 Story_ID: 134271 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sterling Plumpp, S-T-E-R-L-I-N-G, P-L-U-M-P-P. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 30, 1940. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your place of birth? Speaker 2: Clinton, Mississippi, Hinds County. In fact, I was born on a plantation outside of Clinton, but the address was Clinton. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm currently emeritus professor of African American Studies and English at the University of Illinois at Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and visiting professor of English at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois]. And I am a creative writer, a poet. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: April 8, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: 645 North Central Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60644. Story_ID: 134272 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you, and they just require a short answer. And the first one is: what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food has to vacillate between catfish and chicken prepared any way. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think it would be blue. Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Mississippi and the South. Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase, phrase or saying? Yeah, maybe that you have to believe that you are beyond the best. Story_ID: 134273 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. How far can--back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: Perhaps about 1860. I was reared by my maternal grandparents. My maternal grandfather [Victor Emmanuel] was born in 1880. His parents would have been slaves. And my maternal grandmother was born in 1890, and her grandparents would have been slaves. Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories that they passed down to you from the slavery period that you remember? Speaker 2: No. They were rather reticent about saying anything about slavery other than it was hard times. And the times when I did see individuals who had been slaves, it would have been in the mid to the late 1940s, and they would have been eighty to ninety years old. And when I would ask questions about what they had said, they would all just, ah shucks, those people are crazy because they did talk about us jumped over the broom, you know, and didn't know chickens had nothing but heads and foots, you know, used language like that, you know; old master tanned so and so's hide. And it's more of the tone than the theme because they would almost say it as if they were reliving it. And I don't think my grandfather or my grandmother wanted us to hear that. But I did see those people that I deduced as I got older who were slaves. At the time, I just thought they were old people with gray hair who talked funny. Speaker 1: All right, so the family didn't have any particular stories about people in your family who in-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --And what they were doing when emancipation came or any of that? Speaker 2: Very little, even about land, cruel landowners because I was only fourteen when my grandfather died. And those hardships, painful stories was not related to me. Story_ID: 134274 Speaker 1: Tell us about your--did, well, did you know your grandparents? Well, you knew your grandparents, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What were they like? What were your grandparents like? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Victor Emmanuel] had more pride and arrogance than [President] George W. Bush although he never had a dime. He was the type of patriarchal, zealous black family man who would not allow whites to come into the fields where we or his children were working. If they started toward the field he'd tell 'em to stay in the road, "I'll come see you." Or at that particular time, hobos would wander in, and they would want water or bread. We called them tramps, you know (laughter). And he would holler out to 'em, "Don't come in my yard. I'll send you some water." Or just--what's most vividly, two incidents, most vividly describe his personality, his fourth child and his sixth child, two women, were together at the house of one of them, and the husband of one of these women came in and began to verbally abuse his wife, who at the time--he married her when she was fourteen, maybe this particular time she would have been seventeen, and she hit him. And he threw some water on her while the other aunt was fixing her hair. And without thinking, the other aunt grabbed the shotgun and shot him in the chest. The problem were that it was bird shot, and so he was bleeding, but he could still move. And so the two aunts and, and, and a nephew of them ran. And it was a Sunday morning, about the time that my grandfather was going to church, and so they met him. And they said--and he said, "What happened?" And they told him. And then the husband came up, and my grandfather looked at him and said, "What's wrong with you," said, "you look like you hurt," and ran his hand in his pocket and gave him ten dollars, said, "why don't you take this ten dollars and go to the doctor and take care of yourself because if I ever see you again, you're dead." That's one incident. I didn't witness this one. The, the second incident, I did witness, somewhere around '51 [1951]--his name was Victor, Victor, Jr. Someone had come by and asked him to move some things, you know, I mean it's common. It's more common in rural areas than in the city. And he helped the man move some stuff from the car to the house. Three or four days later, the constable, you have a sheriff and a constable, two white men came after dark to arrest my uncle, accusing him of helping someone steal, saying that he was an accomplice to burglary. And my grandfather said, "My boy, he never stole nothing." He said, "Yeah, he did help so and so move some stuff. He did not know where the stuff had come from, and he didn't take anything." And the sheriff said, "No, no, no, he broke the law," and he said, "if he break the law, we're gon' put him under arrest and take him in." And my grandfather reached for his shotgun and said, "I'm gonna kill you." And, you know, the white men said, "We ain't done nothing. We trying to do our job." You know, "He stole, and we need to drive him," you know. And my grandfather said, "I know you didn't do anything, but white men like you beat black boys, so I'm gonna kill you." And that went on for two or three hours, and the solution was that my grandfather went and spent the first night in jail with my uncle. Story_ID: 134275 Speaker 1: If I (unclear), you know, they would kill hogs, and I couldn't have been three to eight, they would kill hogs and, and the animal would squeal, and they'd cut the throat, and the blood would run out. I mean, and, see, if I'd cry he'd [maternal grandfather, Victor Emmanuel] beat me. And he'd say, "Boy," say, "some things you gotta do," you know, that type. I mean that type, I mean not the type to back down, small man. In fact, there's a story, and, no, it's a true story, two stories. I mean when he was fourteen years old, he was in school, and at that time, they had heaters, and someone threw a spitball and hit the teacher. And she asked him who did it, and he said he didn't--no, what he said is, "I did not do it." And she said, "I didn't ask you if you did it. I want you to tell me who did it." And he said, "I didn't do it." And she got angry and took a switch, and she had intended to hit him on the shoulder, but she hit him on the ear. And he grabbed her and lifted her up and tried to put her on a hot heater. And his brother and sister interceded. And the teacher said to his mother that he was expelled permanently unless his mother came to class and whipped him before the class or unless his mother allowed her to do that. And that night his mother told him, "From now on, you're a man." She didn't do it. Very religious man who would wake up in the morning--he was sixty when I was born, and my recollection of him calling on the Lord before daybreak for about an hour, thanking him for bringing him through the night and beseeching the Lord an additional thirty minutes when he went on bended knee at bed. He would cuss, occasionally drink whiskey, and, and he loved coffee, walked five miles to church, even after sixty-five. Deacon Mason, family man. You call those people family men, you know, they had wives, they had children and ninety-nine percent of their stature was contingent, contingent upon how their family was received. And not being criminal and being clean and being respectable was a good reflection upon the family. Story_ID: 134276 Speaker 1: My grandmother was born, 1890, and she didn't die until 1993 at the age of 103. And she also had two sisters who lived to be a hundred, was divine. I never heard her curse, believed in God, hummed under her breath, "Do Lord, do Lord, do remember me." When I was a child, she was--I was bonded to her, not my mother. She not only would read the funnies to us, the comic strips, it was the funnies then, but she would also play the part of the characters (laughter), you know, sweet, enduring, you know, enduring two things--my grandfather [Victor Emmanuel] must have died early, two o'clock or so, January 8, 1955. He had been sick, and I can remember my grandmother waking me up and having me go in there and put my hands on his face because it was still warm, you know. That's the first incident. They had seven children born between 1914 and 1929. And the children died between 1980 and 2001. Now, my mother was the first to die--well, well, she had, but she had cancer, my, my grandmother told me after she died that she knew that she was going to die by the way that she was talking to God, you know, that type. I suppose my most vivid memory of her comes when she's about ninety-eight. She was with my aunt, and I was going down to see her and stay with her, and it was her habit in her nineties to get out of the bed, oh, maybe about eleven or twelve o'clock, and my uncle and my, my aunt would give her almost like a five-course breakfast. And if there was any hint that they did not want to do it with jubilance, one growl from her would simply set them straight. And I went in and, and I asked, "Mama," I said, "what's, what's wrong with you?" And she, she said, "I'm swollen up." And then I felt her legs, and I said, "No, mama, you're fat." And she just laughed. You know, she was about, what, four foot, eleven or five feet, Choctaw, brown skin. Skin didn't break, you know, as she aged, but always praying, calling on the Lord, believe in the, in God, and one of the--and none of the children went to school when they were six years old. And, you know, being educated by [Jean] Piaget and [Sigmund] Freud and all that crap, I had thought that my grandmother did not know the importance of early childhood education. And what she had told my aunts is that the reason why she didn't send her children to school when they were very small because they were the only thing in this world that she had ever cared about, and the thought that something would happen to one of them would kill her. Very gracious, very religious woman. Story_ID: 134277 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. Can you give us his name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father--I knew who he was. I never lived with him because I was born out of wedlock, and he was married, but he knew who--my father's name was Cyrus, C-Y-R-U-S, H. Plumpp, P-L-U-M-P-P. He was born in 1910. My grandmother, Emma Johnson--my father was completely literate. He was completely literate, you know. I mean completely literate and articulate that he could read the Bible, and he, he--he did not stumble, jet black and strong, physically, kind of a leadership quality about him. He was a Worshipful Master of the Masons, hard working man, strong father figure. And in some ways perhaps my success in life come from him because his genes was a side of the family that was extremely academic. They still are. One of my nephews is a captain in the [U.S.] Army right now. I mean, just right from poverty, you know. So, so my father was the heir who carried his self with a great deal of self-respect. His speech was not slurred. And I have heard, it was rumored that a white man made a mistake that owned the plantation and he threw an ax at him intending to kill him, you know. And in this transition from the cotton field to the meager jobs that black men could work, and I suspect without regular medical check-up, he died of a stroke. Speaker 1: So, did he die when you were fairly young? Speaker 2: No, he died when I was twenty-five. He died in 1965. Speaker 1: Now, what did he do for a living, do you know? Speaker 2: He was a, he was a farmer and then he became a laborer. Speaker 1: You said he was completely articulate. He was very articulate for those days, I guess, he was remarkable--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean, there, there are a lot of African Americans, when it comes to reading the Bible and newspaper, are not articulate. No, he was articulate. Speaker 1: Yeah, for his community-- Speaker 2: For his, for his community, yeah, yeah, self-made--but he was educated. His mother was a teacher. I mean the English, there was a desire to speak it correctly, and he did, although he was a farmer, now. Speaker 1: Yeah, but his mother was a school teacher? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you know anything about where she went to school or-- Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know that much about that side. That's the black side of my family, dark skinned, educated. Speaker 1: Now, now, did he get a chance to go to school himself? Speaker 2: No, he had finished high school. I'm quite sure of that. Speaker 1: Did finish high school. All right, so and he was a laborer basically. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But he had another family you said? Speaker 2: Well, yes, he was married, and my mother was about eighteen or nineteen, you know-- Story_ID: 134278 Speaker 1: On my mother's side, the average--the mean education was somewhere between the third and the sixth grade with the exception of one aunt who went to the ninth grade. Speaker 2: Okay, so there wasn't a lot of deep educational background-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: --On your mother's side. But, all right and you said that they were part Choctaw. Speaker 1: Part Choctaw. In fact, my grandmother and grandfather [Victor Emmanuel] was so much of an Indian that he lived on a reservation. Speaker 2: I know Mississippi is really--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well, that's common though, I mean that's not unusual, but because you don't speak the language and you don't know the culture, you look just like Cochise, but you consider yourself black, very common. Speaker 2: I know it used to be said, years ago a lot of black people would say they're part Indian. We really didn't understand it all, but in Mississippi, especially, a lot of Choctaw-- Speaker 1: That's right, Chickasaw and Choctaw. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. So now, tell me about your mother. Give us her full name and-- Speaker 1: My mother's full name at her death was Mary Shields [ph.]. She had married my stepfather, Charlie Shields. My mother was-- Speaker 2: What was her maiden name? Speaker 1: Her maiden name was Mary Emmanuel, E-M-M-A-N-U-E-L. And let me tell you a little bit about the story. My grandfather, when he was born in 1880, his mother had had an affair with a prominent farmer on the plantation. So in order to protect the anonymity of my grandfather's real father, the wife of the plantation owner named my father after his--my grandfather, after--gave him the last name of the King of England--King of Italy, Victor Emmanuel, his name was. He was, so I suppose I became a black Italian (laughter) with that name. But now, my, my mother was born in 1920, the third child, and vacillated between the world of reality and the world of unreality. But they don't, you--the saying is, she was funny. The one incident that's told about her childhood is the crib where they kept the corn burned down and it's obvious she burned it down, but when they asked her, she might have said the devil did it. I never lived with her from age one through age sixteen or seventeen, I never lived with her. I mean so she was my mother, she was biological mother, but after my--I did live with her about two years. And she couldn't cope, but I mean you're a child. You don't, how do you ask your mother, can you cope? You know, my stepfather had left, and she just did not pay the notes on the house, and we got put out. And she never told anybody. Do you get what I mean? When I say she, when I say she couldn't cope, I mean she couldn't cope. Story_ID: 134279 Speaker 1: Two, two things illustrate it, maybe three. She [mother, Mary Emmanuel Shields]--one day I went to school--now, we had been moving and moving, and I didn't know why we were moving. One day I went to school, and I came home and the house was locked. And people said my mother had been put out. My aunt had come and picked up all the things and taken them to her house. And I don't know whether I saw my mother again for about a year. I lived with my aunt. See, that kind of thing. Now, I had a paper route, and meticulously worked it and counted the money, and a number of times she told me that the manager had said that I had not left him enough money. That I was forty dollars short. Yeah, but--it was only when all of that happened that I began to, to, to add things up, that up. But, but the final thing that happened is in 1974, my mother was having a kind of mental and health crisis. So two of her sisters, her brother, two of her brothers, you know, you know, and I went down and asked her what was going on. There were a lot of things, water bill, gas bill and all that stuff behind, paid all that stuff off, asked her what was going on and she said, change of life or something, diabetes. And she wouldn't, she was, walk all night. She, I said, no--had this big argument with this general doctor, you know, internist. I told him I don't know anything about medicine, but what the hell you telling me don't make no sense in terms of symptoms. I thought my mother had cancer. I thought, no, no, no it's just, this is too much. Now, this is 1974. In 1977 in December, my sister called me and told me I had to get there because my mother had to--what to do--well, what had happened, she had disc- she had this--found that she had cancer and, and she had literally scratched one of her breast away. The cancer had gone in her hands, so she couldn't open her hand. And so in order to alleviate the pain, we--my sister and I said, no, she has to be operated on and told the doctor, he didn't have to tell her anything, that we would tell her. And I asked her, I mean I told her why we did it, and she said, "You don't know if you gon' live if you get this thing anyway so why have them cut on you." I mean and not, you don't mean that she didn't, she was that lucid and then she talked about all the things that she did, a forgiving woman. Of course, the last thing that she said, week before she died, she had--the cancer had gone in both breasts, had taken one lung, and it was going to the other lung. And she said, "When I go down sick, you know, it was like I was in this wilderness, and I couldn't even see out of my window. There were trees and vines and thickets and bushes everywhere." She said, "But every day, you know, I done gone out there and I done cut down a tree, dug up a stomp, cleared it all out, and then I done built me a picket fence around my house." That's her way of saying, I suppose, in her way of saying that she was ready to die. So religious in that sense, but not religious in the sense of the ritual of the church. Last thing she told me that she wanted--didn't want to go to church, didn't, didn't want to go to the church. She wanted to go directly from the funeral home to the grave, didn't want a long ceremony. "There's no need of trying to make a funeral for me when I done lived my funeral," didn't want anybody saying too much about her, and wanted the casket closed, and that picture I have of her, said, "You take this picture and, you make copies of it, and you give it to people if they want to see how I look." And I put the picture on the copy of one of my books. You know, so a religious person who was very athletic and had a great deal of physical prowess, you know, could fight men. I mean she had a great deal of physical strength, but couldn't cope. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 134280 Speaker 1: Give us an idea of what it was like growing up in, right outside of Clinton, Mississippi. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I mean, we actually lived in two different places. Let's say the first one was, I think his name is Manila, Albert Manila Plantation [ph.]. There, you were in hollering or walking proximity of, of about four or five different families who are all renting from the same landowner, you know. Behind our house was a railroad track, and the whistle and the struggles of that train huffing and puffing, going by with the smoke stacks that would shake the house. Across the track, hearing Sam Johnson [ph.], cursed the mules, when they would not work. You know, they're actually cursing them. And then on Saturday, seeing him with the black boots and a derby hat riding a buggy going down the road. Somewhat to the left of him was Jim Henry Johnson [ph.], whose hair was completely white, who walked with a limp so that it, it appears that every time he took a step, is he had negotiated an unsuccessful dance, you know. Straight down behind us was Ike Biggs [ph.], who was old and had an ex-slave living with him called Hat. To the east of us--I mean to the north of us would have been where my grandmother, Emma and Charlie Johnson lived, and not far from them would have been where my father [Cyrus Plumpp] lived. And every so often, this man by the name of Cincinnati, he must have been 6'6". In fact, when he rode the mule, I would swear that his feet could touch the ground, would come by with a sack of corn, going to Clinton [Mississippi] to the mill to get it ground (laughter). You know, and I could always--you would see him coming, and when he got along by our house, he would pause and say hello to Ms. Matt [ph.]. The birds singing, the crickets singing, the euphoria that happens with the commencement of April and spring, the flowers, the leaves, the plums in May, the dewberries, the black berries, fishing. Occasionally, a deer would run by and the whole community would go after him, hearing dogs bark. Speaker 1: The whole community would go after the deer (laughter)? Speaker 2: You didn't see that deer, no, they're trying to catch that deer, man (laughter), running after the deer. Speaker 1: You didn't have gravel roads. See, you have to understand. I--let me explain. I lived about a half a mile off of the dirt road, which was a mile off of the gravel road. See, they didn't even have blacktop roads or seeing people going, seeing the dust come and, and knowing that people was coming in a car and set on the running board, you know what I mean. You stand on the side of a car--what do you call that? It's a running board. Cars don't have running boards anymore, you know. Story_ID: 134281 Speaker 1: My most vivid memory is 1946, World War II [WWII] is over, and off in the dif--distance, we see my uncle coming. He was in the Pacific in the [U.S.] Navy. He was a cook in the Navy, and hearing one of his sisters just scream and took off down the road, you know, that, "Bro is coming, Bro is coming," and seeing him--I was four maybe, and basic training, how strong he was. That he could lift either of us with one hand and seeing how war had eroded all that, how thin he was, and how he screamed at night. No, no, no, no, it's not shell shock, but if you're on a--you don't know whether you're gonna live or die on these ships, and these planes are diving at you and shooting, and they're shooting these big guns all night long, maybe planes are taking off. And, you know, I mean, it's just--maybe it's the death because there was an awful lot of death. Maybe it's the death. You know, he just looked, you know--or the whole thing of hearing things. They say you could see ghosts because there are no electric lights. You can see the stars, and you would see falling stars. Maybe they were UFOs, but you were looking up in the nighttime sky or hearing people talk about going to funerals 'cause that's a big thing, that's an outing. You'd get the community news. Who was there? How was he put away? Or going to revivals. I mean it was a rich exposure to the community wisdom through oral commentary. The Fourth of July and ice cream, the cake. At hog-killing time, getting the liver or getting the crackling, making crackling bread. I mean catching the chicken and killing the chicken and have real fried chicken or having fried corn. I don't know whether you know anything about fried corn, you know. You would have fried corn for breakfast or fried tomatoes. You know, living off of the land or watching how soap and water could transform the most stained garments into something beautiful hanging on a line, the clothes hang on a line, quilts hanging on a line. And being afraid to death when a storm come and the house would shake. And it seemed as if the thunder and lightening would come inside of the house. Story_ID: 134282 Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you? What did you like to do and what were you concerned about the most when you were, when you were little? Speaker 2: I was concerned more about whether or not I could find some way so I would not have to depend on working for someone in a cotton field to make a living, some opportunity for education. Reticent, very skinny, reticent, introverted, was not the strong mastican--masculine looking--when I graduated from high school, I was only about 140 pounds at 6'2". Eager, eager to be baptized, I mean eager. In some ways very religious. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you like to read and did you get a chance to read? Speaker 2: On the land they could have thought that I was retarded up to a point which I, I was not, I mean it--and that is a story that needs to be told. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was not a good student until I got to seventh grade, you know. I was not a good student, like I was a B student in the seventh grade, B student in the eighth grade and a straight A student in high school. I, I-- Speaker 1: What was the difference? Did you have to make some kind of adjustment--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the only, you know, the only way that I could get out of the condition that I thought I would be in, I thought was to try to learn. And I really tried to learn, whether the teachers taught or not, I tried to learn everything, tried to learn everything and tried to be a model citizen. Speaker 1: Well, did you feel like, sort of isolated and with your father [Cyrus Plumpp] not being with you and your mother [Mary Emmanuel Shields]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I think it's two things. I think I felt trapped because I suppose I was illegitimate or a bastard that my parents are gone and my grandparents would die, and I would be left out here in the world. Maybe I felt out of place because I was two years older than the children in the class I was, that I was in. Upon reflection, maybe because I was country and didn't have a lot of money to really be a flashy dresser. Maybe that had some impact on me. Maybe that had some impact on me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I learned very early, if you're smarter than people, it's hard for them to laugh at you. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said when you were in grade you didn't make that good of grades when you were-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't--you know, it went from no distinction until I got to high school. Story_ID: 134283 Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in elementary school that tried to, that saw potential in you, that tried to develop you in some way? Speaker 2: Well, no, that didn't come until I got to the Catholic school where the sons and daughters of dentists, sons and daughters of lawyers, sons and daughters of teachers, sons and daughters of people who owned newspapers, sons and daughters of people who owned undertakers--well, what I mean, is profoundly changed the potential for my developing. I thought I could compete with them. So if you're smart enough to compete with them, well then, I thought that at the end of the rainbow, I would have found whatever treasure that awaited me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so-- Speaker 2: Was not that interested in girls or dancing. I think that I suppose--when you're very skinny, you don't have a lot of respect for your body. It's, it's a funny thing, you know. It was--didn't want to play athletics, but then it proved that some of the things that I could excel at, you know. So it made me introverted in some ways, made me unable to articulate maybe what I wanted to feel, you know, this boy, girl thing. Speaker 1: A lot of adolescents feel like they don't fit in (laughter) in terms of that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, you're right. I mean that, you know, that's right, but see with the, but the fact that I'm introverted, right, and very religious, made me a ripe candidate for some kind of intellectual rebellion when I got to college. Speaker 1: Now, you say you were very religiously oriented. Were you and your grandparents members of a church? Speaker 2: I, I was baptized into their church or a different Baptist church when I was eleven. By the time I was fourteen, I was converted to Catholicism and I was very faithful. I even begun the process of applying to the seminary to become a priest. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start Catholic school? Speaker 2: I started Catholic school in 1955, a few days before I turned fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated from high school about four months after I turned twenty in 1960. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you start high school when you were fifteen, is that what you're saying or-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you start high school when you were fifteen? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. I was only--I was in the seventh grade. Speaker 1: Seventh grade, all right. So you were in like middle school, so seventh grade through-- Speaker 2: That was not too unusual 'cause I was nineteen until the final year, and then I turned twenty. That had some impact on me, and then I went away to a Catholic college, Saint Benedict's College in Atchison, Kansas [later Benedictine College, Atchison, Kansas]. Story_ID: 134284 Speaker 1: I'm gonna backtrack a little bit about high school. Now, you started off at a public high school, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, no, I mean public, public grade school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how did you end up going to high school? You said your grades improved dramatically in high (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no, what happened is that-- Speaker 1: --Seventh grade and that's exactly when you went to Catholic school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, what happened is, I--when my grandfather [Victor Emmanuel] died, we moved to Jackson [Mississippi]. And for a while, my cousin, my brother and I lived with my grandmother. My sister was going to Catholic school, and I went there. Now, B's and C's, you know what I mean, if you have a B student, right. However, when I get to high school, it became all A's, became all A's. Speaker 1: What was it, the fact that you had--well, you said you wanted to--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it was a lot of things. I mean you, you're with a lot of bright people. I mean you're not--I mean that's what students did. They, they read books, they took tests. And I studied harder than people. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it hard for your family to afford to send you to Catholic school or-- Speaker 2: Well, my aunt was a bootlegger, and she is the reason that I prevailed. Speaker 1: That makes sense, okay. Speaker 2: She's the reason I prevailed. I had clothes, I had somewhere to stay. In fact, she, she had more money than most people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't have parents, I didn't have a car but I didn't go without no food. You know what I mean. And I was not someone getting in trouble, you know. There's a great deal that can be said for children who are at home when they should be at home or I was at church or I would go to a basketball game or a football game. I didn't go to the movies that much. I didn't have a phonograph, so I was, you know what I mean, I was in the church and I read a lot. Speaker 1: Now, what kind of material would you read? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I, I mean I would read Sir Walter Scott, different books. I would read, but more important, that stuff that they, that other stuff, you know, whether it be 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] or 'Macbeth ' [William Shakespeare]. I read that stuff. No, so see, see I read it, you know. I, I mean I--in other words, I read it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got into some serious reading. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 134285 Speaker 1: Did you have teachers in Catholic school that stood out, that tried to-- Speaker 2: Well, the nuns encouraged me. I'm--it's not clear to me what they thought that I could do. I think that they didn't know whether I just had worked hard, but it was very clear when I made the honor roll in college [at St. Benedict's College, later Benedictine College, Atchison, Kansas] that I could compete. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very clear. Speaker 1: Now, in high school, did you stay basically shy in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, shy. Speaker 1: And you thought about becoming a priest. Speaker 2: Yeah, shy, religious. You know, where do you go from here, you know, you don't--because your parents help transition you into adulthood. I mean, you know, you, you work, and if the job ain't going, they say, "Well, hell, why don't you go to college, you know?" But, but there, this leads to just work. I mean, the ethics of work, work, work. And my aunt helped me a little bit in college, but after the first semester, I swept up the different halls at the university to pay for--I had to pay for my room and board, that's all I had to pay. Speaker 1: Now, I still wanna go back to high school for a second 'cause I think we skipped past it. But at graduation, did you know that you wanted to go to college at that point? Did you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had three to four scholarships. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you had 'em all lined up. Speaker 2: I had full rides. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I had one full ride. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had at least two full rides. Speaker 1: And where were you--where did you go to college? Speaker 2: I went to college at St. Benedict's College in Atchison, Kansas. Story_ID: 134286 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about Benedictine College. It's in Atchison, Kansas. Speaker 2: Well, St. Benedict's College [later Benedictine College, Atchison, Kansas] is a very old college. The Catholic Church, the priests organized into societies and orders. For example, the Jesuits is a society [Society of Jesus], but the Benedictines and the Dominicans and the Franciscans, those are orders. And Benedict's [Order of Saint Benedict] is a very old order that has produced a number of popes, a number of scholars. There were students in my class who have been National Merit Scholars. Many middle-class Catholics sent their sons and daughters to St. Benedict's College for undergraduate and then on to law school, engineering or wherever. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you got there, I mean was it a--now, this is an integrated campus at all? Speaker 2: It was, only two freshmen, black freshmen in my freshman class. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a basically white Catholic school. Speaker 2: And about eight blacks in the whole school. Speaker 1: Okay, so I mean was that different from the high school you attended? Speaker 2: Well, the, the high schools are all black in Mississippi. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Here, see there are two things that you have to understand. You are in the white world at St. Benedict's. You don't necessarily see the white world when you're in the, in an all-black school. And although some black people had money, all these kids came with a blank check and just wrote out everything, wrote out everything, you know. And, and then the way your life is organized socially, isolated as a black--then alienation is a good thing for you, I think in the long run because it was there that I learned how to read. I learned to think about literature, you know. What is it that I want to do? Speaker 1: So, no, distractions in other words, you know, is that what you're saying? No distractions--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What, what I mean is there is no black presence. There is no black presence. So if there's no black presence, and I'm confronted with Greek literature, it's just literature. If I'm confronted with English literature, it's literature. You know, I'd read it. You know, I read history. I mean I contemplate who the Romans were, who the Greeks were, you know, I read it and I think about it. The Civil Rights Movement was going on, but I'm actually reading and thinking about things that I read. After two years I got a job at the Chicago [Illinois] post office. Maybe I could have gone back but it's fate, and I stopped--worked full time and began going to college at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're skipping something here. You actually left Benedictine--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I left Benedict's at about the age of twenty-two, after my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Okay, so you left and just--were things going okay, and you left? Or did they, you didn't like it anymore or what happened? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I was not getting any support, you know. I was living off campus, rooming from a black woman and working on campus, using that money to live off of. It just was, couldn't, couldn't do that. Story_ID: 134287 Speaker 1: So why did you choose to move to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I had a aunt, two aunts here, two uncles here, a brother and a cousin here. Speaker 1: Had you ever been here before? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had been here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so I moved with them, and then it didn't look like I was ever gonna get a job. And I took the postal exam, passed it, and I got a job. And it was a job that paid more than most jobs at the time in 1960. Speaker 1: Yeah, the post office work is usually good. Speaker 2: And I got, came into contact with this broad spectrum of black characters, failures, success stories. Speaker 1: In the post office? Speaker 2: In the post office, but more importantly, I had enough money to begin to buy books. And I could come to the blues clubs and the jazz clubs. Speaker 1: So what was going on intellectually in Chicago on the literary scene and that sort of thing when you got here? Speaker 2: Well, everybody was reading James Baldwin, initially and 'Nobody Knows My Name.' Then 'The Fire Next Time.' It was the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] movement because soon it was to be the March on Washington and soon thereafter, the death of those girls in Birmingham [Alabama] [16th Street Baptist Church Bombing]. Then it was to be the Nation of Islam, all these books 'When the Word is Given,' ['When the Word is Given: A Report on Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, and the Black Muslim World'] coming out. Malcolm X as the spokesperson, black consciousness, boycotts, sit-ins for, to get black people--more black policemen, black supervisors at the post office. You know the school boycotts because they had mobile schools for black children. Speaker 1: Were you involved in any organizing efforts--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was involved with CORE, C-O-R-E. Speaker 1: Congress of Racial Equality. Speaker 2: --Racial Equality, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Marching. I even marched in Cicero, Illinois. Speaker 1: When Dr. King came here? Speaker 2: No, I was marching in Cicero, Illinois in '66 [1966]. I think he had just left. Yeah, I was in the [U.S.] Army in '64 [1964] and '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, how did you end up joining the Army or did you get drafted? Speaker 2: No, they, they drafted me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) and I was a military policeman. Speaker 1: Okay, where did you serve? Speaker 2: I served at Aberdeen Proving Ground [Aberdeen, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Aberdeen? Speaker 2: Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not that far from Baltimore [Maryland]. Story_ID: 134288 Speaker 1: All right, so you're there [Aberdeen Proving Ground, Aberdeen, Maryland] for two years and then you came back to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Came back to Chicago, working at the post office and going to school--the post office full-time and I graduated from Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] in 1967, 1968. Speaker 1: All right, so all the while, you were involved with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] still when you came back from the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I was involved with CORE. But, see, soon after that, black power hit, Malcolm X is killed, and maybe some of the first riots in New York [City]. '67 [1967] the, the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In '66 [1966] Los Angeles [California] had a big riot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Watts [neighborhood, Los Angeles, California], in '65 [1965] Watts, but then '67 [1967] you had the war in Vietnam, the Detroit [Michigan] riot, '68 [1968], the murder of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] riots everywhere, you know. By that time I was, I was reading a book a day somewhere between '62 [1962] and right about '67 [1967], that's what I did. I read. Speaker 1: A book a day. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, that's something that used to be a popular thing to do in the 19th century. I've read 19th century stories about Charlotte Forten's father, James Forten, you know, had her read a book a day. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what you do. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Because they fall in patterns. Speaker 1: Where did that concept come from and with, you know, who suggested you do this--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I was trying to--well, now, no one suggested. I was trying to learn how to be a writer, and so I just read everything, Richard Wright, Roundfellow [ph.], some Langston Hughes, W.E.B. Du Bois, oh, E. Franklin Frazier, John Hope Franklin, read it, you know, just went through it, [Fyodor] Dostoyevsky. Speaker 1: Now, did you have speed reading skills? Speaker 2: I'd had no course in speed reading. Speaker 1: You were just a fast reader? Speaker 2: Well, if you can concentrate, you know, you could do three or four hundred pages in five or six hours. Speaker 1: Did you get involved with any of the literary groups here in Chicago? Speaker 2: I didn't join OBAC until 1969. Speaker 1: Now OBAC, just for the sake of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Organization of Black American Culture, Hoyt Fuller. At the time it had [HM] Haki [Madhubuti], Carolyn Rodgers, Iman Dooley [ph.], Rhonda Davis [ph.], Rancin Boykin, Carlos Wimberley [ph.], Mike Cook, [HM] Sam Greenlee, [James] Jim Cunningham, Lisa Johnson, Sheldon Scott, you know, that group. Story_ID: 134289 Speaker 1: But, when I was reading books, and the ideology of blackness has always frightened me because I love James Baldwin and some kind of way, he was in disfavor. And I had read Ralph Ellison and thought he was the smartest--so, so how the--saying somebody is black because they're militant, I was always suspicious of that. Speaker 2: Okay, let's restate that now. You said that, say that again now. Speaker 1: I, what, I mean, the, the heroes of the [Civil Rights] Movement because at some point [HM Maulana] Karenga come in and talk about black artists functional, and it should be for the people, by the people. You know, I had read James Baldwin. I had read all of his books and knew that Baldwin tried to tell the truth. I mean I didn't, you know, I didn't pattern my life after Baldwin. Baldwin tried to tell the truth. And all of a sudden you're caught up in some situation and people are telling you about white people this and white people that. But I don't wanna hear that, you know, I mean--if a white person--policeman shot somebody black, I know he evil, and hell, if he didn't, I don't know anything about him (laughter), you know, I mean all of a sudden somebody giving me all these answers. And I've written, stayed away from that. And everybody is writing, using the black language of the city. I'm from the South. I mean you don't need to say dude and all that stuff to be educated. But what Malcolm [X] said, you know, then why in the fuck would I care what Malcolm said, and I never thought he was as smart as [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. I never thought he was as smart or as brave as King, you know. You know, you down there fooling with these people that will kill you, you know what I mean, kill. I know those white folks will kill you and you know, and, but I did join OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture], and one of the things that you began to learn is who you are as a writer, let me say that. Speaker 2: Okay now, OBAC is founded by Sterling Plumpp, I mean--I'm sorry. You are Sterling Plumpp. I mean Hoyt Fuller. Speaker 1: Hoyt Fuller, Hoyt Fuller was chairing. Speaker 2: Hoyt Fuller--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he founded it. He was chairing it. Speaker 2: Tell us about Hoyt Fuller a little because I don't-- Speaker 1: Well, Hoyt Fuller was an urbane, brilliant black man who was learned in both world literature and African American literature. And so he exposed African Americans, right, to all of that. And then this procedure of how one develops as a writer through workshopping, he also brought that. In addition, he was the most powerful black man in the world because he had the largest black, literary magazine [Negro Digest/Black World], and by publishing writers or saying things about writers or having writers reviewed, they came to the con--to the attention of the literary world. Speaker 2: Wow, okay. He sat in a powerful position, but (laughter) [HM John H.] Johnson owned the magazine. Speaker 1: No, but Johnson, Johnson didn't decide what was in the magazine. Speaker 2: I hear you, but he eventually closed the magazine--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but what I'm, what I'm trying to say is that the point is, you would not have had the careers of a large number of writers launched if Johnson had been there. See, Hoyt did that. I mean your poems if you were there--if it were not for Hoyt Fuller, I would not be a professor now. Speaker 2: That's true, I wasn't arguing that. I was just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, well, I--I'm making a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(unclear) the power-- Speaker 1: --I'm making another point. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: See, because I had been published in Black World, my poems had been published there, at the same time, I think that 'The Poetry of Black America' had chosen my poetry, and he also wrote the letter when I came up for tenure, I mean when I came for appointment. And the people that eventually got me tenure, Addison Gayle, Jr., George Kent, is through Hoyt Fuller. Story_ID: 134290 Speaker 1: Right, I don't wanna get too far off the chronology with you, but you were in OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] while you were going to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] or afterwards? Speaker 2: It was after Roosevelt. Speaker 1: After Roosevelt. So you got your degree from Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], I got married in '68 [1968]. And from about '69 [1969] to '71 [1971], I was in graduate school at Roosevelt studying psychology-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and by-- Speaker 1: Why psychology at this point? Speaker 2: Some objective way of assessing why people are the way they are and not knowing that the study of psychology is the study of learning studies that had been performed primarily on rats or some other kind of animals who, which were basically neurological, you know. But you really don't know anything about the human being, and even when you came to the human being, you're dealing with something physiological and something chemical in the mind. That's what I was thinking. But what it, what it forced me to do is to look at one methodology for doing something. And so at the same time, my imagination as a poet was forming. Story_ID: 134291 Speaker 1: You know, I published one or two poems in Black World magazine [formerly, Negro Digestrld]. I published a couple of chapter books. Speaker 2: Okay, now, were you published by Broadside Press [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 1: No, I was published by Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Third World, first? Speaker 1: Yeah, because I think that maybe I sent poems to Broadside, and I think that Dudley [Randall] might have recommended Third World and [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] published one book in '69 [1969] and another book in '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: And what were the names of those books? Speaker 1: 'Portable Soul' in '69 [1969], 'Half Black, Half Blacker' in '70 [1970], and then I did 'Black Rituals' was published in '72 [1972]. And, and then Third World did 'Stuff to Break the Circle' in 1974, and in 1976 Broadside Press did 'Clinton.' And I don't want to get ahead, Third World didn't publish a book for me after '74 [1974] until '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: Okay, it's almost twenty years, 19--(simultaneous)--okay, now, when you--now, how long did OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture] last? Speaker 1: I think I was in OBAC till about '74 [1974] or so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Well, there's nothing wrong with OBAC but I, personalities and ideologies bother me. That's why I left institute. Story_ID: 134292 Speaker 1: Now, you were a founding member of the Institute of Positive Education[/New Concept School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Founding director. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, tell us about that. What was it? Speaker 2: I mean, well, the question is how does one institutionalize anything? And, and the belief was using the principles of Nguzo Saba. Speaker 1: Now, what's that, now. I didn't hear that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Nguzo--the seven principles of Kawaida. Speaker 1: 'Cause I think it's good to describe all these 'cause this is for historical purposes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I mean using the principles of Kawaida, unity or self-determination, that you could organize people that could work collectively, their resources and their money to build something because if you don't take a salary, everything you do go right back into the, right back into the press. See, that's the great thing about that. You know, if you, if you're not taking a salary, and you're a editor at Third World [Press, Chicago, Illinois] everything goes right back into it. Some of the things about-- Speaker 1: So is that what you all do? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I mean that's so that everybody did whose associated with--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean everybody at Third World Press and Institute at one time was writing, editing and was not getting paid initially. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were the founding director for the Institute--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the school because you're trying to build an institution, couldn't deal with all that and become a writer, couldn't deal with all that, you know, but I mean, maybe I need to go out and get a drink of cognac tonight. I couldn't deal with all that, couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was like-- Speaker 2: Well, I just couldn't do, I mean I, I just couldn't, I just couldn't do it. I mean I'm, saying the point, I was only interested in the literature that I could produce. Speaker 1: Okay, and just for historical clarity, I wanted to explain what the Institute of Positive Education is because people looking at this years from now (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Institute, the Institute of, of Positive Education was basically two things. At one level, it's an educational enterprise that focuses on the production and dissemination of information from a Black Nationalist viewpoint. I mean reading books in the production of that. And still at another level, it is an institution which required people to sort of live in a commune way so that they became examples of how this new African American nationalism would live. You changed names. You developed a different ritual for funerals, for weddings, and maybe the most important thing, although they don't get any credit for it, you institute, Kwanzaa. Speaker 1: Okay, so some of the things. Speaker 2: You know, some things, but the magazine, I mean, but and the school, I mean-- Speaker 1: There was a magazine (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, yeah, see, if you don't have, if you don't have the commune, you don't get the school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'Cause the school was originally in Haki's wife [Safisha Madhubuti], who was a school teacher, whether you had to pay her salary originally, they would a never gotten off the, gotten off the ground. Speaker 1: Right, so I'm-- Speaker 2: And Johari Amini. He sometimes said--Johar Amini had a master's in anthropology from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 134293 Speaker 1: So everybody was pretty much volunteering their time [to the Institute of Positive Education/New Concept School, Chicago, Illinois] in a collective way? Speaker 2: And attracted a lot of young African American people. I mean I think it's true that black people have to do something like the institution, like the Institute [of Positive Education/New Concept School], but probably it would be better if you did it with a big institution like a black church or something. You'd probably have more impact. But that's not how it's viewed in 1972 [1972] because a lot of the stuff that [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah Wright [Jr.] does, it's kindergarten to what people were doing back then. You know, the African garb, the diet, the Kente cloth, I mean, I mean--he discovers that thirty-five years after it was done by the Institute, going to Africa, although Tanzania was a model, (unclear) ujima, but you got a problem if you're a writer, and you're an intellectual, you know, maybe I would have problems if I was in an Islamic country or Communist country. I don't know whether or not I would disagree with the imam, but I definitely would not try to look and see what the prophet has said every time I get a damn thought. It's just not how I operate (laughter). Maybe other people could do that. You see what I'm trying to say? Speaker 1: Now, again, now, once again, I'm trying to explain what this is now. In 1972-- Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Actually, 1970, the Congress of African People was formed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the Institute of Positive Education became a part of the Congress of African People? Speaker 2: About 1971. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the Congress of African People is very much doctrinaire, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Very much [HM Maulana] Karenga, but Karenga, as seen through the prism of Amiri Baraka's-- Speaker 1: 'Cause Karenga was in prison. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, well, not newer but new of. He set the example. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Maulana Karenga--he wasn't a doctor then, but Maulana Karenga. Speaker 2: He was Maulana Ron Karenga then. Speaker 1: And he was in prison in California at that time. And there is always disputes about what the charges, were they true or false or whatever, but the, but the doctrine was being run by-- Speaker 2: Amiri Baraka. Speaker 1: Amiri Baraka who used to be LeRoi Jones. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was running it out Newark, New Jersey and he had a group called NewArk [Newark Congress of African People]. Speaker 2: NewArk, and maybe at 1973, '74 [1974] somewhere in Little Rock [Arkansas], is that he broke with that and became a Marxist. By now--it may be it's '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: I think it's '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] Speaker 1: And so, were you still with the Institute at that time? Speaker 2: No, no, I had, I was leaving. It just--it, it--I don't know how to describe it to you. It was like putting a hood over your mind, or walking up to do other things. Speaker 1: From what I understand in '70 [1970]--well, in that--the Institute of Positive Education and to some extent, Indiana and New Orleans [Louisiana], and-- Speaker 2: And somebody in New York [City, New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Somebody at the East, somebody at the East-- Speaker 1: Tuwai Alwatoco [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --In New York. The institute was kind of a problematic cadre of CAP [Congress of African People]. In other words, it didn't, I mean not--you weren't the only one at the Institute-- you couldn't deal with the Institute's doctrine, but the Institute couldn't deal with the doctrine of CAP. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: That's what I've--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't know that. Speaker 1: --Understand from reading and talking to people, that's all. I mean I don't know. Is it true, do you think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I, I don't know whether--I mean there's also this brother, a brother named Hannibal Lafeet had his own on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Tuwai Alwatoco. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now, I think that some of those efforts, I mean--see my problem was, after a while, if that's what you want to do, do it, but in order to better black people, do I have to do that? Just address the whole thing, can't deal with it, huh. Story_ID: 134294 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Institute for Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois], and Congress of African People, which--now, the Congress of African People--well, let me backtrack to '72 [1972], in '72 [1972] [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] wrote a book called 'From Plan to Planet' ['From Plan to Planet: The Need for Afrikan Minds and Institutions']. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Haki Madhubuti, formerly Don L. Lee, I think that was the first book, he formally used that name. Speaker 2: Yeah, he changed his name, yeah. Speaker 1: Haki Madhubuti, and I notice that, now, you didn't change your name when you were with the Institute [for Positive Education]. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And, I mean, were you supposed to at a certain point, or you didn't do it or what happened? Speaker 2: There are differences. I always felt that any blues song, any gospel song was far more African than Habari Gani or that the culture that the slaves produced was as authentic as anything that you could take from Africa. It just, it just pushed me to--to me, it's just too far. I couldn't take that step. I never contemplated changing my name. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you knew you were gonna stay Sterling Plumpp? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And in terms of--now, you left the Institute-- Speaker 2: It was somewhere around '73 [1973]. I mean I wasn't around there too much after '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: I know in '74 [1974] the Institute split from the Congress of African People at a conference that they had at Hirsch High School here in Chicago [Illinois], where the Congress, where I think Ahiti Atta (ph.) split, IPE [Institute of Positive Education] split and so did the East. They all split from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because, because--I think that [Amiri] Baraka [formerly LeRoi Jones], not a communist, but a Maoist, I think that he--because you can't talk about communism unless you force people to talk about communism (laughter), you know how do you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: A natural dialogue. Speaker 2: Yeah, in other words, you have to insist people read some things before you can even have the dialogue. And I think that that was a big break. I think that people felt betrayed by Baraka and then there was another person who was very prominent in that movement, [Gerald] Jerry McWhorter, became Abdul Alkalimat, and he became a Marxist. Speaker 1: That's right. Now, he taught at University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]. Speaker 2: At Urbana, yeah. Speaker 1: At Urbana. Story_ID: 134295 Speaker 1: While you were director of IPE [Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois], were you teaching at U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: University of Illinois. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, how did you get that position? I mean how did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] recommended me when he left Illinois to go to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 1: All right, and he'd had already achieved a certain amount of fame as a poet-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean great deal of visibility and fame, 'Don't Cry, Scream' is one of the most remarkable selling books of poetry ever. Speaker 1: That's right. Okay, and so you began teaching at the University of Illinois at what they call Chicago Circle [Campus] then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --That's University of Illinois at Chicago, and you basically taught there for your whole career, basically? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Right, you never left. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 134296 Speaker 1: So well, we'll leave IPE [Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois] and Third World [Press, Chicago, Illinois] for now. Now, you were still published by Third World Press in those days. Speaker 2: I was published by, the last time, was '74 [1974], 'Don't Cry, Scream' and then we went--separated circles and I wasn't published by them again until 1995. Speaker 1: Okay, does that--anything to do with you being not a part of--(laughter)-- Speaker 2: Well, I--no, maybe--it was probably fortuitous. I published in Callaloo, I published, and-- Speaker 1: Callaloo, the literary magazine? Speaker 2: Yeah, I published in Obsidian, but I published in more, in the next twenty years in white literary magazines, not the bigs ones, another, another Chicago press, the Greenfield Review, I mean TriQuarterly, Thunder's Mouth Press [later part of Perseus Books Group] and another Chicago press, more to the left. See, my sentiments are more to the left. Speaker 1: More to the left of-- Speaker 2: Well, no, no, no, I mean, I don't--the only way I think that you could fight for any kind of rights, you would have to be a Marxist. I don't know about a Communist. If you cannot create an even playing field, what are you talking about, to people--I mean that's what I'm saying. Definitely called Marxism. Now, I know--(simultaneously)-- Speaker 1: You consider yourself a Marxist basically or-- Speaker 2: Analytically, yes. Speaker 1: Socialist or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's who I am. Speaker 1: A Socialist or Marxist? Speaker 2: What, what I mean, I mean philosophically, I'm a Marxist. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And so, so I was much closer to the people in South Africa, the writers and things, and so I was--did, did an anthology of South African literature and had contact with people in South Africa. Speaker 1: For a while there, there were some South African poets that are still, I know one prominent one here, Keorapetse-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, I, we--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Keorapetse Kgositsile. Speaker 1: Keora, okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --And Dennis Brutus was also here. But I was much more closer to that movement in terms of sentiment because slavery is not too different than apartheid or apartheid is a sophisticated Jim Crow. You know, so, so I didn't follow that, but, but, but poetically, I produced so. See, my writing was political, it was sort of loud--I mean, I was not writing about flowers, what I'm trying to tell you. And in '95 [1995] it had come back to the music, you know, '95 [1995], it had come back to the music, and he did the book called 'Hornman.' Speaker 1: Now, who, who-- Speaker 2: Third World Press, and then they did another--subsequently, did another book called 'Ornate with Smoke.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I had the book done by Tia Chucha, they wanted it called 'Blues Narratives.' And the next book I'm doing will be Third World Press, 'Velvet BeBop Kente Cloth.' Story_ID: 134297 Speaker 1: How many books of poetry have you written thus far? Speaker 2: Oh, about twelve. Speaker 1: And you've been published widely. Speaker 2: In Finnish, in French, in a number of magazines in South Africa, I mean, yeah. Speaker 1: And so the themes in your poetry. You did a book at Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] just before you left, I guess, and it was published, I think after you left called 'Black Rituals'-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it was like a book of essays, basically, about the way people use language. Speaker 2: Well, it really was about two things. It was about how language shapes African American world view and how a different language shapes European world view. And that was talking about the importance of the black church as an institution. I said it was the most important. I said, what I said, you can't talk about no black nationalism and no black nation without talking about the black church. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: I, I'm not so sure that you can talk about it with these same preachers, but that's where black people are. Speaker 1: Now, is that--do you find any contradiction with being a Marxist and are you still a Christian or what--how do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I think I believe that--I have some concept of God, some concept of some kind of justice. I don't have any kind of concept that I'm going to hell because if I have a relationship with two women or that--some of that stuff, see, see, see--some of the mythology around that (laughter) has gone from me forever, but it, but it, but it means that I think that God and humans' relationship to God is one thing, and what some people call religion is something else. I don't think that they are the same thing because the church has an ideology and a philosophy, and its interpretation of God. See, I don't believe that. Speaker 1: So, you don't believe in the Catholic--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, I don't, I don't believe the Jews are the chosen people. No, that's the, I don't--fuck, I think all people are the chosen--I understand it's a good story. I wish I had written it, but let's be clear, it's a story to me, you know, have no animosity. You know, I have absolutely no animosity for Jewish people, telling them that they're the chosen people because every morning I get up and look in the mirror, I think I'm looking at a damn chosen person, you know what I mean, (laughter), you know. Speaker 1: Even though you're not Jewish, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, that's, that's their problem with God. That's not my problem. And I don't think I should take on their whole historical inadequacy in relationship to God. You know, when I look at it, you know, I, I mean see myself as a human being, and there are causes that I will contribute to. But there are none that gon' make me prisoner. Story_ID: 134298 Speaker 1: Now, this raises an interesting point about culture--black culture in Chicago [Illinois]. There are quite a few, not only in Chicago, but Chicago's a prime example of it, there're quite a few black people in Chicago that try to solve the dilemma of the Jews being the chosen people by claiming Jewishness or claiming to be Hebrews and stuff. There's at least twenty groups in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Well, well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Israelites and black Jews. Speaker 2: I mean I understand that. I'm not a Christian. All religions are, the major religions expropriated Jewish history. It is true that Abraham was Jewish and Moses was Jewish and Christ was Jewish, well then what fucking right do anybody have of telling Jews that he is the Messiah? He ain't the first person that came along. I mean, I don't get involved in that argument. You know, and the other issue become Moses, Abraham and then Muhammad comes along and begins to interpret Abraham and Moses in a different light. I mean, you, you see, I, I don't--I mean I, I mean I wanna to believe in God and take all this manufactured history out of it, shit, you know what I mean (laughter), you know. I, I don't need the, the, the historical inaccuracies to, to do today, you know. It seems to me with the concept of a God, what about those people that lived before Jews can be accounted for, you know. So God couldn't deal with them. He had to wait 'til Jews come along? No, what's special. It's not making any sense to me. Speaker 1: I hear you. Now, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think that they are their chosen people. Speaker 1: Okay, it works for them. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It might for somebody else or-- Speaker 2: I mean Chinese, I mean Indians, I mean, come on. Speaker 1: Now, in the black community, though, I mean so many, I mean, you wouldn't be the--but put you once again in the extreme minority position 'cause in the black community, I mean there's so many people, they pick up their Bible and they talk about the children of Israel, and you'd think they were talking about themselves, and some of them think they're talking themselves too, and it's, I mean this is one of the rituals we find going on every Sunday. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think, I mean, obviously--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And Wednesday night-- Speaker 2: --Obviously, there's a great deal of truth in the book that some people refer to as the Bible. And Bible literally means many little books, I think. And obviously, the experiences of Israeli or Jewish people, Hebrew people is a very, very profound story. But see, I don't see it as being any more important than the experience of black people with God coming out of slavery, you know. I say, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You know, see, I think, I think that God was down there with Nat Turner. I think he was down there with Rosa Parks, said, "Don't, don't you sit down, Rosa." But I don't think black people have written about that for five hundred years, (laughter) don't you see. Speaker 1: So you're saying those are dramatic stories in their own right, as dramatic as anything that's ever been written. Speaker 2: If you get the appropriate interpreter. See, I'm not someone that's knocking--I told you, I mean Jewish experience is valid, some of the most powerful things I've read. Is the presence of God there? Yeah. But I don't think that's the only way God has worked himself out in history. That's--you know, I don't believe that. Story_ID: 134299 Speaker 1: Do you continue to be involved in political activities and cultural change activities at the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, more of a--just a professor and a writer because I don't trust politicians. I think that's a lie. I think it's a deception. Speaker 1: So, for instance-- Speaker 2: For instance, you got Harold Washington, he have to do whatever he has to do to make these people rate the bonds for the City [of Chicago, Illinois]. You know, don't be telling me how fuck black you are, tell me how you get these bond ratings, you see what I'm trying to say? How do you talk to these people there on LaSalle Street? Well, that's how you talk to me. You keep the damn rhetoric that you talk to [Edward] Vrdolyak. But, but you have to create this myth of somehow you got this great mind, you know. Black people need a great leader. In white America any damn leader they pick is great. You get someone like the President [George W. Bush] who comes from a great family. That's what I marvel at, educated, public servants, rich, but no one talks about his intellectual prowess. Speaker 1: What do you think? Speaker 2: But, but what do you--yeah, but when he says that I do not need the approval of the world to protect Americans, that is the law of this damn planet. (Laughter) you better believe it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He didn't have to have the voice of an angel. He seemed to me to be a fairly religious man, committed, and I disagree with people. I don't think that he has any grandiose political desires. I just think that this is--that he believes because of who he is, that this country can free other people. And, you know, I mean--I think actually believe that. And I think that he was very angry about 9/11 and he feel that he needs to go to war. But then you talk about a black leader, you almost have to be Booker T. Washington (laughter) or somebody. See, anybody can't become a black leader, what I'm trying to say. Speaker 1: So are you saying that--I mean I guess I miss--I'm trying to understand what you're saying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What I'm say is that it appears that God himself have to handcraft a black leader, a Harold Washington with impeccable speech. In white America, you get someone who can barely speak like [Richard M.] Daley and they can be very effective leaders because the--they control the mechanics of, of politics. And it seem to me that African Americans are more concerned about the metaphor of politics because it doesn't make any difference whether you're Harold Washington, Sterling Plumpp, these millionaires are gonna, say, "Boy, tell me how you gon' protect our money, so we can give you a bond rating." I don't care what my rhetoric is. And I want to demystify politics and reality for black people. Story_ID: 134300 Speaker 1: Would you agree that black people--the difference between black people and white people in this country is one of power? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I won't say white people, rich white people. See, white people in this country do what rich white people want them to do, and I make a distinction between white people with white skin than white people with this, 1 percent, controlling 80 percent of the wealth. I make a distinction between the two, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so not all white people are as white as some, some are whiter 'cause they've got more money-- Speaker 2: Well, no, see, [President George W.] Bush, when he's talking about America, it look like he's talking about people--I mean how much money do you have to make to be concerned what he's talking about investment credits? You see what I'm trying to say? Even if you made three or four hundred thousand dollars a year, he's not talking about you. It's a small group (laughter). It's true that most are white, but that's not white people. I mean that's what (laughter), see, I--in other words, I don't know. I mean I need to go out there and ask white people--I need to go out there and ask white people what do they think about rich white people. That's what I need to do. Speaker 1: I don't know if there're any black people in that group thinking about some of those questions too. Speaker 2: Well, no. I could have believed that George Bush could hire Oprah Winfrey and Michael Jordan and Michael Jackson. Speaker 1: All of 'em. Speaker 2: (Laughter) otherwise, he would not be a capitalist, would he? Huh? That's what it means to own the means of production. Most of what they do is in service, then they get some money, invest it, it's in the company that he owns or, you know. I mean there's nothing wrong with not having power. But I think there's a great deal of wrong if you cannot be intellectually clear about what you think is happening to humanity. And while I agree that my skin color creates a hurdle for me, but it's nothing that should prevent me from achieving distinction in any race. You see, I don't believe, that, you know. I, I just don't believe that white racism or being black prevent me from doing any damn thing. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: And don't believe it, I mean, you know what I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, I hear you, but I've got a question for you based on what you said. Do you believe it stopped you from getting in that capitalist power class? Speaker 2: I don't think that's me. I don't think it's me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, no, no, no. I'll tell you what--I probably-- Speaker 1: Can you conceive of a black person getting in that class? Speaker 2: Yeah but I don't--I wouldn't see him as black. I would just see him as another capitalist. Speaker 1: Well, but I'm, I'm saying--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that I mean, I mean well this society--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, it's a valid question. Speaker 2: You asked about, you asked about-- Speaker 1: --Get in that power capitalist class that you just described 'cause nobody has so far. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think it's-- Speaker 1: --how would somebody get in it? Speaker 2: See you're talking about family. I mean, I mean I don't know how, how I would analyze it. I think that when you're talking about the people who rule this country and rule the world, I think you're talking about family. And I don't think they sent out any invitations for anyone to join. I mean, and, and that's what confusing. I think that that's what's confusing--that's why African Americans can't--see, if you made yourself white for one day, and you worked hard. Your father was a plumber and you scraped and you made all A's, and you tried to get in the top law school because you felt if you went to a law school, that would enhance your chance of being the head of one of the Fortune 500's. Well, now, don't you see why they would feel bad if they felt that someone with a lower score get out. I didn't say they were right (laughter). See, you have to--because the ain't, you know, why? They ain't Bush. I don't give a fuck what kind of score he get, he's gon' get in Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. There are no law schools in this country that gon' turn down George Bush, too much money. Here, let them make a contribution of a hundred thousand. That's why I'm trying to say, that's just family. But that's not what--(laughter) don't you see--see that's not what the--in other words, when you talk about affirmative action, it never impacts against those people. You can't move to Winnetka [Illinois], you know, they don't need them--let's, let's say, they don't need no law, five million dollar house. And then these fools got summer homes and stuff, you see what I'm trying to say. But you can move to Cicero [Illinois] (laughter), see. The only thing, only thing the poor white man in Cicero got is his whiteness, you see what I'm trying to say. Story_ID: 134301 Speaker 1: So I'm more concerned, I think, that black people do as much as they can to demystify reality and think, and, and, and create some kind of common ground where politically, issues that affect people without big incomes in terms of medicine, housing, education can be addressed in the political process without race. That's all. Or, you see I'm African American. I know why white folks used to kill black youth. Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: They don't kill 'em because they're black. They said too much back to these policemen. You don't tell a man with a gun that I'm gonna get you 'cause he's gonna think, why not now? You know what I mean, I'm gonna get you? Why not now? And part of that mask that you put on seemed to be anti-authority and since it's anti-authority, it might be dangerous to me. And that's why black folks, black policemen kill less. You know, they understand what the mask mean, but see, I'm being politically incorrect, if I say that shit out in the public, you know, it won't get nobody black elected, will it (laughter)? You know, what I'm trying to say, I want you to analyze it. Yes, there are racist white po-policemen out there, but some of 'em don't even know they're racists though, you know what I mean. I was at [William] Fremd High School [Palatine, Illinois], and this student asked me was black literature sociology? I said, "No, no, no, no you're getting me and you wrong. First of all, I want you to take that black off of it. I think the literature is black literature. Now take black off of it. The literature which expresses the depth of humans' experience is black literature. And since I didn't come, you know, over here on a cruise ship, I write my beautiful poem from the perspective of someone that came over on the hold of a ship. And I think that's great literature like the Bible (laughter), like the Jews," and I said, "Furthermore, if you were three years old in Baghdad [Iraq] today and wrote poetry seventeen years from now, I bet it would not be about flowers." Story_ID: 134667 Speaker 1: One question we always ask is: what are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: It's somewhat complex. The period between 1965, 2004 is a golden age of African Americans because of the sheer numbers of African Americans who have been allowed to share in the fruits of the economic system, the number of households that make over hundred thousand dollars so that they can give their children options of education from K through Ph.D.'s, the number of African Americans on world stage. For example, it's truly remarkable that in the great really state on the planet that the representative to the world in terms of policy is a black man [Colin Powell]. The chief intellectual in terms of security is a black woman [Condoleezza Rice], and the spokesperson for the United States Army is a black man. You know, that's, that's a mighty long road from catfish alley, from being Jim Crow. But on the other hand we're only looking at the tip of an iceberg and that the remainder of this iceberg, the news is not so good. It is also true that an alarming large number of African American males, in particular, are criminalized before puberty and gets far less education than these smart bums, who graduate from Audy homes [Arthur Audy Home, Juvenile Temporary Detention Facility, Chicago, Illinois] to county jails and receive advanced degrees in penitentiaries. There's an alarming sociological fact that far too many African American children come up in a single-family household where neither the chaperoning of children nor the collective financial support is sufficient for them to develop into complete human beings. And at the bottom, that seems to be increasing. You see at the iceberg, it's becoming more visible but that does not mean it's expansion of opportunities for people of, of African Americans. So, so I suppose in this sense, I think I have more hope for the future than I would have had in 1900 after Plessey versus Ferguson [1896] and after there had been 2,500 documented cases of black lynchings within the last six years. The tennis courts, the golf courses, the baseball diamonds, the football fields, they're open to African Americans. And, and part of my faith is that since the only way African Americans have ever made a quantum leap is through education, a great deal of education will--needs to be applied to the structuring of an African American community that can guarantee that a citizen of their community can compete with the world. And I just think that there are enough African Americans out there with that kind of intellectual wealth. Story_ID: 134668 Speaker 1: So, so I'm not pessimistic. I'm a realist and see for a time to come, unless African Americans can do something to prevent the criminalization of its youth, that there will be a major, major problem that might express itself in some kind of revolt or express itself into some kind of apartheid system where you would have these huge places where poor people will be warehoused, but even with that, I'm just amazed at the number of African Americans with the skills, who have developed themselves. And there are large numbers who are at the best universities in the world, in this country who are very young. It's just not the generation who are thirty or forty, but it's also the younger generation. So that makes me optimistic. And I, I--it's not clear to me that race will have the, the sting in the future, you know. It--because it dawns on me, both Michael Jordan and Oprah Winfrey have remarkable talents. But I'm far more impressed with the fathers of Venus Williams and Tiger Woods, that the dreams of these ordinary black fathers have produced products that could dominate the world. You see, I think that's where the hope is at, you know. I think that that's where the hope is at. I just don't know what race means in social relations, you know, I mean--'cause if white people didn't have money, who in the hell would want to be white? For what? If Chinese ran this country, I'd eat an awful lot of damn rice, I'm telling you that, from where I sit because we're looking at power. In other words, what, what--whiteness have come to connote as this human society has evolved and in the current century a society which have applied the best of knowledge and accrued wealth, you, you're just looking at a Western society that's white, but that wasn't true five hundred years ago, a thousand years ago. Or they didn't come to power because they were white. There are scientific ways, you know. They got this great land between the two oceans that's the fulcrum of white power. You've got these land grant colleges. You got this land that you took from Mexico. You've got a free press. You've got a state that does not have to have a spy on you every time you walk--there, there are a lot of reasons why this country dominates, you know what I mean? You change the president every four years without having a coup. See, people should look more at those type of things and look at the absence of those type of institutions in the rest of the world, rather than the fact, you know, well, you know, you know, white people got power because the fact of the matter is if the Chinese could become completely literate and could industrialize, right, they would rule the world industrially because if you sold every Chinese a tootsie roll, hell, you'd have a hell of an economy going. They have a potential of having a huge internal economy. Story_ID: 134669 Speaker 1: Can you tell me at this point, what do you think of the new, there's been a resurgence in poetry in terms of its place in popular culture. There are poetry slams on television and a lot of clubs have poetry readings. It's become popular again and as much as it was in the late '60s [1960s] or in the '70s [1970s]. I mean, what do you think about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I think it's a very positive sign in the same way that I think that rap is a very positive sign. And I think both are wrought with significant pitfalls. In the case of slam poetry, performers' poetry, I think any method that democratizes that great genre to the masses of the people is a good thing, any method. While at the same time, I realize, and I don't run away from the fact that literature has been and will always be defined by its most significant text. If it were not for slam, perhaps some of these poets today would not ever have an opportunity or know that they could become a great poet tomorrow. It's a wide net that's bringing in far more fish. And the same way with the rap. Without rap, the African American youth would be voiceless. At the same time, if they recognize that African Americans who were voiceless before them had a far greater acumen for music because when Negro spirituals, blues and jazz is aesthetic, is developed aesthetically, it not only becomes the music for that black generation, but it becomes the music for the world to compete with. And while I see the lyric side and the rhythmic side of rap, making brilliant innovations, I'm far less impressed with the musical composition. I'm far less--it's almost as if one studies music that it would dissipate more of the ability to be a rapper. And see, I don't buy that. Story_ID: 134670 Speaker 1: What do you see at this point as the future for you in terms of writing? Is there a book you want to write or a poem that you want to write that you haven't written? I mean is there something you really want to do (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's simple. I've always wanted to write something that was better than the Bible. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I feel the only way that you can honor any great writer or any great text is devote your life to writing a better one. There's something about being human and having this infinite imagination of possibilities and how that is expressed and experienced that I want to do. And if you write a thousand books, you can't do it. See, as much as I want to live, there is something beautiful about people passing from this flesh and being so powerful that their achievements is literally a bridge that can unite galaxies. There's something beautiful about that. You see, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--most people don't talk about it--said, when there was a great power that held his people hostage, that he would do it with love. Saddam Hussein said he would do it with scud missiles. [Mahatma] Gandhi said he would do it with nonviolence. What I'm saying is there are always human options other than the one you opt for if you have a great mind and imagination. And it seem to me that the world should be more about developing individuals who can create those options rather than having a kind of mold so that people can develop a structure that will only protect somebody's ideology. Speaker 1: Now, sir, you said, you said that you wanted to write a book that's better than the Bible. Would this be a spiritual text or what would it be? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --Or what is the--are you working on it now? Speaker 2: No, it could be many things, but one of the things that's always attracted me as an imaginative act. What if slavery was a great thing, you know, that God knew that human beings would expand all over this planet. The problem was, how can he create some musicians that could create a music for them? And that's why he had these people who come over in the holds of these damn ships. And that's why you have people singing, 'How I Got Over' and 'Drowning on Dry Land' and 'Strange Fruit,' that they were chosen to give voice to humanity when they would lose this voice because of technology. You know, I'm interested in opening--not trying to avoid the horror of exploitation, but trying to probably expand the concept of what it means to, to have human potential. And it's not that easy to do that because people say, you know, you're crazy. You, you know, you're out of your mind or they brought you over here because you were black. No, they brought me over because I was there, you know what I mean? They had tried to enslave white people first. They had tried to enslave Native Americans first. They went to Africa originally to do what? Get gold. But they saw that the climate that the Africans were working in was similar to the climate here, and they saw that Africans had been engaged in a sedentary life in agricultural work. So it's, I mean, I mean questions like that, you know, you know. I mean, I'm toying with the idea, you know, what if Clarence Thomas is not the hero? Story_ID: 134671 Speaker 1: Well, I think we suppose he's [Clarence Thomas] not now. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. But see, you can't get in the position of Clarence Thomas unless you have had a specific kind of education, don't you see? I'm not talking about, you see, I'm not talking about Clarence Thomas, but, but don't you see, if you were too gung ho about civil rights, you never would have been on that court, would you? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: If you're too gung ho about civil rights, you would have never been on that court. Speaker 1: Not under the [President George H.W.] Bush administration. Speaker 2: No, no, what if he's playing a game? No, no, no. That's a game Clarence playing. I'm gonna, I'm gonna fool these folks. Speaker 1: He's sure done a good job. Speaker 2: And I ain't saying nothing--I'm gonna fool these white folks and these black folks, but when the deal goes down, I'm gonna be the one to stand up (laughter). What I'm trying to say, you don't have to--what I'm trying to say, you talking about human potential, right? Well, why in the hell couldn't Clarence Thomas be the black angel? See, I don't know, you see what I'm trying to say. See, that's what you do when you write. See, I would have to go and think of situations, see, that's why it's so hard to write. Speaker 1: Well, as a writer, you can make him that--(unclear)--(simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, but I need to, no, I need to--now, you have to be credible. I have to think it up, but what if--see, that's a hell of a story. No, no, no, no see that's a hell of a story. Only somebody inside the camp can do (laughter) those people grave ideological harm. 'Cause they thought (unclear), what's wrong with his training? I'll tell you what. If Clarence Thomas votes to uphold the admission standards at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I'm gonna personally go to Hollywood and demand that they give that blood a, an Academy Award 'cause he done fooled a whole lot of white folks (laughter). See, I'm in, I'm involved--I'm concerned about the imaginative side of human possibility. See, that's what I'm concerned with. I didn't say he was going to do it. You see--look, one of the things that happened to the Africans who came on the slave ships to these shores is that they are privileged to live in the most advanced human society ever. Now, that's great--whether you're white, black, Indian, I mean that's a great thing. They're not gonna attack this country. They're not gonna occupy it. Nobody gon' occupy Washington, D.C. except AIDS or TB [tuberculosis], believe me. You don't even think about that. That's untold--that's unheard of in human history. That's unheard of. Nowhere else in the world can you get your car, drive all over the country. You black, ain't nobody shooting at you. Speaker 1: Well, every now and then. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Every now and then. Speaker 2: No, no, no I mean, I mean, look, I mean I drove all through, no. You go in there and pay these people for the glass, they glad to take your dollar. They might not like you. That ain't what I'm talking about. They ain't shooting you, ain't putting no gun on you when you go--you know what I mean? What I'm trying, I'm trying to understand, you know, you--it's bad, it's not equitable. It's not according to the law, and from what I see, that the opportunity to live a, a full life is--maybe I see it as being very great in this country. Maybe that's how I see it. And I don't know how to look at people. But I'm raising that question to you about Clarence Thomas. Don't you see when he was a little boy, he said the only way I can defeat white America is become the biggest Uncle Tom, and so he had to act (laughter), you know what I mean, he had to dress a certain way (laugher, hand clap). That's a hell of a story. But see the problem with it, let's say--you saying it's not true, right? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know. I mean I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you what I feel. Speaker 1: (Unclear) You would think that--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Here he is setting up, I mean, he, if he did turn, it would be heroic, certainly, it would be heroic, but-- Speaker 2: But I, I don't think that he's gonna turn--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And we don't know if he ever will. Speaker 2: No, here, here's what I feel. I think that he's a [United States] Supreme Court Justice, and I think that he's basically a conservative, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, Trent Lott, didn't have to say what he said. I think that pissed somebody off like that. He didn't have to say that. I mean, look, black people were segregated. They were segregated. It's over. You see what I'm trying to say? Somebody that's supposed to uphold the damn law saying that? And the other thing is the president's entitled to his opinion, but what would he substitute for affirmative action. I mean, I mean--see, I'm not knocking him, you know what I mean? That's his right, right? But how in the hell can you then--you said people have got to go and die. Black folks have died, Native Americans have died, Hispanic Americans have died, right? Women have died, and you don't have anything to guarantee that they have--that you have diversity when it comes to, to divvy up the rewards. See, that's one he could have slept on, you see what I'm trying to say? For those two reasons, I think he might have pissed Clarence Thomas off, and he might think, I got more power than the president in this day (hand clapping, laughter), just like that. Story_ID: 134672 Speaker 1: At this point, sir, when you look back over your body of work, I mean, and activities, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy has been a dedication to probe so thoroughly within the black experience that I will be able to discover and mine the ore of the universal human experience by applying to it literary techniques and devices culled from canonical text and flavored by my own specific African American culture. Speaker 1: That's good (laughter), that's real good. That's-- Story_ID: 134673 Speaker 1: 'Cause I was gonna ask you what your favorite poem was and what your favorite passage from one of your writings is, maybe you can do something for us. That was almost the poetic (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I think my favorite poem is 'Clinton' and 'Steps to Break the Circle' as a metaphor, 'Steps to Break the Circle.' 'Clinton' because it takes me right back to the soil, my mother [Mary Emmanuel Shields], where my imagination is being formed. Speaker 1: Can you give us part of that? Speaker 2: I don't know the first line: "Stretch before me, a taut pallet of smoke, looking at my life, a taut pallet of smoke, and through that is rising this humanity." Because I never memorize my poems because I think that you should do justice to the words on a page by reading them. Story_ID: 134090 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As someone who was a great father, a giving teacher and gave everything he had, plus more, to his work as a writer. Speaker 1: Now, did your, any of your relatives in Mississippi get a chance to see you become a successful writer? Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Emmanuel Shields] saw the beginnings of it. My grandmother saw it because I have been featured in textbooks in Mississippi, Mississippi Writers' Day. Well, see I think the most important--my daughter grew up with me becoming a writer. And I, and I feel that is more important than any honor that I could win. Story_ID: 134091 Speaker 1: We need a brief description and identification, left to right on all photos like this, going left to right, of who's in the photo. If you can't identify (unclear) photo, and the year. Speaker 2: It's 1957. To the left is Reuben Anderson, the first African American who graduated from the University of Mississippi Law School [Oxford, Mississippi], and the first African American to be a [Mississippi] Supreme Court Justice. Next is me. Next is a classmate whose name I don't remember. To the right is Fred Banks, the second African American to be a Supreme Court Justice in the State of Mississippi whose family owned the famed Peoples Funeral Home in Jackson [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: --(Unclear) Speaker 2: It's, it's 1994. To the left is Sterling Plumpp. In the middle is [HM] Dr. Ann Smith, associate chancellor University of Illinois at Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. To the right is [HM] Vernon Jarrett, and this is a screening of the documentary, 'The Promised Land' done by the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's Mayor Richard [M.] Daley, the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois], and I'm meeting him because I wrote libretto for cantata, 'Chicago Cantata' with the music written by George Gruntz, and it was performed at the 1991 Chicago Jazz Festival. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken about 1988, and this is my official photograph in Poets House in New York City. Speaker 1: And ready. Speaker 2: Yeah, this photograph is about 1983 or '4 [1984] at the Chicago Palmer House [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] at an event honoring the great Guyanese writer, Jan Carew. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: This picture in December of 2001 on occasion of my retirement from the University of Illinois [at Chicago], and to my right is my dear friend, [HM] Ronne Hartfield, whom I have known and admired since about 1971. This, this picture is circa 1989, and it was taken by a dear friend of mine, Elizabeth Bouchard who is a professor at [Wilbur] Wright College [Chicago, Illinois]. And she was also a professor at Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Ready. This is my Aunt Mattie Dixon. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: This is my Aunt Mattie Dixon, born 1916, deceased 1997, and she was literally the Harriet Tubman of the family who brought members from Mississippi to stay in the underground railroad of her home until they got on their own. Speaker 2: Here in Chicago? Speaker 1: Yes, Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. This is--this is me and my daughter around 1984 when I lived 1212 South Michigan Avenue, and she was about seven years old. The picture was taken by Nancy Ortenberg. Speaker 1: Seven years old? Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Seventeen, maybe?. No, seven. Speaker 1: Really. She's tall. Okay. Speaker 2: Daughter and I on occasion of her graduation from DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] in 1997. Speaker 1: All right (unclear). Speaker 2: This is my maternal grandfather, Victor Emmanuel, 1880 to 1955, who was the only father I ever knew. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea when the photo was made? Speaker 2: The photo was made somewhere around 1952 or '53 [1953]. Again, this is my daughter and I around 1984 when she was seven years old, and I lived on the lake in downtown Chicago. This is my mother, Mary Emmanuel, the picture taken when she was around fifty in 1970. She was born 1920, deceased in 1980. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Somewhere between 1985 and '87 [1987], picture taken by Nancy Ortenberg. This is me again, somewhere around '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. Nancy Ortenberg was doing a study project at Columbia College in Chicago. She's a photographer, and she took this picture. At this time, I'm around forty-three or forty-four. Speaker 1: Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is-- Speaker 1: Well first we'll get the overall and then I'll zoom in and try to get you to pick out individual-- Speaker 2: --Well here's, here he is right here. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the group, the occasion? Speaker 2: The occasion is the premier of the BBC's documentary 'The Promised Land' in 1994. And these are the various individuals who were interviewed, including Vernon Jarrett, the distinguished gentleman who is the second person in the first row. Speaker 1: Any others you can recall? Speaker 2: No, I don't, names don't come. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a photograph that announces a happy occasion. It accompanies an article written on me in City Talk after I had hit the Illinois Lottery for a million dollars and it's in the fall of 2001. Speaker 1: --And it's scratch off ticket, right? Yes. Speaker 2: --In a scratch-off ticket, right. And the first time lottery money's been actually used for education. Speaker 1: (Laughter) yes. Speaker 2: --I shouldn't say that on tape (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This picture accompanies the article inside of the magazine City Talk, in October of 2001 when I was interviewed about winning the lottery. And to the left is a excerpt from one of my poems, which influenced by jazz...