 Story_ID: 276744 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. My name is [HistoryMaker] Rickey Payton [Sr.], Rickey, R-I-C-K-E-Y, Payton is P-A-Y-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. But, I go under, I go as Rickey Payton, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, date of birth is 6/16/59 [June 16, 1959]. Place of birth is Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I should say, I wear several hats, but currently, I'm CEO and president of Urban Nation [Inc.]. Also, I wear the hat as a producer and artistic director. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're involved in music too, right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes. Music; music producer. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, music producer. All right. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Today's date is amazing. Today is, what, Tuesday, May the 3rd. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Ninth--2005 (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. And, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Cabin John, Maryland at the home of Susan [Koch] and Chris Koch. Story_ID: 276745 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, they said it was gonna be sushi. They were wrong. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, those were earlier-- Speaker 2: Well, they're not wrong. I will say, well yeah, today, that's one of them. But, I'm definitely into sushi too, love it (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. I love earth tones. So, and brown and beige, and blues. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas. I si- the holiday season, I love it. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. Europe. I'm just in love with--as a specific area, I would say Switzerland. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Unbelievable. Story_ID: 276746 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [William Payton, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, we'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother's full name is Dazelle, D-A-Z-E-L-L-E, Dazelle Payton. Initial--she normally just use the initial I. It stands for Inez Payton, P-A-Y-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Now, does--what her maiden name? Speaker 2: Mourning. Speaker 1: M-O (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, M-O-U-R-N-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what-- Speaker 2: Payton. Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: I--You know what, I'm sorry I don't have that off my head, but I can get it for you. In fact, I can make-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A call and get it. Speaker 1: Can you guess? Is there a guess to when she'd might have been born? Speaker 2: Bor- oh, she was born in North Carolina, Aurora, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Aurora, North Carolina. And, do you have a guess about when she was born? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't have the year. So, I don't remember. I mean, I can call and get it, it wouldn't take but a few seconds. If you really need-- Speaker 1: Okay. I don't want you to call but--right now, but I just, you know, you have an idea of when? Speaker 2: I, you know, it's so hard for me, 'cause I be honest with you, I just don't remember, and I just don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. In the '30s [1930s] or the '20s [1920s], or? Speaker 2: She's like seventy something. So back in the, I guess about '30 [1930] something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, about-- Speaker 1: Early '30s [1930s]? Speaker 2: Early--right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: All right. And, well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back and you trace that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, this when I was a little kid, we used to always go out of town, their family moved to Connecticut; Danbury, Connecticut. And, that was like the hangout spot for the whole family to go there and have family reunions. And, the family was very close, a very huge family. Speaker 1: Okay. But, how far back can you trace 'em? I mean, can you trace 'em pass--back a generation, two generation, all the back to Africa or--? Speaker 2: No. I can't. Speaker 1: How far? Speaker 2: I can't, just, I would say just here in America, I would say that. Speaker 1: Okay. But, how far back? Speaker 2: God, that's--back from my mother's, I'd, I'd say at least two generations, I would say. 'Cause I, I really don't have that much history about my aunts and stuff would've told us. But, we didn't go too much in the history, family trees, I don't have that much information. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you know you grandmother? Speaker 2: No. She had died. No, my grandma passed even before we were, you know, born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He when I was--he passed when I was like early, maybe twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was born in Aurora, North Carolina. But, she grew up in Danville [sic.]? Speaker 2: No. She grew up in North Carolina. It was a later the family migrated up to Connecticut. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, up north; up north. Speaker 1: Okay. And, that's Danville, Connecticut? Speaker 2: No. Danbury. Speaker 1: Danbury. Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Danbury. How do you spell Danbury? Speaker 2: D-A-N-B-U-R-Y. Speaker 1: All right, thank you. Now, did your mother have any stories about North Carolina? Speaker 2: Yes. She used to always tell me, I--interesting, I used to always ask her about slavery at that time, what was it like? How difficult things were? But, the area they lived in, in Aurora, they were not exposed to hardly none of that. They went to an all-black school, up the road. And, the store was in the near area of the neighborhood. And, my grandfather I understood kept them very, very close. To keep, to keep and protect them from all that, during that time; racism and, you know, the problems of that time. So, they were a very close knit family, everyone sort of shared in that community. And, we would talk about this a lot. And, she, she had no stories, amazing, about that unless they would go into the town, of course, they would experience little things. But, very seldom did they go alone. They were always escorted with family members or he would take them into the town. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how old was she when she left North Carolina? Speaker 2: She was in her early twenties. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to Georgia and then from Georgia, she worked there for a while, Savannah [Georgia] area. And, then of course, later moved to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she have a chance to finish high school and go to college, or? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 276747 Speaker 1: Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, middle name Lee, Payton, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay (laughter) (unclear), he's from Aurora, North Carolina, but around the same, early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Very--it's interesting; very little, because my, my father, when I was a little kid, we were, we're actually closer to my mother's [Dazelle Mourning Payton] side than my father's side. Every once and a while, we would go down, you know, to a family reunion or something but it was never often. And, of course, we'll keep in touch. We had some family members on my father's side here. Of course, we mingle with them. But, very seldom we'd, we would go down to North Carolina. I can say very little about the history of my father's family. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that are passed down from either side about life in North Carolina? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother's, of course, used to share stories in the family. My mother's side about, again, their neighborhood about how the school dances at the time about how they--what went on during those times. And, just how, again, how fun they, how much fun they had together. And, family played together which was so important. I guess now, when I--in retrospect, when I think about now how important it is when we look--those values, I guess. They had a lot of values and stayed together; did quite a few things together. So, they shared a lot of those stories with us. And, how my grandfather used to, used to make them all, they all had to work. They had to do things together. It was not such thing as getting up without any chores. Oh, you had chores. And, they didn't have to make you. It was, it was like fun chores to do. They really looked forward the working on the farm, or sometimes, or working in their community. But, everybody had a job. Speaker 1: What kind of work did they do? Speaker 2: Well, some, okay, some worked on the farm there. Sometimes they worked in the store; there's a corner story there. They would, of course, do house chores. Everyone had house chores to do. And, they would help out in the gas station there. Speaker 1: Now, did they run the gas station or did they just worked at a gas station? Speaker 2: Just worked. They didn't run it, they were it was, was within that community. It was a very tight community in Aurora. And, so, and they would sorta, you know, pick up jobs here and there, from time to time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your father get a chance to, did they have a high school in Aurora? Speaker 2: Yeah. They had a high school there. They all went to school. And, again, in Aurora, they had their, I guess we're call it the elementary, their middle school, and their high school. And 'cause this 'cause this county [Beaufort County, North Carolina] was so small, everyone went to the same school there. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you father get a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: My father; no, he did not finish. He, I think he left early and started driving trucks. I believe, at a very early age. But, he, he sort of, and his whole life he's sort of been on the road driving and doing construction work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He got into that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Self-taught too, I should tell you. Story_ID: 276748 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Dazelle Mourning Payton and William Payton, Sr.] met? Did they talk about that? Speaker 2: You know what, just in the community. Not much, we didn't get much about that. But, what I do know is that, he met her at some event. I think it was, it could've been like a dance or something, when they finally met. And, they just remained friends and kept in touch. And, the family lived in the same area, and then they started dating. And then, of course, got married, sooner or later. He took her away and they ended up in Washington, D.C. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--so you said, they went to Savannah [Georgia] first-- Speaker 2: Well, actually you're right, he continued to work on the road, and my mother left Aurora [North Carolina] and went to Savannah, Savannah, there was--and worked there in a restaurant, waiting tables, eventually, they winded up in the District of Columbia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you know what drew 'em to D.C.? Speaker 2: You know, I really don't, you know. I really don't. I just, I think the fact that my father drove trucks at the time. He was always around that area. I think they just sort of landed here. For some reason, they just settled down in this area. Story_ID: 276749 Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: A total of, well, including me eight. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where do you fall--what are their names and where do you fall in order? Speaker 2: You ready for this (laughter). Well, I, I fall number four. Okay, let me start with the oldest. My oldest brother's name is William Payton, Jr. We call him Butch. Then my sister name, oh--let me say, all the guys had commons names, all the girls had odd names. So, we'll start with Butch. The next is--was Trueyer, Trueyer Payton. We call her Shugey [ph.]. And, then there was-- Speaker 1: How do you spell her name? Speaker 2: Trueyer is T-R-U-E-Y-E-R, Trueyer. And, not where it came from? I tell you not (laughter). Trueyer, we call her Shugey. Then there's my brother Derrick [Payton], D-E-R-R-I-C-K, and then I fall number four. And, then it's my sister Queketa, Q-U-E-K-E-T-A Payton. And, then under Queketa, Queketa it falls Queveta, which is Q-U-E-V-E-T-A. Under Queveta is my brother whose deceased now, is Eric Payton. Then it's my baby sister which is Comelita Payton. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the clan. Speaker 1: Okay. Aight. All right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, what neighborhood did you all live in, in [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you start off in? Speaker 2: Well, we for one, started northwest on a street called Quincy Street. Got so many great memories as a child. I was born on Quincy Street. And, so many great memories about Quincy Street. Then later moved to an area call Columbia Road. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On the northwest. Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have an--so did your father [William Payton, Sr.] continue to drive a truck? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, then eventually, and then went into construction business and worked for a long time in construction. But, also traveling doing, you know, building around as well; did a lot of traveling. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton] work too? Speaker 2: She did. My mother, my mother did days work for many, many years. Of course, worked at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a moment, as well. Story_ID: 276750 Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah. I would say--on Quincy Street [Washington, D.C.] and the memory was, there was at the end of the street, there was a hill. And, God, it's--I was just by there not too long ago. It just seem so small now. But, when I was a kid it was this humongous hill, humongous hill. We used to all play on it, and we used to have cardboards and we'll slide down the hills. And, like almost every day we went to do that. We would play that one block. I lived in 702 Quincy Street, but we all--it was really like a family. And, the one side of the street, I remember was very close. And, very seldom did we cross the street, even though we lived on the same street. But that side, we were all very close. We would eat together at different homes. And, it was no issue to tell my mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton], I'm eating over what'cha call 'em's house, or they'll say, they're eating over our house. It was a, it was a--the whole block was like family. That's what made Quincy Street so memorable and so special for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was that unusual for Washington, D.C., you think? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I, I wouldn't've known, it seem natural for us 'cause that's what we did. We didn't have a lot of money. So, we made, we made friends among ourselves, and we played, went to the playground of course. The ice cream truck would come around every day, and we--and hangout on that hill. And, we hung out and played games in each other's homes. That's--that was a life for us; what we did every day. Story_ID: 276751 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up [in Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, some of the sights growing up, I have to say, it will always be so embedded in my memory, is the afro. You know, the bell--the bell-bottoms. Sounds of the doo-wop, the guys hanging on the corner singing. That was a very prominent in our area. The guys would just come together and just start (pop fingers) harmonizing on the corner. And then, just sitting out on the porch and just having gatherings. That was so great for us. And, the smell, if I--we can recollect that, I would say, it was a cologne I used to love called Brut. I used to love Brut cologne. I used to put on, God, about a whole bottle, just I would take a whole bottle and just, just soak it on me. 'Cause I, I used to love the smell of Brut. (Laughter) 'Til this day, I can smell Brut (laughter). I think about it. It was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Interesting. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, everybody else could smell you coming, I guess, could they? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, they could. Here come [HistoryMaker] Rickey [Payton, Sr.], yeah. I saw--I'm at--that was my--I would buy two or three bottles of it. If I got a gift of Brut, I was okay, man; for the whole year. You know, 'til--that was my favorite thing. I smell that scent today. Speaker 1: Now, you're not wearing it right now. I mean, I can't smell any Brut right now. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I'm past that. I've really grown out of that stage forever (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, what happened to that? 'Cause I know there are people now, you meet 'em, and they, they soak themselves, and you know, just like you were saying. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, did somebody say something about it, or did you hear--or what happened? Speaker 2: No. No. It's just actually it was so funny 'cause everybody could smell me, like you said, they could smell me coming. Close their eyes, "Aww, here come Rick." They would know because I actually kept it in the car. I kept it in my, if I had a briefcase, I would have it. I wore it to school. They--I mean, even it's so funny 'cause, it was cool at that time. 'Cause, you know, I wore it 'cause I thought the girls would like me better if I had my Brut on and stuff, they would notice me. But, it was always a fragrant in my room, that they knew it. And, they would say, "Hey, Rick, come on lay off the cologne a little bit." So, those are my memories of Brut (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, also I must add, that was a lady's cologne too. Ladies, they used to love Brut; all the women (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's a good reason to use it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Any other sights and sounds or smell of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I must say, my mother's [Dazelle Mourning Payton]--I would call me mother Madear; her biscuits. Speaker 1: Now, that's something, that's, that's a southern expression. It--you hear it a lot in the black community but, you know, of all the people I've interviewed, I haven't heard many people that said that they call their mother that. But, though I've heard it a lot. Speaker 2: Yes. My--we called my mother at first, you know, as Madear until this day. I mean, a phenomenal woman. Yeah, and, she used make some, I mean, my mamma, my mother could cook. And, I used to love the smell, the aroma of her, of her cooking. When I walk in the door, I just, it just, I knew, I knew dinner was gonna be great. But, she made some, I mean, just some serious biscuits. And, we used to always love that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Cheese biscuits at that too. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So, the food was something, was nice, huh? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. The food, yeah, those the smells I think were just--well, I will always have that memory of her 'cause she used to cook quite often, biscuits a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and just her cooking period. She--my mother cooked almost every day so we were privileged in that. Story_ID: 276752 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid? What were you interested in and what made you happy? I mean, what were some of the concerns you had, you know, when you were little? Speaker 2: Well, as a kid, you know, interesting, I started an interest in music at a very early age. So, I used to always play, we had a piano in the house. So, I used to always play on the piano, just make up tunes and just play, play. I'd spend hours at the piano. And, and did a lot of that. But, also I would also play with my friends in the community, on the street, on the block. But, I would spent time just enjoying myself and my music, and having fun in life. I felt that when I was a kid there was nothing to really have to worry about. I felt safe. I just wa- really wanted to have a good time. Of course, I would have, I thought I had, well, I did have dreams that when I realized I wa- I knew I wanted to do music at an early age. I said, "This is something I really enjoy." Because it inspired me at an early age. It made me feel special. I remember as a kid even playing some stuff and I know how it made me feel inside. I remember those--that feeling. So, what--I knew it was special. That's what really touched me at an early age. And, I knew I wanted to do some form of music. Speaker 1: Now, did, were inspired by artist you heard on the radio, or church, or who inspired you, really, I mean? Speaker 2: Well, I have to say, I started playing, again, at a very early age. I took piano lessons when I was in the kindergarten [Parkview Elementary School; Bruce-Monroe at Parkview Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. I was able to pick out, pluck out melodies. And, I think I plucked out part of 'The Star Spangled Banner.' And, my kindergarten teacher named Ms. Simpson [ph.]; I would never forget, who, who really took interes- in--took an interest in me, and called my mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton] and said, "Hey, you have a child protege here. He can play this. He can hear this." And, she really inspired me by just taking time out with me, and to call my mother. And, my mother put me in piano school, which was great for a while. But, then my teacher was sorta mean. She used to take my finger and bang it on the piano (laughter). "That's middle C, middle C." So, I went through that whole thing. Which was, you know, at that time, she really, I guess, that was her way of really wanted us to learn, and to remember. But, she was a very strict teacher and that's--so I lost interest after that for a while. So, I just stopped playing. But, you know, I would go to piano and would hear tunes--excuse me--I would hear tunes and just pick things up. It was, it was a natural thing for me. Speaker 1: So, you almost played, you'd play by ear-- Speaker 2: Play by ear. Speaker 1: At an early age. Speaker 2: Right, early and started playing by ear. And, I would hear things on the radio and I run to the piano and pluck it out. And, I, I did that for a lot, a lot of times. Then I would--my mother bought me for Christmas, a small piano, an electronic keyboard. And, it had the drum beats in it and it had all the keyboard sounds, so I would play on that. And, that's really how I developed myself. Story_ID: 276753 Speaker 1: Of course, and church had a lot to do with it too; playing in church at a very young age. And-- Speaker 2: Now, what church did you, did your family attend? Speaker 1: A church called New Bethel Church of God in Christ, located in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. I grew up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There as a child, very involved in the music department and choirs. And, I started playing, as I said, at an early age, and I started in the church. That's the best way, I guess, for me to learn because, you know, a lot of it was very, you know, impromptu. People just, you know, it was a great call and response the co- congregation would be involved. And, you know, you just pick up what you heard, and you play what you heard, what you, you know, what you inspire to deliver. And, it was a wonderful feeling 'cause every, every day, I would play in church, I would learn something new, almost every day. Which is interesting. That's how I developed my skills by playing by rote. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what were your favorite songs to play when you were, when you were little? Speaker 1: Songs to play, my favorite songs to play I would call end of Pentecostal. I grew up in a Pentecostal church. So, one of the things I would love to do is to play we called sh- shouting, dancing music. In the Pentecostal church, you know, of course, we express ourselves through the dance. So, and this things called doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo, very popular in the, you know, Pentecostal churches. And, I used to love to do that thing. And, you can just sort of freelance, do what you wanna do with your right hand. But, you got--you had to keep that base going doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo doo, oh, its fun, fun groove. I called that a, the, the church groove. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I've heard it, I've heard it. It's strong, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and another thing, it's such a driving impact, a driving force and, you know, you really get caught up into that. And, you can do all kinds of fancy things, new ideas, and that's how, I mean, I just grew into it, who'd love that. But, that's one of the things. Of course, the hymns and the time there was, The Hawkins Family was very popular. When I was growing up, we used to do a lot of their music. [Reverend Dr.] James Cleveland as well. And, I used to just sit at the piano and listen and just pick the stuff up. I would buy my records and, if I wanna learn songs for the choir would sing. And, of course, half of the chords were wrong, but I would just play what I thought was right, as a kid, growing up. Speaker 2: Did it, it worked all right for (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it worked. Yeah, it worked for what it was at the time but now (laughter), I mean, it interesting. But, that's part of my development I would say, you know, we're just trying to learn and, you know, and just do the best you can at that time. But, I felt I had a need to develop myself. But, I really realized it's--I was gonna do this full-time; music. Story_ID: 276754 Speaker 1: Did you play the radio a lot around the house? Was it, did you hear a lot of-- Speaker 2: Well, I play is-- Speaker 1: --you know, secular music around the house? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Oh, yeah, absolutely. A lot of secular music. I would always listen to radio all the time. I had a radio. I would go to bed with the radio. And, I had my--at that time, we had 8-tracks. And, I had favorite songs. I used to love the--keep--I had my 8-track in my room. Music was always a part of my household all the time. And, when my siblings, we all loved music. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite artist? Or, some favorite artist in those day, that you liked better than others? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I grew up under Motown. That was a--you know, Motown was a big deal in my household; Motown family. A lot, you know, jazz. A lot of oldies but goodies. But, not, not really necessary a particular favorite artist because, I tell you, that's a hard one for me, because I was inspired by so many different individuals. I'll tell you the old school days, [The] Rance Allen [Group], I listen to a lot of Stevie [Wonder] at the time. I listened to a lot of, I said the Motown sounds, a lot of that. Al Green was a big part. I remember so well, I had a lot of those songs. Marvin Gaye, I grew up on that music. Speaker 1: Yeah. Rance Allen, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's- Speaker 2: Rance is a personal friend, good friend of mine. And, I, I really aspired to know him and it happened one day. I had a chance to meet him. We became good friends. We did a couple of concerts together, you know, in my lifetime. So, he's, I mean, he's a great incredible artist. Speaker 1: Yeah. Talk about rhythm. I mean-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Rance Allen-- Speaker 2: It's--yeah, he like, "Ain't no need a worry" ['Ain't No Need of Crying']. Remember that song? Way back in the day (laughter). And, I mean, he used to come up with some great tunes. I used to listen to his music all the time. I was listening to his--his vocals, the way his placement--he's just, just an incredible singer. He, he's a stylist, I call him. Very much so. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, they call it The Rance Allen Group? Speaker 2: The Rance Allen Group, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: But, out of all his brothers, I mean, he sort of took the forefront, you know, and came out, and still, still rolling today. Still rolling today. Speaker 1: Yeah, we probably should interview him (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, he'd be a great one, yeah. Speaker 1: If you got his number, we can get it (laughter) later. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he's a good one to do, right. That's some good stuff. He just released a new CD project-- Story_ID: 276755 Speaker 1: What school did you attend? Speaker 2: Okay. First, starting in--early age? Speaker 1: Yeah. The first one. Speaker 2: Okay. The first one, I went to elementary school was Parkview [Elementary School; Bruce-Monroe at Parkview Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Parkview in northwest [Washington] D.C., and Raymond Elementary School [Washington, D.C.]. Well, I went to actually three elementary schools. Raymond, Monroe [Bruce-Monroe Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], Parkview is--the order is Parkview, Parkview, Monroe, and Raymond. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Is it because you moved, or that you--? Speaker 2: Yes. It's because we moved in different areas. I started out in the area of Parkview in the area of Quincy Street. And, I think we moved to--then I went to Monroe, right. Then, I think that last one was Raymond. Speaker 1: Okay. By that time, are you--you were living on, let's see-- Speaker 2: When I was a child, we moved three times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on Quincy, Columbia Road, and Rock Creek Church Road was the last one. Speaker 1: Okay. Rock Creek-- Speaker 2: Church Road. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now, were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of course we always wanna say we're good students, but I think I did all right, you know. I was very, sort of hyper because I enjoyed school. And, I had a good time. I was very talkative, I was told, a lot of times. But, I, I enjoyed my time in school. I guess one of my favorite years, I would say was fifth grade. Because I had an amazing teacher named Miss Laughlin, Miss McLaughlin [ph.]. And, she really did things with us in school as well as out of school. I, I call it service learning, where we had a chance to go into the parks, Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.]. We had a chance to go into the neighborhoods. We studied nature, and it was a fun time with us. And, I--that year, I will never forget my fifth grade year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lots of fun. Speaker 1: All right. Fifth grade you were like, 1970 I guess, right? Speaker 2: Right in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970], right. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Early, right, that's right. Speaker 1: So, at this age, everybody had a big afro. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, in the late--that's right. Outta the late, late '60s [1960s], yeah, in that time. I'll never forget, I was in, it had to be Monroe in '68 [1968], I'd say when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--I remember, I think, I remember they announced it on the, on the speaker that we had to leave school immediately. And, after we walked outside we saw this smoke in the air. At that time, I didn't know what was going on, at that time. And, thank God I lived only one block from the school. There were kids that had to travel. And, it was a, it was a devastating experience to walk outside and see the, the [U.S.] Army, like the Army was just all in the streets, you know. There we jeeps, there were tanks riding in the streets in Washington, D.C. As a little kid, I remember that time so well. And, really not knowing exactly what happened because they didn't announce to us exactly what happened. They said, we just had to leave school. But, that, that's a devastating picture I will always have in my mind. Story_ID: 276756 Speaker 1: The year is 1968. [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] has just been killed and there're riots in Washington [D.C.], right? Or, rebel- some people call it the early rebellions. But, riot may be a reductive definition of it. But, the troops were in town, right? Speaker 2: The troops were there, man. On the st- I mean, literally on the streets with guns and you know, and directing traffic. Tell us to go that way, don't go this way. I mean, it was unbelievable as a child, you know, we walked--to walk out with no pre-warning, just saying to leave school. And, just have us to travel and send--I thought it was the end of the world. I'm trying to tell you what I went through. And, then had to go in the house, had to stay in the house, had curfew, lockdown, everything. And, seeing the looting, and the riot that was going on. It was a riot. That's really what it was. And, we would go there and by that time, and then I guess it--by the time they got it under control was well into the evening that time. But, it was, it was a scary time. Speaker 1: Were people on your block participating in it? Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah (laughter). It was the day that nearly everybody said, hey--it was all out in the street and everyone just got involved, you know, with doing that. It was funny times 'cause we didn't really know what was going on, you know. We just saw people running around with TVs and shopping carts-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. So, people are looting and--? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Burning? Speaker 1: Yeah. Just chaos in the streets everywhere, you know. And, of course, we wanted, we wanted to come outside. My mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton], I mean, really made us stay in the house. But, every once and a while we'll come out, open the doors to see what was happening. But, they asked everyone to stay in and they were arresting people. It was really something. So, eventually, we sort of snuck out, you know, and just 'cause I really wanted to see what was going on. And, of course, it was dangerous but, you know, the whole town-- everybody was out in the street doing that. So, we just wanted to get out. I remember my brother and I just getting out there, just wanted to see what was happening. Speaker 2: Did you, did you get into any trouble out there? Speaker 1: Well, not really in trouble, no. 'Cause, I mean, they were really, I must say, I would say, this one thing I must say, the troops were very nice and they did well at trying to calm everyone down. So, I mean, I'm sure they were some arrested, people got arrested but we, of course, were fine. They sent us home. They told us to get off the streets. And they, but they did do this, they were throwing tear gas to try to control the crowd. And, that got in my eyes, I remember that, having that experience. Then, of course, that made you run. You ran home. So, you know, we took risk going out there, but just wanted to see what it was like. Its adrenaline, it was just fun being out there. Speaker 2: Now, at that time at age ten, did you have a sense of who Dr. Martin Luther King was, and what he was doing? Speaker 1: We really didn't know. We--they were talking about him in school. The subject would come up. But, at the time though, I had no idea of the impact, you know, that he would have on my life as well, let alone the world at that time. But, I knew, interesting, I knew something happened. As I say, I thought it was the end of the world. So, the impact was strong when I went out and I saw, you know, all the smoke. It was, it was an amazing scene. I could see it today. I can smell it today, you know, it was just that memorable embedded in my memory. But, I knew something had happened. Speaker 2: How long did the unrest go on? Speaker 1: You know, I was--I believe almost two weeks. It was in the community, you wasn't allowed to--'cause it was--the troops stayed for a while, I know that. And, then it was--never seen that before. I never, never seen this before. Speaker 2: So, two weeks? Speaker 1: I would say almost, yeah, well, about a week we had them. But, then they keep the troops on just to make sure things were calm, you know, because they did do--something would break out in the area, something a break out over here. So, it was, it was, yeah, I would say that as far as I remember. It was a while 'cause they kept us out of school for a while. Then we finally went back but still you would see, you know, the troops on the corners. I mean, throughout the whole District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Did anybody try to explain what it was about, or, you know, talk about--? Speaker 1: When we went back to school, yes. We went back to school. That's when we had a lot of topics on it. Of course, we watched the news. We knew that night 'cause it was all, that was the headline of news. We knew exactly what was going on with--and, my mother made us actually watch it. We all sat around the TV and just watched it, 'cause we were scared. We were really afraid not knowing what was gonna happen, you know. It was a scary time. Story_ID: 276757 Speaker 1: Are there any other teachers in grade school that made an impact on you, or? Speaker 2: Yes. My music teacher, Miss Irving [ph.], who in elementary school, I think I was in fifth grade, who made me play, I was shocked, who let me play in a concert. And, I'm, I will never forget that. I picked up the song by ear, a song from "Purlie" called 'Walk Him Up [the Stairs]' from "Purlie." And, she let me play the song in a concert. And, that was a big deal for me in the fifth grade, being able to play before the whole school. Speaker 1: So, it was from "Purlie"? Did you see "Purlie" at some point? Speaker 2: I saw it eventually, much later. I didn't know, I'd of course I'd heard, she taught the chorus. I was always in chorus in school. So, she taught us the song. I heard the record, you know, but I, I never, I never had the opportunity to see the play until much later in life. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. All right. So, you played 'Walk Him Up' before the-- Speaker 2: 'Walk Him Up.' Speaker 1: Before the-- Speaker 2: For the choir, in school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At one of our concerts. It was a big hit and everyone loved it. And, I mean, God, the teachers really, you know, congratulated me. It was, it was just a good time for me and I felt good about that, again, about music; that opportunity to be able to contribute something. Speaker 1: Now, you were in the fifth grade. You're ten years old playing this, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm trying to tell you, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this is, it is something. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It is something. It's something, you know, for a ten years old to get up and play the piano and do well. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that's one thing, every school I went to the teachers really, they validated me as a young upcoming musician starting at that age, you know. They had me play, I played at the gymnastic competition. We had a teacher in junior high named Mr. Buckway [ph.] who taught gymnastics and he heard me play the piano. He invited me in to play for the gymnastic team. And, we had a competition and I played. And, man, that was another incredible time. I had people in the bleachers just standing up clapping. And, I remember when I was playing, it was a big deal for me. They even clapped for me to walk to the piano. So, I mean, those are memories that I have, I will never forget. Being involved in the band. I played tuba in the band. And, we used to go on all those, you know, these trips as a band, you know. I mean, I have some wonderful memories of school. Speaker 1: Now, what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Lincoln Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, Lincoln Junior High School, first. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Lincoln Junior High School. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: Then Cardozo [sic. Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Did they have a band there? Speaker 2: Did we have a band; yeah, we had a great band. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you played the tuba? Speaker 2: Tuba, right. I had a great band teacher who inspired me, Mr. Wilson and Mrs. Wilson [ph.], his wife. She taught me, and Mr. Wilson taught me. They both taught. So, I was really influenced by both of them 'cause they were really, they really pushed the students. And, they really gave all, great teachers. And, I will never forget the opportunities they would give me just as a musician. Took time with me to make sure I, I learned how to read the music. I would stay in the band room all the time 'cause he, he really nourished my talent and my gift. Story_ID: 276758 Speaker 1: Now at the time were you aware of some of the musicians from Washington, D.C. that had made a national impact? I mean, 'cause they, this--when you think about Washington, D.C. in those days, you know, Donald Byrd was-- Speaker 2: Donald Byrd, a man named Van McCoy, back in the day. Yeah, I heard of them 'cause their music, of course, I'm familiar with. And, especially in junior high days [at Lincoln Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], I would hear that. And, I actually, I had a chance to meet Van McCoy. He lived uptown on 16th Street [Washington, D.C.], off of 16th Street and some good friends of mine introduced me. So, I was, I was aware of his music. Hearing him talk about music and his inspiration many years ago. So, that was an inspiration for me too. 'Cause I've always wanted to get something out on the radio. I always thought that was just great. Then here we were talking and they're playing his song 'The Hustler' [sic. 'The Hustle'] on the, the radio (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, he became like a disco king for a while. Speaker 2: Disco king, right.-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Van McCoy. Speaker 2: For a moment, that's right, Van McCoy. Speaker 1: And, yeah, like, I think Les McCann is from Baltimore [sic.]. Speaker 2: That's right. Les McCann right. Speaker 1: But a lot of musicians were around here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. You know, it happened in the early, you know, well, you go, you go that far back, you know even the Duke, you know, Duke Ellington, you know, is from here to, made a strong impact, and a lot of people don't know that. But, very much so. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did they talk about him in school sort of, and try to, or did it just happen--? Speaker 2: Well, some--well, yeah, they sometimes but not often. They didn't get into a lot of the history of these guys 'cause--more so the music. We'll play the music in jazz band, and, and the concert band, as well as the marching band. We'll play a lot of the music, you know, but they would never get into a lot of the history of these guys. Story_ID: 276759 Speaker 1: Did you have, I guess, music was your favorite subject in school, I guess. Was it? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it, well, it was one of them, music. I love history. I--history, I love history, and music. And, I have to say, I had English teacher, who I had a crush on, so you know, of course, that was always my favorite subject; Miss Crocker. I'll say her name now, Beverly Crocker [ph.] (laughter). Who I was always, I would run to her class. But, all the guys did. She was a beautiful lady. And, my science teacher and Miss Crocker in junior high school [Lincoln Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], all the guys would always sign up for their classes all the time. So, that tells you, you know. And, we did actually, did well in the class (laughter). Speaker 1: That's inspiration. That how to inspire young men to achieve, huh? Speaker 2: It was. Hey, we were, we were achievers at that time (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fun, fun days, I'll tell you. Story_ID: 276760 Speaker 1: Now, what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: [Francis L.] Cardozo [Senior] High School [Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Cardoza, okay. That's C-A-R-D-O-Z-A? Speaker 2: Z-O, Cardozo. Cardozo. Speaker 1: Cardozo. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how it's pronounced. Speaker 1: All right. High school, okay, and that's in northwest--? Speaker 2: Northwest. Speaker 1: [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Right. 13th [Street] and Clifton Streets. Right, northwest. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what happened in high school? Did you get more responsibilities in terms of playing and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. It's amazing, I sort of--I did some music but because I was at that time, so involved in other things. I had an early, I guess I'm a teenager, yeah, I started getting involved and getting into a lot of professional jobs in playing churches and that kept me extremely busy; choirs. And, I didn't have much time to spend on music 'cause after I needed to get my homework done and most likely I had to go to church for rehearsal at that time. So, that took up--so, I sort of pulled away from a lot of that in high school. But, I was much so involved outside of school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so it became your part-time job too, doing music? Speaker 2: Right. That's right. It was my part-time job because I was one of the only, well, there a few, not many, we had cars in high school. You know, I was able to get a car, you know. It was a Ford, a late model, I forgot what it was, but it was a Ford, one of those huge Fords. And, I remember paying like five hundred dollars for it, but I had a car, you know. And, that was a good thing in high school. So, I could drive myself to school from time to time. It was great. Speaker 1: And, you could go to your different jobs. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Gigs and things, right? Speaker 2: That's right gigs and just play, you know. It didn't pay as much but certainly, you know, it paid for lunch. And, I was ready to buy it, you know, clothes and food, you know. It was, it was a good thing, helped my mom [Dazelle Mourning Payton] out, you know, around the house, at an early age. Yeah, started thinking about entrepreneurship at a very early age. And, I wanted--I knew if I could make this kind of money, and now, in high school, I--this is great. They said, hey, you can do this play and enjoy what you do. So, it really wasn't a job for me, I looked forward to doing that. Speaker 1: That sound like a pretty good situation. Speaker 2: It was, it was, you know, it just, it clicked for me, it connected. It just connected for me when I realized that music was what I wanted to do. 'Cause I wanted, eventually, wanted to--actually, I thought I wanted to go into medicine 'cause my best friend in high school was always talking about, you know, being a doctor, being a doctor. And, and I thought I was gonna do that. But, my whole career just shifted, you know, in high school. It took me in a total different direction, and I just followed that dream. Story_ID: 276761 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any high school teachers that really stand out in your mind as helpful? Speaker 2: Yeah. My vocabulary teacher, Miss Wilder [ph.]. Actually, she was in, I had her in junior high school [Lincoln Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and eventually she transferred over to the high school I was at, and Mrs. Wilson [ph.]. Now, Mrs. Wilson taught choir in high school and her husband Mr. Wilson taught band in junior high school. So, I had them both. So, by the time I got there, she knew who I was and she had me involved in music. I played for a lot of the assemblies there. I played, you know, I was involved in choir. Just had a great time. And, that, that, I mean, I spent a lot of time in choir at that time in high school. Speaker 1: Now, why was your vocabulary teacher so important? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know, the same thing, she was one, I left her name out, Miss Wilder, Miss Crocker, and Miss Rainey [ph.]. Miss Rainey taught science, Miss Crocker taught English, and Miss Wilder taught vocabulary. And, those--they were just nice teachers, very friendly, and of course, need I say, beautiful. And, that just sort of kept of all involved, engaged us in the classes. And, so, when she, eventually, when I was in high school, she transferred over to Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] and I remember taking her class as well. And, we just had a, we all had great relationships. And, teachers at the time, they really took time to be friends, you know, which helped, you know, to the students. And, that was a good thing. At least that's what I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds pretty good. That sound like a good situation, and you know, you don't hear so much about that any more in the public schools, but-- Speaker 2: You know, because it's hard, you know, I taught school too, for a number of years, almost fifteen years of my life. And, it's difficulty with all the issues that's going on now in schools. All the lawsuits and a lot of issues that--it's a tough time right now. You need to, you need to know how--let me say it this way, you need to know how to befriend students as a teacher. It's very important. Because I'm very close to a lot of my students, but, it's a respect thing. You have to always make sure that respect thing remains intact. I don't care, because it's so easy, you know, if you're not careful to overstep that line. And, but, you cannot do that 'cause you--remember we are still the example setters as a teacher. That's what we do. We teach. We teach by example, precept. That's what we do. So, I've always believe that I, as I've always enjoy the fact that I can inspire the mind. That's what I enjoyed about teacher. And, when you turn someone on, you know, turn their minds on, that's a very powerful thing. They feel, they look up to you. They honor you. That type of thing. So, that's why it's our job as an adult and as, as but, just, in this case, the person who's in charge, it's important to make sure that we give back, you know, to that child what they're there for, and that is to learn. That is the education, and that is it. And, of course, if a friendship comes along with that, fine and so be it. But, the key thing is to make sure we're there to give them that education. Story_ID: 276762 Speaker 1: Now, what would you consider to be the highlights of your college--your high school years [at Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I like--well, I have to say again, choir and just meeting people. We had a jazz teacher by the name of Calvin Jones, he's deceased now. We called him Blade. Blade was an incredible musician; played almost every instrument. He could arrange. He could do a lot things but he had the jazz band at the time. Music was very much so a major part of the school's climate. It was very much so a part of the culture of the school. So, we, we had music. We heard music. They would open the doors while the band was playing. You could hear music while you're walking down the hall. We had that kind of climate, which was great, you know, for us. So, those are great highlights for me; the sport game, all the, the basketball, the football game. We played at all these things. So, we were there, and so I would always have great--I had a great time in school. I mean, again, trace it back to elementary, [Lincoln] Junior High [School, Washington, D.C.], and high school. I have some great memories. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you get a chance to participate in clubs in stuff in high school and things like--? Speaker 2: Not many club- 'cause I, again, I chose to manage my time a little wisely 'cause I had to stay on top of my work, you know, 'cause I was go involved in music. And, then outside of school, I had all these other responsibilities. So, it was always difficult for me to take on more, 'cause I just couldn't be everywhere at one--same time. So, I had to make a decision what I was gonna cut back on, what I was gonna do, what I was willing to let go, and I made that decision. So, it worked out. It balanced out for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you came out in '77 [1977], right? Speaker 2: That's right, '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 276763 Speaker 1: You went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Right. I went to Howard University, right. Speaker 1: How did you decide that you were gonna go to Howard? Speaker 2: Well, it was a choice for me 'cause see at that time, I was already playing. I was making money, and I was trying to figure out a time to balance my schedule out, and I had to make a decision. I had to go and sort of just learn more about music that I was playing by ear. And, of course, I had went to school so I had some reading under my belt. But, I really wanted to go and advance myself. And, I started at Howard, and then I went on an exchange program to Switzerland. Howard students from the music department and drama department went to Switzerland to--for, it's supposed to been for like a semester. But, it wind up being, we stayed for most of the year. And, then in the same--a place called St. Gallen, Switzerland, and later moved on to Paris [France]. And, we had a show called 'Raisin' that we were there, and I was the piano player for that. And, that, that really changed my life. From there I was exposed to a-whole-nother world. And, being involved in music, I met producers overseas and got involved in festivals over there, playing, and been invited back. And, I've been going to Europe now for over twenty something years now. And but I'm over there quite a bit now, and tour a lot. I do a lot of festivals there. And, so, it just sort of opened me up to--I knew I wanted to perform. So, at that time, I said, "Wow." I was going to Howard, and I said, "Let me just--," I decided to go on the road 'cause the money was great and my, things just changed, for my life changed. And, I felt that I needed the experience while I was young, to go on the road and do that. Made a lot of money doing that, and decided to come back and go back to school. So, I went--I did an entertainment law course, 'cause I wanted to--that's how I talk about more business and learn more about the business of music. 'Cause I would do stuff, but I didn't understand, really understand the structure of business of entertainment. And, I, so, I wanted to do that which was great for me. So, I, I had a great time just doing my music and piece in my education, shall I say, 'cause I would always go back on the road and do stuff. And, I, and said I'll come back. And, so, I went to Howard for at least two years, and I decided to go on the road. So, I never finished. I was just--been on the road and I went back to do special studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you go to Switzerland in your freshman year? Speaker 2: Yes, freshman. Speaker 1: In a fresh- as a freshman? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I, and interesting, I wasn't really supposed to go. Somebody was supposed to be--learn the music. The other guy never learned the music. And, I was at the rehearsals all the time, and I was chose to go. And, that's how that happened (laughter). Speaker 1: So, did you go, did you go like a second semester of your freshman year, is that? Speaker 2: It was the second, second semester, right; second semester. Speaker 1: So, in '78 [1978], beginning in '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Seventy--'78 [1978], '79 [1979], right. Speaker 1: Okay. You went to Switzerland? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I know Donald Byrd as we said before was at Howard teaching music. But, I don't know if had him or not? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, who were some of the other teachers that you, that were there? Speaker 2: Well, it was very interesting, at that time, of course, Irby the band teacher, Fred Irby [III], there were others at the time. Kirk Stuart, who passed away, who did jazz. I went in--I went to study jazz. That's why I went in. I wanted to do that. And, Kirk was a tremendous teacher, and worked with him for a while. And, then again, I, my career would take off. I would advance to go back on the road to tour and do more. So, I was always pulled back 'cause some opportunity would come up. And, I remember so well doing lectures on the road and meet, meeting up with other musicians. We would just do so much. And, I said, "Wow, I know this, I know this," and, it's interesting. So, I would--they would call me up to demonstrate in the classes. So, I would do a lot of that; a lot of the lecture workshops we had. I found myself teaching and showing different chords, analyzing chord structures and all that stuff. So, that--it was always that way for me in my life. Story_ID: 276764 Speaker 1: So, your career just kind of took you out of school-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --basically into career. So, well, tell us about some of the things you got involved in early on. Now, here's the late 70's [1970s] we're talking about now, '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the late '70s [1970s], I got involved, I have to say this, the Honorable Reverend Walter E. Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], who sort of befriended me and took me in. I often call him my godfather 'cause he was always there for me in many ways. He's a great singer, and we used to work together. And, he took me at an early age, in my teens, to Chicago [Illinois] to co- I guess, produce the vocals for this album he was working on with Ben Branch, I don't know if you know these names, out of Chicago? Speaker 1: Yeah. Ben Branch of Operations Breadbasket [sic. Operation Breadbasket]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Breadbasket. And, it was guy, now, I'm trying to remember his name, he had the studio on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], Paul Serrano, these old years-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Right. Speaker 2: I remember I said--I was a child, and I was around the, I mean, humong- all these great men and had no idea. And, I was arranging music on the spot. For I--we brought a choir in and they allowed me to arrange the music and play the piano. So, I met some, I mean, under--with Reverend Fauntroy, I met so many great people. You know, he walked very close with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and when he took us on tour with him after we had the album out, we went down to Atlanta [Georgia], we met the King family. You know, we did things, we did a concert tour in Atlanta, went down to Tuskegee, Alabama met Harold Ford [Sr.], the Honorable Harold Ford. And, met, God, was that Lionel Richie's family member? It was an incredible time. We were young at the time but I was exposed to all of this. And, some of the names, I can't remember all. [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. [Joseph] Lowery, other folks that I met sitting at a table with them, in the same room with them. And, I had no idea of the influence I was around at the time. Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Calvin Morris? Speaker 2: Calvin Morris. Speaker 1: From Operation PUSH [Operation Breadbasket; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] in those days in Chicago? Speaker 2: I don't know. I met so many guys there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're in the studio, in Paul Serrano's Studio [P.S. Recording Studios, Chicago, Illinois] and-- Speaker 1: 'Cause he went from both, he started in Operation PUSH in Chicago, and ended up being in charge of The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] in Atlanta at the time period of time during the late '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 2: No. I didn't know them. But, I met some incredible people, I mean, at that time. These are--was the names that I come out to me. But, of course, we were there with him. I remember pulling up in front of Coretta Scott King's home with Reverend Fauntroy, and I remember that--this is unbelievable times that I had, not knowing what I was being exposed to at that time. But, that really changed my life. And, I said, "God, I really enjoy doing this." And, we would go, we--he had a cause, we could go down support the cause of supporting the homeless at that time, feeding the hunger. We did that a lot. And, Ben Branch was great on the sax. And, I had no idea who I was working with. And, I would arrange the music right there, and he would just gone and play it. And, I hung out, we went out to eat together with these guys. I was a little kid on the block (laughter). But, I mean, awesome days and I would contribute a lot of that, my exposure, again, to Reverend Fauntroy who really believed in me and really pushed me as well. Speaker 1: Did you remember the 'Walk Tall' album ["Country Preacher"] from '70 [1970], I think '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] that they did? Ben Branch and-- Speaker 2: Ben Branch, oh, you know what-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson was on-- Speaker 2: I saw, yeah. I saw, yeah. But, I'm not familiar with it. I know the name of, right. But, not familiar. Speaker 1: Cannonball Adderley,-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Also-- Speaker 1: You know, and all that stuff, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. And, and in this studio I was told in Chicago, Paul Serrano and all those guys, I remember I was in the office with them, I remember conversations they used to talk about. Different ones who were here, I saw the plaques on the wall, you know, who all are artist who recorded there. Artist would walk in the studio; Natalie Cole, people like that. I that had no idea really, you know, I knew Natalie Cole, of course, but just all these different artists. Everyone went to that studio to record. Some major, major names, people walk in, you'd see 'em, it's just unbelievable. They'd walk right in the studio just like that. So, that--I knew I wanted to do that. That was another inspirational moment for me. Story_ID: 276765 Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy is helping you out and getting you involved in the, in recording. And, did you--do you remember your first recording? Speaker 2: Oh, God, yeah. I was a little kid in my church, and we had a youth choir in the church and we made our first album. It was a major deal for us 'cause they played a lot, and right that was a big hit here back in the '70s [1970s] too. I was a little kid. Speaker 1: Oh, so, okay, so, you made your first album when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Little kid in the choir, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so, that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was supposed to li- I had my first solo, I was a little kid. I was real small. God, in '75 [1975], '75 [1975], '74 [1974], I had my first solo in the church, you know, and it's a great thing for me. And, Ozzie Edwards [ph.] was the choir director who gave me, supposedly, to that and understanding how powerful it could be to be in front of people and to express yourself. It was okay to do that. And, the first time--he used to always tell me, I had to lear- memorized these words 'cause we had to adlib on the song. So, once I learned the basic adlibs, he put me out there and just let me, and it was interesting, it was like magic, it just happened. And, I have memories of, fond memories of those days as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Church taught me a lot. And, my pastor, I have to say, who recently passed away like about four months ago, Bishop Sherman S. Howard, who was the pastor of the New Bethel Church of God in Christ [Washington, D.C.] where I grew up in, who always was a father figure for me as well. Who always pushed me and encouraged, encouraged me, 'cause he encouraged music in the church. And, so, coming up under his tutelage it was a great thing, and now I'm the minister of music at this church that I grew up in. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what--give us some of the highlights of how things progressed. Now, you were like touring with Walter Fauntroy. Did you all make a, what was the title? Did you make an album? Speaker 2: An album, we made an album, we made an album together? Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: You know we asked--I'm so sorry, this was years ago. But, it was just, he wanted to make an album. I don't think we gave it a title. But, it was basically songs about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. It was a tribute to Martin. Songs about Martin Luther King. And, that, he would narrate in between and we brought a choir in. Again, we did this on the spot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, laid the tracks and everything. And, that's when I realized I really wanted to be a producer at that time. 'Cause I was able to create the magic in, in the studio. And, then we would listen to it. I said, "Wow, this is great." And, we'd go back into it, make the changes. And, the whole album was great. He took a lot of memorable songs and we would sort of change some of the words. They would add a line or two in, 'cause it was a tribute to Martin Luther King, Dr. King. Story_ID: 276766 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to 1972 to something we didn't talk about and that's the 'The Sunshine Store.' This is an NBC television show. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: That you, you wrote songs for, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had this children's program called 'The Sunshine Store,' and they brought me in and asked me could I create some music for this thing. And, of course, I came in and I started playing on the spot, again creating music, and they, hey, they say, "Hey, this is great." So, they brought me on to do this and they paid me, you know, to write music. And, I was, again, my early, early days of, you know, of exploring my music ability and not knowing what I was doing at the time, but knowing that I could create. And, I would do it based off of the feeling of what was being done at the time. So, I would just have to sit there and make it up, create it on the spot. And, it's called mood music. Speaker 1: And, this is, this is--you're twelve years old in 1970. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know. Very, I was very young. I could, 'cause I was exposed--and this went on for a while 'cause I met someone who worked there and I would, and we, he wanted to create some music for himself. So, he was working on some things and some of the producers there met me. I used to do things at the studio from time to time and they thought it was fascinating to have me there. So, I would come in from time to time and do things for them. And, one of the times, we had a Christmas special with Patti LaBelle. I was young, a teenager and they, they brought me in to play the music for Patti LaBelle, you know, for one of the Christmas specials there. Things like that. And, I still have a relationship with NBC, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's, that'll give you some confidence. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, then the, you composed music for a documentary called '[The] New Cotton Club Revue.' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The New Cotton Club Revue.' Speaker 1: In '76 [1976] now-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're like sixteen? Speaker 2: Right. When I first started scoring that. I got involved in community theatre called the New Theatre [Washington, D.C.] of Washington. Miss Thomasine Allen [ph.] who ran that theater who really, again, who saw--recognized my talent, and had a script and needed music and asked me would I consider writing some music for the script. And, then took me to New York City, to Harlem [New York, New York], and to give me a feel of what it felt like. And, we went by the Cotton Club [New York, New York], at that time, it was new Cotton Club. They had moved at that time, but still I had a chance to sort of see it and sense it. And, being around the Cotton Club, I was able to feel it. And, I came back and I scored music based on that. And, then the summer, they had something called street theatre here in Washington, D.C., and one summer they chose to do it. And, you know, the whole script, the music, and here I was again, very young seeing someone perform my music. So, it--that was, that was a real highlight for me. And, then, of course, it was a documentary on NBC and won an Emmy Award there. So, we were excited about that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--now, is there a reason why you didn't go to--I know they had, they were starting up a performing arts high school [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] in the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s] here in D.C. In fact, I think we interviewed the founder [HistoryMaker Peggy Cooper Cafritz]. And, is there a reason why you did attend that high school? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it was, 'cause I think at that time, I was so far involved in, in I guess, my career. I started very early performing, doing things, traveling, playing for church events across the country, at a very early age. Establishing myself and I just didn't have time, I guess, at a point I sort of made my strides at Cardozo [Francis L. Cardozo Senior High School; Francis L. Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.], and that's where I was. I loved that environment. I loved my teachers there. So, at the time, I just chose not to do it, I guess. I knew about it. I remember when they started up the whole bit, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I thought I'd ask. Story_ID: 276767 Speaker 1: We're in about 1979 when we left off, '78 [1978] or '79 [1979] and you're working with [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Walter] Fauntroy who wasn't a congressman then, he was just, he was a reverend. Speaker 2: Right, reverend. Speaker 1: Involved in, a veteran of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement. But, then, but, then hanging around him, you know, learning from him, he really opened a lot of doors for me. I would play for him from time to time and then he would invite me to go places some times, 'cause he wanted to sing. So, I would play for him in sense of that relationship, it was established for a while. And, then the biggest break for us, when we used to go on tour. So, we decided you're gonna do a tour and he brought me into rehearse. I brought singers in, and we took a mobile home, a mobile unit and we just went on the road. We had a great time. I remember several times we did that. Speaker 1: And, when was that? In the--? Speaker 2: That must have been in the late--in the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. So, so you just steadily basically from that point on, you just steadily--? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's just, right, a snowball effect. Things just started happening for me, and I just happen to be in the right time, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now this--now what did you do during most of the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: The '80s [1980s] I spent, of course, a lot time definitely in church ministry, church music ministry. A lot of time developing my skills and playing, writing, even producing small projects, you know, at that time. It was, I was always involved in some form of music at that time. Traveling as well. Speaker 1: And, mostly church related? Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, church related things. And, which really gave me my foundation. I would always contribute that to the church, my foundation. Story_ID: 276768 Speaker 1: People from time to time, they find themselves in conflict between the secular world-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --and the, and the church world, you know. Al Green, you know, the popular singer-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --musicians and then he-- Speaker 2: Al Green is still rolling too (laughter). Speaker 1: And, then he, then he stopped, you know, after having great success, you know, after, you know-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: He stopped and became exclusively a pastor and a musician in church. Then he, he's, now I think he's doing both. Speaker 2: Right. He is both, doing both. Speaker 1: So, I mean, did you ever have to make those kinds of choices? Speaker 2: I did. But, it's interesting. I look at this, like this, you know, music is an art to me. I think God created all music. I believe that. And, I, I look at it as a job. However, I do have my boundaries of what I would touch and what I would not touch. But, I, but I'm inspired by music. I'm a producer. I just love to create and I think that's one of the joys and the gifts that God gives us to--he allows us to create music. I think what has happened in the church world that, in traditional church world should I say, allows how--they will always related to playing blues, which as is the devil's music. But, how can that be the devil's music when it's our heritage. It's what we own. We brought this music here, you know, to raise--we own that. We live up to it. So, I think that when you look at it in the right perspective, when you sort of look at who we are, you have to be able to accept the whole part of who we are. And, music is a part of life. It's a part of us. So, I look at it that way. I decipher it by saying, "Hey, I'm a musician. This is who I am and what I do." I can appreciate all forms of music. Yet, I am a Christian. Yes, I am a believer. But, at the same time, I do music. That's what I do. That's how I justify what I do. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it doesn't stop you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It doesn't stop you from performing your secular music? Speaker 2: No. It doesn't stop me from, 'cause I keep things in perspective, whereas I say, I have my boundaries; what I will do, what I won't do. Speaker 1: Okay. Does it, you know, the movie 'Ray' was just out recently, where they, you know, that was seen, now that was pointed out as, as one of the sources of conflict in the movie 'Ray.' And, they say that Ray [Charles] took gospel music and made it secular. And, then there's another school of thought that says that, Thomas [A.] Dorsey took secular music and made it gospel. Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, who's, who's following who here? Speaker 2: Well, actually it's interesting, I say it this way, it's all in the family, you know. You know, the influence I, I look at everything. 'Cause see if you take the slave from slavery time, it's what we, we created this stuff. Even when we started singing acapella before there was any music added. We did the slurred tones, you know, the grace notes. We did all that stuff, and that eventually translated into the blues, into the jazz, it's all part of the same family. So, you can't help but be influenced by, 'cause what you hear, that's what you are. It's all mixed in the same boat. So, I, I--we play it on. I think when you listen to some jazz, you can hear the influence of gospel. We listen to some gospel, you hear the influence of jazz. You can't get away from it. It's there. Speaker 1: Now, there was a television show, public television did, I think it came out in the mid-'70s [1970s], [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. from Chicago [Illinois] was the host and he--on it, the show was called 'From Jump Street[: The Story of Black Music']. It's about the black, the evolution of black music basically. And, he, what he says in the show, which was like a ten week series, is basically what you just said. I mean, an extended version of it but-- Speaker 2: Right, it's, that's all it is. It's who we are. And, I say again, when we listen to it, you know, as an historian, the lecture on our contribution, African Americans' contribution to music, it's great to see that, how it all developed into what we have, you know, as music today. We have that. And, if you trace it back, you'll see the same thing. Everything touches on each other. A little bit of this. A little bit of that. And, that's what influences it. It's just when you can, know, when you know how to emerge and mix flavors together. And, that's all it does for us. So, I think, in fact, I celebrate it. I like, even today, that's when you get the different styles of music today in gospel. You can find some classical influence. You can find some Caribbean influence. You can find some hip hop influence. Where music is gone today, we have a little bit of everything out there. And, I can appreciate that. Speaker 1: Okay. Is it, now, in terms of the message that you deliver through the music in terms of--do you, now do you write lyrics? Speaker 2: Yes. I write. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you write secular lyrics as well as--? Speaker 2: I write, yeah, I do. I write secular. I write for shows, musical theatre, gospel, as well. I've been involved in different genres and styles of music. Story_ID: 276769 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is as we speak, I guess, the hip hop genre is a, or, I don't know if you can say its all hip hop 'cause I know people say it's a difference between hip hop and rap, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I'll say first, hip hop, it's very important for us to understand that hip hop is a culture first. It's important to understand the culture that's out here 'cause it speaks to the world now, and the influence is so strong. Everywhere I go in Japan, Europe, wherever outside of America, you can see the strong influence of hip hop. And, eventually, the world had to wake up and have to listen and say, "Well, these people have something to say." When you took time, take time to listen to the message. It's a very powerful message at this time. Rap music on the other hand, it allowed, it gives a platform. It allows the artist to just sort of rap about life experiences and who they are. But, the hip hop deal with the beat and the culture. When you mix, blend the two together, you know, you have very powerful art form of music. Which at one time, people didn't wanna accept. They just wanted to look at the negative side of that. But, you know, we have got to get to a place--it's very, it's psychological now. It allows us to really share what's inside of us and to get it out. A lot of the issues that people sort of just say, hey I'm not gonna listen to you today. I not even gonna deal with his. But, the platform now where rap music is gone, it allows you get all the anger, they talk about the anger. Talking about anger management; the best way to deal with it, is allow people to talk, is to get it out. And, that's, that's why I'm grateful for the hip hop culture and the hip hop era 'cause it will, it has given us a platform to talk. Speaker 1: Now, do you have favorite artist in the genre, that you--? Speaker 2: Well, of course, you know, I mean, of course, I mean, I like Dr. Dre. And, of course, Tupac [Shakur]. Folk like that who really spoke really from the heart. And, I felt was very important to really allow that time to open up. If you go all the way back, you know, there of course, when you start talking about rap music, hip hop, you--the message sort of changed a little bit. And, you know, there's gangster rap now, all these types of things. I don't agree with all the messages, and I'm one, I can listen to lyrics. I wanna know what they're talking about. But, then understand again that hip hop culture, you have to go and look at the coded message as well. All that's part of it too. Not, just listen to the beat. We get caught up in the beat and before you know it, you hear--the lyrics may pass you by. But, it's important to take time to listen to these artists, what they are saying. So, I mean, it's hard for me to narrow it down. Biggie [Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], I mean, there's so many artists out here who I really enjoy. Because I like music, I listen to everybody. I listen to country. I listen to gospel, jazz, hip hop, R&B. I would-- exotica music. I listen to everything; classical, 'cause I love it. Speaker 1: Okay. There's lot of African music coming into the country now too. Do you--? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Do you listen to that to as well? Speaker 2: Yeah. I do. I try to, I try to expose myself to as much music as possible 'cause it's important to me to hear what's happening, what's in right now, and what's out right now. And, the beat--if you listen to a lot of the same beats out there, and, but the influences was a color in all this. So, I like to study music, and write from my experiences. Story_ID: 276770 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the founding of--now if I'm skipping over something major, let me know. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: But, tell me about the founding of City of Peace [sic. City at Peace]. Speaker 2: Okay. City at Peace was birthed out of, first the organization called Peace Child [Foundation] who, what we did. The focus of Peace Child was to travel around the world to deal with getting cross understanding through the arts, cross-cultural understanding through the arts, which was important. We used to go to Russia during Cold War time, former Soviet Union. It was a very powerful time, we'd go to different area over there just--we'd bring together what American, Americans and Russians at the time, and we just spend time, like a month together-- Speaker 1: So, what would you do, like organize a choir--? Speaker 2: A play. A play. Speaker 1: Or something? Speaker 2: We do a play. Speaker 1: A play. A play. Okay. Speaker 2: Based on the issue, their issues in their government, our issues here in America. And, we'd do some of the play in Russian, and some of it in English. Some of the songs in Russian, some in English. And, I would write the music for the play and we used to have a great time, man. And, we went to different areas around, performing. It was very well received; very well. Speaker 1: Now, how did you get funded for that? Speaker 2: Well, again, it was from foundations government funded, and just basically, friends who supported what we--the work that we were doing. 'Cause at that time, you know, there was a serious--people believed that again, Russians and Americans really had no relationship. They hated each other. And, this organization was an exchange program that allowed us to go into these areas and realize that we are the same, you know, and we're people. And, we developed an incredible bond in that one month. We would stay for about one month, and it was very, it was very difficult to tear us apart when we were leaving. Speaker 1: Now, did you have--who was your support, did you have support in the state department [U.S. Department of State] or in the administration to help you? Speaker 2: Well, not real--it was some of it, I guess, of course, we did some of this through the state department who allowed us to, to go over there, paperwork and stuff. But, basically, our funding at that time, came from foundations and just personal friends who knew the work that we were doing, that type of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some corporate sponsorship as well. Story_ID: 276771 Speaker 1: So you said you went to Russia [Soviet Union]? Speaker 2: Russia, South Africa, over there in Japan where we do this program Peace Child [Foundation]. And, out of that, we decided, it was decided that when we came back, why travel around the world trying to fix their problems and their issues, and right here in our own backyard we have real issues happening here. At the time, we had a, and you know in Washington, D.C., we had one of the highest rates of murder, here among teens. And, all kinds of issues; drugs, things that were happening right here in the District [of Columbia]. So, it was decided at that time that we would focus more on home. And, out of that was birthed this program City at Peace. You know at a time when, when gangs was running rapid here. It was just really a bad time and in Washington, D.C. So, we started the first program here, and was received very well; standing ovation. And, out of that, you know, of course, the program went through several changes. You know, funding was always an issue of trying to keep, you know, keep things alive and moving. So, you know, we shut down a couple of times and started back up again. Speaker 1: So, y'all headquarters-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: For City of Peace? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah there's headquarters now, actually, headquarters in--located in Washington, D.C. There's also, I wanna say a national, as well, chapter that's been started up as well. Speaker 1: And, what was your approach to it? I mean, how did you get, like, you had like youth participating, right--? Speaker 2: Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: In City at Peace? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How did you recruit 'em? Where did they come from? Speaker 2: Well, of course, we did advertisement, word of mouth in the schools, and we would come together, we would hold an audition. And, then, well, the good thing about City at Peace, we tried to take everyone and anyone who wanted to be involved. If you had something so you can say--you had to say, that was the criteria. It wasn't based on really, your talent. That was part of it of course, but, we really, you know, we took you. If you wanted to be a part of this; the whole concept of making a difference in your community. And, that was the really, premises for why we took anyone; what made us develop this. 'Cause it really worked. We found out we had, interesting, we had blacks. We had the whites. We had Hispanics. We had Asian. Put everyone together, coming together talking about our issues and our differences. But, what made us come together? What was our common ground? And, that, that was a challenge there, trying to figure out what we had in common. And, I often say, you know, interesting, stick a pin in you, out will come red blood. Stick a pin in me, red blood. So, color was not the deal where--we know we had issues with color and race. So, that was a big thing we used to talk about all the time. But, it brought us together in a forum that we could talk. And, it was okay to express what you were feeling; your hurts, you know, what was going on in your personal life, what was going on in your home, in school, you know, it's a place for you to feel accepted. And, it was healing for a lot of the students, I would say. They would come together and they would share those things they couldn't talk about at home. They couldn't talk to their parents about, couldn't share with the counselors at school, but City at Peace gave them a platform to really, you know, cleanse themselves. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what were your, would you like, would it open like five days a week or six day--I mean, all--. Speaker 2: Well, naw, I think, as--when we used to have the program, we probably would meet maybe once or twice a week 'cause they had other iss- things going on too, they had to deal with, responsibilities. But, that, they would come together, would meet, sometime three or four hours that evening, and we would have workshops, seminars. We'll have script writing time. And, the good thing about it, they would develop the scripts. We would sit and have--I guess, sit in a circle and just sort of talk about the issues and out of that, we develop the script. And, then out of that, I would develop music based on the topics. I would write those tunes. Sometimes they would also contribute to the songs as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was City at Peace involved with the--in the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton inauguration in '96 [sic. 1997]? Speaker 2: No. No. No, it wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, City at Peace, so that started like way back in--? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]? Speaker 2: When, when we first started the first-- Speaker 1: And, you know--? Speaker 2: --show of City at Peace, right. Then, of course, it developed and, you know, of course, on many different stages at that point. But, I would say, it's going strong now; really strong. Story_ID: 276772 Speaker 1: There was an HBO documentary made of the, of the activities of City at Peace, right? I mean, it just kind of followed you around for over a year-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I understand. Speaker 2: Right. Well, what happened was that after working on City at Peace, I used to always hear questions, like, "God, how did y'all do this? What was the concept? What made you do this?" You know, and, so, I felt it was important to document the experience. So, I invited a good friend of mine, Susan [Koch] and Chris Koch in, actually Susan to come and look at what I was doing. Susan came in the first day, was blown away by the concept and what was being discussed among, you know, the participants in the program. And, she decided that she would just follow me around at her own expense, as you know, bringing the camera crew around, on for every day, I mean, for, I mean, many days, she was there. And, she paid for it herself 'cause she really believed in what I was trying to, you know, say, and get out to the community. People would see the show but they had no idea what went on behind the scenes. The, the, I mean, I'm talking about the tough moments when, I mean, seeing the real issues of how, how you have to develop the type to pull all this stuff out of, again, the performers. And, it was not an easy time. We had some tough things to happen, some tough issues we had to deal with. With issues of racism, you name it, the peer pressure, issues on, on topics on drugs, homophobia, you know, a lot of issued that came up which actually, these kids were actually living with and dealing with. But, yet again, it allowed them to talk about it. And, she was so clever with the camera that actually they became so comfortable with it, they had no idea it was really there entirely. They just sort of ignored the camera and just sort of expressed themselves. So, out of that need, she put together a documentary and that, as you know, that was featured on 'Nightline' as well. Speaker 1: Now, it came on, the documentary was produced in '97 [sic. 1998-1999]. He had some support, I think, really--Barbara Streisand was one of the executive producers. She put up some money, I guess, for it? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, Barbara Streisand, Cis Corman, president of the company rights, was very impressed with the piece and got involved in, you know, and I'm going to say this, I mean, Susan had a way of, Susan Koch had a way of really, really keying in and knew how to really bring out the feeling of what people were expressing, or what you really felt. And, that's a gift to be able to really, you know, touch the nerves and really know how to express, on camera that is, what people are really are trying to say. And, she was able to capture those moments. It was cleverly done so well, and I think from that brought a lot of interest in people seeing the work. 'Cause as you know, you can shoot something, but if the right feelings not there, I mean, it just gonna, gonna happen. So, that was the gift that she brought to us that really helped, you know, to really get this thing out there in a big way. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the arts are, I mean, people discuss the arts in terms of how to be involved in a play takes a high level of cooperation, you know, or a musical production. People have to cooperate on a higher level. You got a lot of egos involved. And, then I guess, when you have kids that may actually have other troubles and stuff, well we all have troubles-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, you know, some of them really, I mean, from what I understand, they're a couple of people were actually shot in the group. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: On--in the--during the year that she filmed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's another thing was really, glad that she came aboard, because right, things just happened that year, you know, Murphy's law, what will happen, what--is it, "What can happen, will happen." It just happened that year. And, my son [Rickey Payton, Jr.] was one who was involved in a robbery shooting and almost took his life. And, here I'm working on the piece 'City at Peace,' trying to promote peace and, you know, focus in on--'cause there isn't here. I received a phone call, I was in a meeting, and I just--remind you, I just left my son. He came by to see me early that day and I got a call a few hours later that, you know, he was shot. And, that was just incredible. And, then another guy in the show was also shot during the course of the year. So, it was a lot of drama went on, but it was more, it was really I think was--overwhelming was the support that the cast gave to one another. Of all the, all the things that were going on, personal things that were happening, they were there for each other. That was a very powerful time for us. The show of support, overwhelming. Story_ID: 276773 Speaker 1: When the documentary was released, you all appeared, well you appeared on 'Nightline,' right? Speaker 2: No. It was actually the, they were--what happened, they--the piece appeared and Ted Koppel spoke about the 'Nightline,' I mean, about the 'City at Peace' documentary. He was only, originally from what I understand, was gonna use only a few minutes. But, after reviewing it, he gave the whole show, you know, to the documentary which opened up a lot of opportunities and doors for us 'cause many people saw it around the world actually. So, we received numerous of phone calls and which is, that's how a lot of celebrities got involved as well. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, the documentary won an Emmy Award [sic. Crystal Heart Award], or? Speaker 2: Numerous, numerous awards from a lot of film festivals and we said, we--it was interesting, we were always being called to come to, to go to the premiere, the documentary films somewhere, which was great. So, we were, we were in, I remember the story, we were in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] they featured the film there. And, in some places, I was just shocked. Susan [Koch] would call me and say, "[HistoryMaker] Rickey [Payton, Sr.], they wanna showcase the film there, showcase it here, you know, can you go?" And, I, I mean, I had some great times. We went several places. So, it was really wonderful; got a lot of, I would say, exposure. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, in--anything else about 'City of Peace'? Speaker 2: 'City at Peace,' so what I was gonna say about it, is hopefully what we're trying to really market it into the schools. Because, I feel that the message, it's a great teaching tool to use if you wanna address the issues. It's a wonderful piece to show. And, and we're getting phone calls still about that. And, they, and also in the current program now is, has been formed--performed constantly around and they're touring with this. They're also in schools with it. It's been featured at some of the major theatres around town [Washington, D.C.]. So, I mean, it's still getting exposure, and people see it. They need it. They recognize it's really valuable at this time, as you know, with all the violence that's going on in schools right now. So, it's a wonderful piece, and I really hope that they will pick it up and use it as a learning, a teaching tool, to--'cause one thing it does, it's non-threatening, it allows the students to open up and talk about their own issues without, you know, feeling like we have adults telling us what to do. But, that's a good place to start by getting them to see that these things really exist, you know, among us. Story_ID: 276774 Speaker 1: You know what, tell us about [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton's inauguration and your song, 'Let's Build a Bridge [All Across America].' Speaker 2: Well, the whole thing came about, you know, I taught school for a number of years at Sidwell Friends [School] in the District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.] and, of course, Chelsea Clinton attended there. And, I, of course, I had met the Clintons from time to time, and I had a choir I was working with, and they wanted a song. I was approached about writing a song. And, the theme was, let's build a bridge across America. And, I came up with a concept, an idea, and the guy who heard the song, we sent the song to President Clinton. And, he heard the song, the committee heard the song and they said, they wanted to go with it. And, we were all just amazed and shocked with it 'cause other celebrities submitted songs as well and they chose my song. And, it was, it was a wonderful time. We had a choir called Children of the Gospel, at that time. And, we had a wonderful group. And, I remember so well in preparing this song. It was a crazy time, because we, we had to go in the studio, you know, to do tracks. We had to arrange the song. A good friend of mine name Evelyn Simpson-Curenton who also worked on arrangement of the song with me for the choir. So, that was through the Washington Performing Arts Society [Washington Performing Arts], as well. At that time, I was working with them. And, it was a great time for us. It was, I remember so well, it was, I think it was the coldest day in the world. You hear me, I would--that's how I would say, not (laughter) in the year, but in the world. And, we had to sit out there and we were all so excited and we didn't actually didn't think about that. But, every once in a while, you were reminded how cold it was. And, I remember so well, when they announced it, I was, I was given the privilege to direct the song as well with the choir. So, it was a very powerful time. And, we used to play at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for a lot of different events, and the Christmas holiday events, shall I say. So, it was a fun time for us, under the Clinton administration. Story_ID: 276775 Speaker 1: Okay. So, how many times do you think you performed at the White House [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Oh, God, I mean, we go back under, go back to President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.]. Who else was there; and-- Speaker 1: [President Gerald Rudolph] Ford [Jr.]? Speaker 2: Bush. Not under Ford but under president-- Speaker 1: [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan? Speaker 2: [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush as well. Of course, under; who else was there; Reagan, yes. Many times under President Reagan, as well, administration. So, we've, we've been there quite a bit, you know. Good times, too. And, we eventually had a chance to eat there, had time to play for different events there. So, it was a fun time. Speaker 1: And, you've played for Queen of England [Queen Elizabeth II] or something at one point? Speaker 2: Yes. I had a chance to do that. (Laughter) Had to travel abroad with some of the royal family and had a command performance there, President [Francois] Mitterrand, at that time in France. You know, it was, it was a great. This is doing music, and my jazz, and my gospel. And, I just always enjoyed doing that, very much so. And, I have to say, I have a special connection with, since you mentioned that, Europe. 'Cause I go there sometimes two or three times a year. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now, you've performed with a variety of people, too. I think there's a list on your bio, it's just a--give us some examples who how many different kinds of people you've performed with. Speaker 2: Well, God. I would got back to Wayne Newton, or to Michael Jackson, P. Diddy [Sean Combs], back to Aretha [Franklin]. Oh, God, Shania Twain, Celine Dion. And, gospel, we got John P. Kee, Karen Clark Sheard, Dorinda Clark-Sheard [sic. Dorinda Clark-Cole], the Winans, it just goes on and on, the list. And, but, I mean, all fun, fun times, and different experiences. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell us about the Christmas pageant. Speaker 2: The Christmas Pageant (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a special thing. Speaker 2: A special thing, yeah. Speaker 1: Christmas is your favorite time of year, you said. Speaker 2: My favorite, my favorite time of year. I love the lights. I love the music. And, when we were asked by the White House to be a part of the national, the lighting of the national Christmas tree and that was the Urban Nation H.I.P.-H.O.P. Choir. And, H.I.P-H.O.P. standing for Hope, Integrity, Power - Helping Our People. So, we performed for that event. The President [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] speaks, and it was a great time. We're outside again. So, the only thing we don't like about it, it's outside. (Laughter) All these cold events (laughter). But, it was a good time. We had a ball. And, we performed about three or four selections. And, again, Wayne Newton was there; Marty Stuart, Renee Fleming, and God, well, that's, that's the gist of it. We performed with them, backed, you know, backed them up, and plus sang along. Story_ID: 276776 Speaker 1: In 2004, you became a Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] scholar. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, someone recommended me because of my knowledge in gospel and Afro-Cuban jazz. I had lectured on the history of spiritual and gospel music in Long Beach, California for the Smithsonian as a scholar as well as Afro-Cuban jazz. And, I was a, a great time again, I met some fascinating musicians and people there at the time. I, what I did was I involved the community. I brought in choirs from that area. I brought in musicians from that area. And, we, of course, presented a pre- I had a presentation there which was great. And, was held at one of Long Beach Community College [sic. Long Beach City College, Long Beach, California] and one of the Latin museums out there. So, it was, I mean, it was well organized and again, it was just an incredible time, to be able to expose so many to the style of the history of spiritual and gospel. We had a packed house as well as the Afro-Cuban jazz. Story_ID: 276777 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, oh, I didn't ask you about Urban Nation [Inc.]. Now, when did you form--you're one of the co-founders of Urban Nation, right? Speaker 2: Right. Urban Nation actually, Dr. Sheila Crump Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson] and my, and myself, we started this out of a need to give back to inner city youth. The Urban Nation H.I.P.-H.O.P. H.I.P.-H.O.P. again standing for, Hope, Integrity, Power - Helping Our People, which is important. I believe that if you can give a child hope; this is our motto, and teach some integrity that's how we empower each other. So, that's the H.I.P.-H.O.P. And, we talk about it all the time. And, we had a group of kids back in nineteen--'97 [1997], '98 [1998], I think when we first started. And, we had over, on that day, over six hundred kids to come out to audition for this H.I.P.-H.O.P. Choir. The kids thought it was just hip hop music. So, that was the bait to get 'em involved. But, Miss Johnson really saw the need to sort of do something to give back to the inner city kids. So, that's how we started. She funded the, the project. And, now it's still booming, years later. We're going into our ninth year. We're really excited about it, and things are still going--booming for us. And, we've been asked to do a lot of corporate events as well as, church events as well. We do a lot of corporate things. So, it's working the kids, and what we do through Urban Nation, I should tell you, we give--build an infrastructure for them. We give them scholarships. We try to help them maintain a balance, and build infrastructure in their lives. We have workshops, seminars. We even have some of the corporations in the community to help us out by coming in doing partnerships. We have a huge partnership with The Washington Post, some of them--Freddie Mac Foundation, what's this, the Chevy Chase Bank [F.S.B., Bethesda, Maryland], and there's so many corporations out there who've just been great in helping us to launch our vision and our dream. Speaker 1: Okay. And, that was founded in what year? Speaker 2: About 1998. We started in '97 [1997], but officially got the paperwork through in '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, Urban Nation. And, the H.I.P.-H.O.P. Choir is an extension of Urban Nation? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 276778 Speaker 1: In 2005, you received an honorary doctorate from Breakthrough Bible College [& Theological Seminary, Temple Hills, Maryland], right? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, I, it was so strange, I was called. And, one day I as actually sitting at home, my phone rung. And, this young lady called and said, "[HistoryMaker] Rickey [Payton, Sr.]," she said, "We want to give you an honorary doctorate." I said, "Me? An honorary doctorate?" I said, "For what?" (Laughter) So, she said, "Well, your work in the community and what you're doing in the religious community and we think that, you know, you're, you know, you should have this." And, so, of course, I really didn't take it really seriously at first. 'Cause I really, I said, "No." I didn't take it seriously. So, she called back again and wanted to make sure that I would get my paperwork in as the--'cause they wanted to really do this, and wanted to contact me. So, I received a call again. So, the second time, the ninth hour, I started to put stuff together and send it in. And, it's just a wonderful organization. They recognize people of, again, who helped or who has contributed, you know, especially to issues around youth, urban issues, and just the community, and they wanted to give me an honorary doctorate based on my work in the religious community and with youth. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, we can call you, Dr. Rickey, now, right? Speaker 2: Well, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. Speaker 2: Rickey's okay (laughter). Story_ID: 276779 Speaker 1: Tell me now, we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've thought about, I think about that a lot, and I really wish for the African American community that we would really understand our purpose, and our, our purpose in life. And, that is to understand and make sure that you really take advantage of every window of opportunity that comes your way. And, a lot of times, we feel that we can slide by, it's okay. But, I encourage everyone to really reach out to pursue their dreams. To, to really explore every window of opportunity. And, I think, sometimes, of course, a lot of us do. But, I really wanna get to the kids who really don't have a voice, the community who really don't have a platform in place to encourage them to keep fighting, and to keep believing in yourself. That's the key word. I don't care what happens in life, if you can keep your, your faith alive inside of you, you can, you can get there. You can achieve. But, you have to have that willpower to really believe in yourself. And, so many times that we give up too soon and too early. We don't allow ourselves--it's okay to fall down. It's okay to get your bruises and your scrapes. That's a part of the game. But, if you can be, you know, just say, I'm going to get up, wipe myself off, and I'm going to keep trying. It's not about how long it takes. The fact is you're moving. That's what's gonna give, you know, the goal at the end. You gotta maintain and keep your focus there and strong. So, I would tell our community just to be strong. And, I don't say that just for words. But, to really be strong, and to really, and--just keep fighting. 'Cause I believe that if you, if you work hard enough, you'll get there. Story_ID: 276780 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I would, I would take some time to probably, I would strategize some things a little different I think when I look at this. I, I'm very grateful for where I'm at, where I'm at and what I've done, and what I've accomplished, but I would take some time to sort of re-strategize and re-think some things. And, and it's true, I would do that, because I feel that windows of opportunities have been given to me. I met a lot of friends and people opened doors for me. I would never, never, ever forget that. But, if--I think, I would've spent more time just sort of, I think I would've stayed in school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] longer. I would've done that. 'Cause I think that's always the foundation to--but, again, my career was booming, taking off, I think it took me away from, you know, that. And, I would try to maintain all my focus more with that. But, I don't regret anything 'cause I, I could always do that, you know. And, the doors have been, the windows of opportunities have been there and I think I've achieved a lot for where I'm at. Story_ID: 276781 Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become a big success in music? Now, you were a child prodigy in the beginning, so how did that affect everybody? Speaker 2: It was interesting, my parents are very supportive and I taught--basically, my mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton] more so, 'cause she was on the scene a lot; very supportive. And, even when she took sick, she would come out in a wheelchair and support me. Always have been supportive, you know. I have to tell you this, it's a very emotional moment for me. My mother is very ill now, and I tell you I was going through just thinking about this interview today. And, I looked at some of these questions, and I just went--well, I just sort of forgot what I wanted to talk about. And, I began to cry. I cried because I thought about how supportive my mother has been for where I'm at today, have really helped me through, even when I couldn't afford to pay rent, she allowed me to stay there, when I was building my career. She has always, always supported me, made sure that I had the tools that I need to further my career. And, now that she's sick, you realize this now, and I found myself having to take care of my mother now. I consider it such an honor to be able to be there, and I don't care what it takes, I'm gonna be there until the end. I'm gonna be there. 'Cause, she's been a rock, she the matriarch of our family now, 'cause my father's [William Payton, Sr.] passed away. And, she is, I mean, she has, she has kept us together as family. She did her best. And, God knows she did everything she could do just to make sure we had a roof over our head. She kept food in the refrige [refrigerator]. She, I mean, she's an incredible woman, a phenomenal woman, and I will say that to you. So, I think about this, and I even dedicate this interview to her. Because she, she is my hero. I say that in many ways. And, she has really paved the way for me to, to do what I'm doing now. To, to be able to speak. To be able to be here to talk on this interview, is because that she gave me the resources and, you know, to--for me to do what I'm doing. Story_ID: 276782 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are any of your brothers or sisters involved in the arts? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I was about to say, none of 'em are. But, they--I have a sister, a couple of sisters who sing--well, I shouldn't say that. I have a sister who's an aspiring actress. I'm sorry Comelita [Payton] (laughter). No, she's an aspiring actress, and she has done some things. And, but, you know, most of them are in several different careers, and you know, I mean, they appreciate the arts of course. They support me in most everything I do as well. But, no. It's just my sister who's an aspiring actress, and myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your family today? We haven't talked about them. You mentioned your son [Rickey Payton, Jr.] was shot back in '97 [1997]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I guess. Speaker 2: My son was shot, right, a very tragic time, I tell you. And, and I--when I reflect to, I remember being at the hospital and how we didn't know if he was gonna make it or not, the police, I say, they refuse, the detectives, refused to leave. They just kept waiting, waiting, and I saw them over there talking. Normally, it was okay, they'll leave. But, they were waiting for the worst to happen. And, I remember my friends came, my family came, the--and make sure we're okay. And, the doctor came out about maybe after ten hours of surgery, came out, and just looked at me and said, "Man," he said, "I don't know why, but you are a blessed man." And, I didn't understand that 'cause he--the bullet lodged in the--went through his back between the two main arteries to his heart and brain. And, and then he had, there was some bleeding this side, so they decided instead of going in the back, they decided to go in through front. They cut his chest open and they were able to get the bullet that way. And, so, they, they didn't expect him to live. They thought it was gonna really be a bad time for us. But, thank God, that that was turned around. You know, that God gave him another chance, and spared his life. And, that's one thing with my son, which was great, it brought us together, closer together after that experience. And, then my family as a whole--my mother [Dazelle Mourning Payton], my parents always raised us to be close as we were growing up as kids. We, we shared clothes. I--sometimes my brother [William Payton, Jr.] had something, when he grew out of it, it was passed down to my other brother [Derrick Payton]. When he grew out of it, it was passed down to me. So, we had to take care of our clothes. And, when my mother went out to buy school clothes for us, we wore those clothes to school, when we came home, we had to take them off. And, we had no idea, she was thinking that we--she had to reserve those clothes for the next one. But, we were saying, "Hey, they're mine, let me wear 'em." But, we had to take 'em off. So, she was very strict about that too. So, we were able to reserve our clothes for years and years 'cause we wore 'em to school, came home, we had what we called school clothes and play clothes. See today, people don't know about that today (laughter). Speaker 1: So, how many children do you have? I mean? Speaker 2: I have one. I have one son. Speaker 1: The one son. Okay. Speaker 2: Just one son. And, I have to say that, I love, I love parenting because of what my parents put in, into me. And, how important it was to, to really be strong, to be a committed parent to be together, and that type of thing. And, we did that. That's how we grew up together. Doing a lot of things together, going to events together. It was just a good time for the family. We would eat together a lot of times and it was just, I mean, very enjoyable time, growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me, do you think raising children now is more difficult than it was in the past? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Then you got today, look at the danger you have to worry about, you know, you, you know, I want my son to go outside to play. And, to, you know, and if he go out even just to hang out, sometimes with his friends, I could not go to sleep. I have wait until I either heard from him, call him, or he walk through the door. Then I can shut my eyes. Things are so difficult now. Look at what we're dealing with here. The shootings, all kind of gang violence. There's all kind of drugs. I mean, just on the, blatantly on the streets now. It's just, it wasn't like that way, as I said, I felt safe when I was growing up. We were able to go, go to the corner store, able to go to the playground, able to hangout over our friends' home not, and not worried about anything; child molestation, none of that stuff. We didn't have to deal with that. But, now today, the whole scene has switched. It's, it's a whole new generation of minds, we're dealing with now, people we're dealing with now. And, it's a lot, I hate to say it, but it's a lot of cruelty out there and people are just not the same. They don't nourish our children like they used to take care of them. So, that's a difference. Yeah, it's very difficult to raise a child in today's society. Story_ID: 276783 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, to today, I mean, what would you consider at this moment to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know. Let me think about that one. My legacy, I would feel that I, I tried. God, knows I've tried with all my heart, to leave a picture that we can live together, and work together, if we only took time to, to, just simple, learn how to respect each other, appreciate each other. I've always tried to drive that home. And, too really, you don't have to, let's say love me to understand me. But, at the least respect me, and allow me a voice to communicate. And, I've always tried to drive that point home with all I do. 'Cause we all are different. You're gonna have a different opinion, and that's okay. We can have our differences, but let's learn how to come together and respect each other, respect each other. And, I try to do that through my work but more so example through my life. I've tried to live by example in precept of what I do. 'Cause I try to communicate and I try to get along with everyone. No, it doesn't happened all the time, no. But, I do try to. I wanna leave that legacy of being able to, you know, to succeed and be a--learn how to just get along and enjoy life. And, that's what I'm trying do. I wanna, I--until I close my eyes, one thing I'm gonna, I'm gonna enjoy my life. Story_ID: 276784 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that you should address before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: I'm thinking of my mind, about who I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Who I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Well, I guess, who I am. I am, I try to be very, very real, very open about who I wanna be and what I believe in. I'm definitely, I wanna, I wanna be known on record that I am a born again Christian. I'm a believer. I spent a lot of time--my faith is very strong. I achieved so much in life because, that I believe that God has opened those doors for me to walk in and to make some things happen. But, I really, I'm comical. I love to have fun. As I said before, I enjoy life. I, I just want to be able to touch people, you know, through my music. And, I often say this that, the greatest gift that God has given me, has blessed me with is my music. I've been able to, to reach out to so many, and touch so many people because I've had the gift of music. Not even knowing what I was doing. How music can influence the atmosphere. How music can change people's thought pattern. And, it's all because that God endowed me with this gift of music that I've been able to do and accomplish what I've accomplished. My success has been because of my music. And, so, I want people to always understand that, I love music. I love people. I just enjoy, again, the simple things in life. I'm a very simple person. I mean, a lot of fanfare, that's fine, it's nice. But, I don't need that. I enjoy the simplicities of life. Story_ID: 276785 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this may sound, the answers might sound redundant but the last question is similar to legacy. And, I think some of the answers are contained in what you just said but, I'll ask the question anyway. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) How'd I like to be remembered? As a person who really, who really tried. At the end of the day, who tried to just do what was right, and to do good. And, who tried to, really tried to help to do my, to make my contribution to society, you know, worth it and count. If no more than just a tilt. But, what I gave, what I'm giving is just trying to help build upon the legacy of peace. It hurts, it pains my heart that we're in conflict around the world, in war. When I think part of it is, again, as I said earlier, about respect. Part of it is coming to the table just to talk. People refuse to talk because of politics. A lot of times, it gets in the way of us wan- one thing I will say, when I was on--traveling to Russia [Soviet Union], Japan, and still in Europe, going places, I found out something simple. That a lot times, it wasn't us. It's our governments that's really in conflict. And, that was so interesting for me. So, I wanna be remembered that I did everything I could to, to do my part in contributing to society and promoting peace; very, very important. And, even after that, I would take it a step further, I do this for ministry. This is a ministry for me. God has, I believe God gave me this gift to really reach out and to bring, to help the lost. To help, you know, to bring people back into the fold. To bring people into a peace within themselves. To help them realize that, you know, you can get through this, not matter what's going on around you, what's going on in the world. We can get through this together. But, people have to believe that and have to build an infrastructure in place to make that happen. We can talk and talk until we are all blue and green in the face. But, until we walk the walk, it's all in vain. So, I'm just trying to, again, step out and just be a servant. I just wanna be a servant. The bottom line, end of the day, [HistoryMaker] Rickey Payton [Sr.] was a servant. Story_ID: 276786 Speaker 1: Why don't you introduce this song and tell us what it's about? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead when you're ready, sir. Speaker 2: Oh okay. This song called 'Voices for Peace' is a song that I composed for the Peace--"City at Peace," and it's the finale, it's--we call it our anthem song. And, again, as I began to think about the world issues and what was going on, I decided to write about it, and the song says (playing piano and singing, 'Voices for Peace'). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, that's my little anthem song about our world where we are. So, that's it. Well, thank you guys so much. I appreciate your time man, so much. Thank you. My pleasure...