 Story_ID: 512920 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My birth name is John Richard Porter, capital J-O-H-N, R., Richard, Porter, capital P-O-R-T-E-R, better known today as Dr. Kwame, K-W-A-M-E, Kwame, John Porter of Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right, now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born April 2nd, 1932, in Howard County, Mineral Springs, Arkansas. Mineral Springs is a small city in the southwestern or southeastern part of Arkansas. It's next door to a twin city called Hope [Arkansas]. And the City of Hope, President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was born. I'm about twelve years older than Bill, ten years older than Bill. Hope is known as the watermelon capital of the world. And one of my Porter relatives was mayor of Hope about twelve, fifteen years ago. Story_ID: 512921 Speaker 1: All right, sir, what is your occupation just briefly. Speaker 2: Basically I'm a professional clergy member of the United Methodist Church, but by training, I'm a sociologist and urban community developer. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 10th, 2003, 2003. Speaker 1: And, and where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: We're in the Hyde Park community of Chicago [Illinois], one of the more progressive urban communities in the country. Speaker 1: In, in your home, right? Speaker 2: In my home. I've lived here thirty-two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 512922 Speaker 1: Now, okay, before we go into, we get into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite--you mean a food, a particular food? Probably chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: And fish. Speaker 1: Oh, and fish. Do you have a favorite-- Speaker 2: It's fresh. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Southern United States where there are good fishing waters. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. We're either transformers of the society in which we live, or we are transformed or deformed by it. Story_ID: 512923 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and we'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's name--she's deceased now--but it's Retha, capital R-E-T-H-A, Retha, Hendricks, H-E-N-D-R-I-C-K-S, Hendricks; Hendricks her maiden name; married name, Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R. She was born in 1906, Howard County, around Tollich, T-O-L-L-I-C-H, Tollich, Arkansas [sic, Tollette, Arkansas]. Her father was named John. He was an itinerant preacher and farmer and sharecropper. I don't remember my grandmother's name at this point, but I do remember my grandmother being around. And when she died I was probably about five, six years old. Story_ID: 512924 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how far back can you trace your family? Do you-- Speaker 2: I have a family tree here, you know, you've seen, which goes back, spans about five generations. Someone sent it to me from San Diego, California, who worked it out, very comprehensive tree. And so there are so many Porters on there. I have not had time, taken time to really interpret these generations of Porters who are from Arkansas, Mississippi, Texas, and there's another state--Arkansas, Texas-- Speaker 1: Louisiana or-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Louisiana. Speaker 2: Louisiana, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Texarkana, Louisiana, yeah, that, yeah. That's where Porters are from. It's a considerable number of them. Speaker 1: Now did they go, go back to slavery? Is that where-- Speaker 2: Go back to slavery, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, go back to slavery. I heard my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter], and remember the old people, grandmother and them talking about the folk in slavery, what they thought, what they believed, how they lived. Story_ID: 512925 Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the anecdotes that they [Porter's mother, Retha Hendricks Porter, and other elders] told you about slavery that they passed down. Speaker 2: Yes, I do, very much so. They told me that there were black people who--most black people were (unclear). So after the emancipation--they called it 'mancipation. They did (unclear)--they wouldn't say emancipate--mancipation. After [President Abraham] Lincoln signed the mancipation, that most of my people were not told that they were free. He signed the Emancipation [Proclamation] January [1], I think, of 1863. But they didn't tell most of our people they were free until after June, until they had worked--made them plant the crops, got the crops in, and got the crops going real good, and some of them you're harvesting, picking cotton. And then they told them around June 19th that they were free. I think in Texas they were first told. And so that Juneteenth is celebrated from that. They, they, my people remember that. And my people remembered, they remembered great black people who they heard about, who even though newspapers were unpopular, they didn't have a newspaper, but the man, black man who traveled on the road would bring the news to, to our people from all over the country. And then the grapevine, people talk about it in church, talk about it in the little circles, in communities. So that's how we picked up, people meeting each porches and here them talk about what was happening up North, what was happening in other parts of the, the South and other cities that we were not able to travel to, and the money was accessible. And then they talked about sharecropping, and it was a--it was part of semi-slavery because the white plantation owner owned the land and everything on the land. And the only difference between that and slavery was that our people could up and leave if they weren't too far in debt if at the end of the season when they had planted and harvested. And they had what they called a settling time. And usually on most of those old plantations, that is after the Civil War now, Reconstruction after--Reconstruction during--at that time. They had a commissom--a commissary store, the common store. And so that the slave plantation owner'd build a store on their land, and that's where you got your flour, your mill, your meat, and sugar, and salt, and whatever and beans and whatever. And that most of the blacks, some poor whites too, were sharecroppers. He controlled the land; he controlled the commissary, and you could, you could get food and all kind of items in increments, farm work on debt, on credit. And at the end of--then, then you worked for him, worked the land and you'd split one half and half, whatever it was sixty/forty, whatever it was, depending on the plantation. But then at the end of the season, let's say five, six months later, accounting time was say in August or something like that, and each--people be lined up to figure out how much you owed or how much he owed you. In most cases, the families ended up owing, owing the plantation owner, and he kept the figures. And many of our people could not read or write, were not allowed, those who could not allowed to see the figures. And he determined that, you know, Suzie Mae, Bill, Jim, you, you owe me $300 dollars. Unless you can pay that off, you might as well work another year and work that off, you know. In some cases, our people so as to not to get in debt. They would either, they had their own wagons and go someplace else and, and trade or they plant enough and cured their own meat and so forth or shared smokehouse so they would not go into debt, and he end up owing them. "Well, you don't owe me nothing. I, I owe you a $150 dollars. Here it is, da, da, da." You have the guy that count or whoever was counting the money. And she remembered the blacks who could only sign an X, who did not read or write, but they're mostly the ones who got cheated. And some people in our family were cheated, some were not. We had some people in our family who were landowners, who owned their own properties. But many of those who, blacks who owned their property didn't often weren't conditioned to look out for those who were landless, basically, you know, I got mine, you get yours philosophy was very strong. And that philosophy kind of followed us as we, you know, moved through migrations, those three great migrations North, as you all know, and that kind of self-centered individualism, I got mine you get yours. So the Southern blacks, my folks that thought the North was a paradise found it was not a paradise. Story_ID: 512926 Speaker 1: But I remember all kinds of anecdotes about death and you know, romance and--I, I was telling my daughter last night, my son, and my wife [June Carol McIntosh Porter] there was a guy named Cleo Sockwell--I remember I was about seven years old, 'cause white and black men used to gamble together. It was segregated but they would gamble and drink together and gamble on out in the woods--only thing is they, the, the black and white men together that was gambling they didn't have the women over there, see. You know, you couldn't fool with any women, white or black, but there'd be a bunch of them men over there gambling. They get paid, get them--some mill or wherever they're working. These guys had some money, and so them black men gambled too. They shot dice, was a dice card game. And, and they'd get drunk, cuss each other out and you know, call each other nigger and cracker and whatever, you know, honky, but they, but they were friends. It was strange. And this guy Clarkwell--Sockwell--was a player. He was a tall, Indian, light brown skin, quote, unquote, "handsome" black man, about six feet or four [inches], 210-fifteen [215] pounds, you know, a big, rawboned, what they called double-joint at that time; they'd say he was double-jointed, meaning got natural muscles, like a [Mike] Tyson, you know, like Sonny Liston, he was double-jointed, you know, like Joe Louis. And you know, black people talk about he, boy born strong, you know. And Clark Sockwell [sic, Cleo Sockwell] was known to beat up a white or black man at that time that owed him some money and didn't pay him or try to cheat him with some crooked dice. And everybody feared him. Even the white guys feared him. He was what was called a bad nigger. And I heard my folks talking about on every plantation, even in slavery, there was at least one or two bad niggers that, that the white folks feared. And the bad niggers had a, had a, had a saying that now, you know I'm gon' work for you like ten men, Mr. Bossman, but don't push me. And, and if you push me too far, you might as well bring a whole gang of ya'll clan to come and get me, 'cause you come to kill me. I'll be ready to go, but I'mma take some of y'all with me, is that was he always carried a gun somewhere hidden. And he always told white men, hey, I'll take care of my business. I'll work for you, but leave me alone. I'm not, I'm not your regular colored boy; I'm not your regular nigger. Just, just don't push me too far, 'cause if you push me too far now, you decide you gon' come get me, come get me, be sure you're ready to die. 'Cause when you come to get me, I'm gon' take somebody with me. If I don't just take but one of y'all, I'm gon' take somebody with me. Ain't gon' be no name on the bullet. And so every plantation, and as young boys growing up, it's kind of like a superman, a phantom, a heroic black man, you know, wasn't afraid of the white system, 'cause a lot of the black men were afraid; they would cower, cowed and bow their head - "Yes sir, yes sir, oh yes sir, you know, no ma'am, yes sir, yeah boss, yeah, yes sir." But there were those black men like Sockwell and a stepfather of mine. My father was kind of in between that. I don't think he, he was from up here--tough family, he and his two brothers, they would fight, you know. I got an uncle here [Chicago, Illinois] now about eighty-six years old. He a Porter, only one living of the other (unclear) Porter men. He lives on 42nd [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue]. But I remember them talking about Sockwell. Somebody--he was drunk on the way home two, three o'clock in the morning on his horse. He had to cross a, a small river, a stream. Somebody ambushed him, don't know was he black or white, shot him, and took his money. But they had to steal on him; they had to sneak up on him. He was the kind of man--he was a nigger. He wasn't the kind of man you could confront in a straight up pistol shoot 'cause he straight up, he straight up be ready to die. So they sneak up, sneak up on him while he was drunk on his horse, singing and drinking crossing up over the stream there. And they picked the time and they shot him somewhere and killed him. They found his body the next day. And I remember the whole town, Tollich [sic, Tollette], Arkansas, which is about seventy miles from where I was born in Mineral Spring. Everybody was talk about that; it got all over town. The church was talking about it, you know. "You know, they killed Cleo that night, but only way they kill that nigger, they have to sneak up on him 'cause he was bad. No telling how many white men black men he done hurt and beat up and killed. They had this nigger--we don't know whether it was nigger did it or whether it was a peckerwood did it." They called white men peckerwood. "Don't know if it was a nigger or a peckerwood did it, but somebody had to get him that way," you know what I mean. And I would relish hearing the people tell these stories-- Story_ID: 512927 Speaker 1: And a lot of times as kids they would tell us stories about ghosts and haints. They called ghosts haints. Poltergeist calling--(unclear)--but they called 'em haints, H-A-I-N-T-S, haints. You know, our black people--not only our people was spooky or superstitious, but a lot of 'em coming out of the African culture were not, they wasn't superstitious. It was a belief that there were other powers in, in, in the world, in the air, in the rocks, in the streams. It's not simple animism. I, I studied (unclear) anthropology when I was an undergraduate, undergraduate. So it wasn't, it wasn't simplistic religion that these people are (unclear); they're scared of their shadow. No, no, no, it was a belief in power. I remember them talking about "Aunt Caroline" [Caroline Tracy] Dye. I don't know whether she was Louisiana or Arkansas, but she had a reputation for having what they called the power to do evil or good to people, and that--she was a black woman, and she was a conjurer woman. She was so powerful people came all over the world to get cures from her, to get their romance straightened out, love life straightened out, white and black. And she lived in a mansion on a hill--(unclear)--with her family. And if a black person was in trouble or a white person, and she believed in them, and they got to her place, closed the fence and got up in her place, the high sheriff--the sheriff at that time was called a high sheriff--the high sheriff wouldn't come up in there; he wouldn't bother her. And they told me the tale that white men and some blacks crossed her. And she told them, "Now I don't mess with nobody. I treat everybody right. This here, this here old colored woman has powers from God, from Africa, and I don't bother nobody. But now I'll tell you, you do that one more time, what you did, you disrespect me one more time"--when she walked downtown, all the other colored folk had to walk on a certain side of the sidewalk in most Southern towns. And if whites were coming on rain day, black folks had to get out and walk in the mud. Let the white folks walk on the, on the plant, I mean or brick. But when "Aunt Caroline" Dye came to town to shop, she was the only black person that went in the shops, tried on the bonnets. Black person tried on a bonnet, first they couldn't try 'em on, 'cause they'll try one to buy one, they put their hands on it, black hands on it, that was a--or to pick a magazine up, you have to pay for everything you put your black hands on. That was the way it was then, had colored, white signs on the restroom or the dressing. But when "Aunt Caroline" Dye came down, she went to the best shops, and the white folks bowed down--"yes ma'am, yes," 'cause they were afraid of her. And they'd tell the tale of "Aunt Caroline" Dye and many a time white folks crossed with power, they say, "Oh Aunt Dye, we'll come out there and put your ass in jail, come out there arrest you." "You ain't got no power." She would look at that man or she would get some of his hair or something, something belonged to him. She said, "If you cross me one more time, you gon' go see your maker in heaven or hell. You will not live twenty-four hours. I won't put a hand on you." And that had been so accurate for so many years that folks feared. And mom [Retha Hendricks Porter] and them used to talk about when she walked downtown and white folks bowed--"hey Auntie, hey Caroline, you need anything? Need anything?--can we help you? You need a ride home?" "No, I have my wagon and my driver over there," you know. They treated her better than they treat the, the, the, the highest class of white women of that time. Now that did me a lot of good as a boy, to hear about such heroic black figures like that whom I never met, but the black people knew who she was. And "Aunt Caroline" Dye could heal you anything, you know, arthritis, you had the consumption, which would be tuberculosis--(unclear)--lung. ["Aunt] Caroline" Dye give you some, some root medicine, fix that medicine up and give that root medicine to you. And you would be healed in a minute. You know, when you--next thing, you'll be well, up and hopping around. And she was better than a doctor, and doctors came there when they couldn't cure people. Now to hear about a, a, a person like that as a boy, seven, eight years old, did something to my imagination. Story_ID: 512928 Speaker 1: I wondered if I had those powers, since my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] said, on her side, some of those powers ran in the family, as a sixth, and seventh sense that her side that was what's called a sixth sense; the highest is seventh sense. "Aunt Caroline" [Caroline Tracy] Dye had seventh-plus sense. Now by that, that means she was born with a double veil on your face. They say a woman, when you're born with a veil with on your face, you're born with a spiritual discernment, power, that's given directly by God to certain people that are marked for that, basically. Mama said some of us were, had part of that. We had the sixth sense. Speaker 2: What would be the difference between a sixth sense and a seventh sense, just, just in degrees of power? Speaker 1: Degrees of power. For example, the sixth sense runs in my family. And I know it's there. I've never majored in it, but there have been several times when there a crisis, a trouble, or something in my life, and I stopped to meditate, to think, and ponder very deeply on it for solutions, and for answers, and directions. And once I went into deep meditation and thought about it, with my mind and my spirit, it wasn't long, within twenty-four hours, day or two, the answers came; the direction came as to how I was to deal with that problem, that situation. And as long as I thought of that, it, it came out all right. So I know it sound--although I, I never majored in it; I never practiced it. Had I practiced in it, I might have been as good as my mother. My mother was a discerner. She could read people. She could discern. If you walk in the room, she could tell whether this person meant good or evil, you know. She told my sisters, when they got hopped up and had one, one got married at fifteen and the other had a baby at fourteen, and she told 'em, said, "He's not good for you. You're not grown yet. You're body is not formed yet. You don't need to lay down with no man. And that's gon' create pain in your body the rest of your life. You're not through growing yet girl, gal. I told you, I can't be here, working two part-time jobs to watch you. Your brother, you don't mind your brother (unclear) told us. But I'mma tell you, you're gon' have a hard row to hoe." That's another saying they had. You'll have a hard row to hoe. The row you hoe gon' have rocks in it and, and, and branches in it, you know, and the stems, and the stickers in it, and cocker burrows, snakes in your way. Everybody else's road gon' be pretty easy. Time you die, a snake down there, rock, break you whole, "hard row to hoe," the old folk would say, say, "A fool makes his own bed of trouble." They, they, they relied on the Bible, particularly the book of Proverbs and Psalms, for wise aphorism wise proverbs, wise words to guide them. But they also relied on African aphorisms that came out of Africa and passed on to them from our ancestors. Story_ID: 512929 Speaker 1: Now those things I remember as well before I was ten years old, hearing them talk about--and I remember my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] telling me that one of the uncles or grandmother saying, "That boy--(unclear) that boy is marked for something. Retha, he marked," talking about me, "he marked." They would observe your behavior. That's why in the African tradition, the naming ceremony occurred seven or eight days after the baby was born. That's so they could observe which ancestral spirits were in the child. Not all of them are good, which ones to avoid, and so they gave the child a name that they (unclear) you an ancestral name, spiritual name, 'cause that name had been around for eons, centuries. And even though the ancestor was deceased, that ancestor's spirit had lived and would live through that child; and so that, our people had that. Story_ID: 512930 Speaker 1: So my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] told me--my nickname was Johnny--said "Johnny [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter]"--my father [Steve Porter] left when I was about four or five. He went to California and left us. He could not read or write, landless. He left with another woman. My mother took up another man named Arthur Littleton [ph.], double-jointed. He was a bad nigger. He was mean. He had two children, my stepsisters. And--but he didn't care very much for me 'cause I wasn't the natural child, which is (unclear)--(unclear). And he was an uneducated man and very suspicious. My mother was very attractive, so he was very jealous. And he'd go up where he had worked for the white man, work like ten men. They loved him. And white men of that era had a saying. If they had a bad nigger they would--that they loved and who was a great worker, outwork ten men, plus had two things: one, if they could get that bad nigger and pay 'em enough money, get him to keep other niggers in line, keep other black men in line, then keep him, keep other, keep other black men in line, keep them from acting up, keep them from, you know, from being, from being "lazy," quote, unquote. But they also had another saying. The white man would tell the Arthur Littletons like my stepfather--there aren't many of them--you tell them, "Now listen, nigger, you my nigger. You the baddest boy around here. I wouldn't trade a white boy for you. But I'll tell you what, if you kill a man, black or white, if you kill a nigger it won't make a difference, but you kill a white man and he ain't no good, he ain't nothing anyway, mess with you. Now if you make it to my spread, you make it to my plantation, you get inside that gate, you safe." You see what I'm saying? "If you get in jail, they arrest you, high sheriff arrest you, you tell him that Papa John is your boss, and I'm gon' get you out. They ain't gon' lynch you. The lynch mob come for you, they'll lynch everybody else but you. They ain't gon' lynch somebody that work for some of us, okay." So a lot of the black men, and he was a black man that resonate buying that, thus he could not, like many black men, express his rage and (unclear) rage for that white system, sharecropping system. They used him like a slave still. So what he did, he came home and took his rage out on my mother. He whipped the mess out of her, you know--"Any men been by here?" I used to hear him as a boy. I used to duck and doge, peep around the corner. And he'd whip her on her legs, her arms and (unclear) a switch. And, "I better not catch you with a white or black man around here"--insanely jealous. And all black men weren't like that, but there were a few like that. And one day in about 1939, just about 1940, my mother saved up some money. Her sister, Aunt Janie [ph.], and some others helped her save up about a hundred dollars. And un--unbeknownst to him, she know on the weekends he'd go Saturday sometimes and get drunk, gambling. She got plane--they got her plane tickets. And it was about three in the morning. He hadn't got home. Wake--I remember it was, it was foggy, it was dewy. We had to walk across a field about five miles, maybe eight miles to the train station, and me and my, my mother and my two little sisters. I was about nine, was ten, and they was like seven and five. We got on that train and (unclear)--delivered her father's brother, Uncle Levy Hendricks [ph.], who was a (unclear) he had a business. He was kind of well-to-do. He had a very mean wife though. She would limit them in one little room backed up there. Old lady counted every bean, his wife, Levy's wife. He was kind of henpecked too, so we had to get up out there. So mama married another man--(unclear)--World War II or I veteran, named Will Crofton [ph.], out of convenience, just to get out, get us out from that other, that depressing situation that (unclear)--(unclear) 1029 Oakland [Avenue, Kansas City, Kansas]; that's where we lived--(unclear). So I can remember my mother looked out for us. She didn't abandon us. I remember one time my mother worked in a whorehouse, but she wasn't a whore. She cleaned, she was a clean, cleaned up the slop jars, cleaned up the rooms, maybe washed the laundry, 'cause she was a solid Christian person. She took her faith very serious. And I can remember that, and that had an impact upon me. She always told me, "Son, you are meant to be a teacher or a preacher, 'cause your grandfather was a preacher on both sides; your daddy's father was a preacher, and my father was a preacher. So somehow, some of that is, is meant to be on you. I don't know how it's gonna be." And my mother had sixth grade education. She wanted to be a teacher. Story_ID: 512931 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's--and your fathers' side of the family. Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Steve, capital S-T-E-V-E, Steve Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My dad was born in 1904. I'm not sure exactly the date. I have it in there written down, 1904--(unclear) 1904. He's two years older than my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter]. Speaker 1: Was he from Howard County [Arkansas] too? Speaker 2: Howard County, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I know that his father was also a, a, a, a clergyman and minister, an itinerant minister, popular but untutored. I know that they owned a little spread, not much. And they were a large, they were a large family of them. My wife's side was a large family. In fact, my wife [sic, mother] and her sister Janie married two cousins. Steve and Jimmy Porter were cousins. Both of them married two sisters, Aretha Hendricks and Jamie Hendricks, basically at that, that time. My father was about six-three [6'3"], six-four [6'4"], was a, not quite your complexion, but he was a brown-skinned, considered a good-looking man, heavy Indian features. And blacks were proud in those days of saying I got some Indian blood in me. And, and that-- Speaker 1: And they still-- Speaker 2: --(unclear)-- Speaker 1: --they still say that. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's what I mean. I (unclear) say that--(unclear)--I got some Indian blood in me (unclear). And (laughter), and I think about that now how oxymoronic that it sounds now. But my father was uneducated. My mother taught him to sign his name. My mother desired to be a schoolteacher, and she had a sixth maybe eighth grade education, enough to really teach school. That's how she taught me to read and write, taught me my life love for it later on (unclear) love for books and ideas, and taught me who some of the great people were in our race, in our group. That came from my mother. Story_ID: 512932 Speaker 1: I meant to say my father's [Steve Porter] family, I don't remember much about them, but he had two brothers, a brother named Lemon [ph.] and a brother named A. D. [Porter (ph.)] A. D. Porter is here in Chicago [Illinois]. We see him maybe once a week. (Unclear)--(unclear)--see him all the time, and he's about eighty-five, eighty-six years old. I can in A. D., look at A. D.'s countenance, and he's about five-ten, five-eleven, short. Father is about six-three or four and look at A. D. and get an idea of what my father looked like somewhat, very intentional, self-assured, (unclear) well-done educated, but, but confident man, a quote, unquote, "good-looking" man, a man that could attract women, this sort of thing, a man who, who could negotiate his way out of something basically, but a man who did not have the formal education to, to make his way and to take care of his family. Story_ID: 512933 Speaker 1: Now do you know much about his [Porter's father, Steve Porter] side of the family? Did they talk about their history at all? Did you-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you, it's a, it's a strange thing. He has a mot--they have a sister, Aunt Marie [ph.], she lives in Flint, Michigan. She's got to be in her--ninety-six, ninety-seven, in there, and she knows the family history. In fact, she's the person I've, I've talk to Aunt Marie now about two, three years. If I wanna know something about that side of the family, I get it from her. I have a first cousin, one of the sisters has a son who lives in Benton Harbor, Michigan. His name is Austin [ph.]. His name is Austin. I visited him about twelve years ago. The daughter died, and we had told me about, and John T. [Porter] and I, my son and I wanted to go up there to the funeral. I hadn't--the first time I had met him, bunch of them basically. So, there's some Porters in Phoenix [Arizona] that can be traced back. There's some Porters, a lot 'em in Arkansas, of course, but there's some Porters in San Diego [California] and parts of California. There's a bunch of Porters who, the children worked on the King Papers at Stanford University [Stanford, California]. 'Cause my daughter Jorja [Porter], my, my third oldest daughter was out there in California for six years. She hooked up with him. And I have a lot of paper, important papers now that Coretta [Scott King] and The King Center [Atlanta, Georgia] does not have and the King archivists do not have, original papers, some that you see, that I've got to get to them some kind of way. But it's really simple. My father, father's side I don't know a lot about, but there was some division among the Porters, 'cause we had a family reunion here in '80 [1980]--in 1987, right here in Chicago hosted by my family. And only one side of the Porters came, and these Porters are mostly my father's side, my father's side. The side from Aunt Janie's side, who live in Tollette [Arkansas], which is about seventy miles from Mineral Springs [Arkansas] in Hope [Arkansas], they didn't come. And then my son and I and a member of the church I was at in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], went to a reunion there in 1989 in, in Mineral Springs in Hope. That's where I met the relative who was a mayor of Hope where President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton was born. And he know this personal. Though Clinton and I don't know each other personally, our paths have crossed a couple of times. It's something because the regent--reunion, the, the reunion in Mineral Springs drew about seventy-five, eighty people (unclear). But the people in (unclear) Porters did not come to it. So there's been either some bad blood over the years or some sort of divisiveness or something that--and then we went to visit the Porters in Tollette year after that, my son and I did, and spent about a week down there and spoke. It was--(unclear)--(unclear)--a lot of property and nice homes--(unclear), and they owned half the town look like. But--and, and, and I don't--forget what they told me about why they didn't--they knew the people seventy miles south of there, but they don't have much to do with each other. They never have-- Story_ID: 512934 Speaker 1: How did your parents [Retha Hendricks Porter and Steve Porter] meet? Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They met the way boys and girls kind of meet. They were fully grown. She was twenty-six; he was twenty-eight. They both were from quote, unquote, "Christian families." My mother was a more practicing Christian than my father was, you know--father (unclear) wouldn't--in church (unclear). And they met the way men and women meet. They saw each other down in the black section of time several--section of town [Tollette, Arkansas], on the black sec--section where they shopped in and, and went on Saturday nights--(unclear)--Friday and women go shopping on, on Saturday, Fridays, you know. And the guys'll go down shopping, you know, drinking, shooting dice, and hanging out on the corner--(unclear)--Tavern. And he struck up a conversation with her and got talking to her. And I think she was with her sister, Janie, 'cause his cousin, Jimmy [Porter], struck up a conversation with her sister. And they got to going together, and before it went too far, decided to get married. And that's kind of how they met. And-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And in those days, you, you had to get family (unclear)--you had introduce the person to your parents, you know, didn't matter how old you were--(unclear). That's the way it was, not for approval but just so they met, met the guy with, with the gal so that families got a chance to know who they were courting and, and got serious enough to get engaged and think about marriage 'cause they want people to plan their weddings somewhere. Story_ID: 512935 Speaker 1: See, now your father [Steve Porter] left. Now you, you were telling us earlier that he left when you were about nine, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was a, he was a ladies' man too. He started going with a woman there. I guess I was two, three years old, four years old. And the strangest thing about it, you know, Larry [Crowe], was that about twenty years ago here in Chicago [Illinois] Aunt Marie [ph.] came to town, and there were some Porters and there some Trotters we were related to. I think maybe the Trotters who owned the Packers Liquor Store out on Cottage [Grove Avenue], a bunch of Trotters that we're directly--first cousins of ours right in Chicago. And there were some Stewarts here that I didn't know and some other Porters. So Aunt Marie brought us all together about a little less, about twenty years ago, about, maybe a little more than that, brought us together, and we met over here on, on 54th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] I think it was, either 54th and Michigan or 52nd [Street] and Michigan, somewhere in there in a big apartment, (unclear) apartment. And Uncle A. D., I picked him up and we went. And Aunt Marie was there, a bunch of people there. And do you know I must have been, twenty years ago I'd be, be about fifty, you know, and I had seen the woman my, my father was going with. It was well known he was going with this woman. In since nineteen--probably '37 [1937] like that, long time, in that room, apartment there, twenty or thirty people partied and you know, drinking, and laughing, and joking, and getting acquainted. I remember Aunt Marie, Aunt Marie saying, "This, this Steve's boy here, you know. This is Steve's boy here. He, he, he a reverend. He, he, he a doctor, [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R.] Porter. He, he, he just, he just, boy just wrote a book. This is our kin here." You know, she was telling everybody around, you know, (unclear) say how you doing? How you doing, sir? How you doing, Reverend? How you doing? I'm so and so, so. And there was this woman that came around and shook my hand--(unclear)--(unclear), and I knew. You know, I'm just five years old, four years old, and my father--(unclear)--this woman, and, and, and he left my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] for this woman. I knew that was the woman. Now that's where the sixth sense comes in too, the sixth sense. And she shook my hand. I said to her, Larry, some look at you--I said, "You're the woman who was my father's friend." She jumped back--"Boy, how you know that? You wasn't but four, five years old." I said somehow I knew it. And I don't, I don't, I just, it wasn't her face. It was a spirit, man. I know, I said, "You're the woman." There were a lot of women there and men there, that generation, you know, older than I was. I said, "You're the woman who (unclear) my daddy." Story_ID: 512936 Speaker 1: So did your father [Steve Porter], when he left, where did he go? Did he go to-- Speaker 2: He went to California. Speaker 1: Oh, he went to California. Speaker 2: He didn't take her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the split up with my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter], rather embarrassingly, was over this woman. Speaker 1: Okay, and this woman stayed in Arkansas? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and ended up in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I don't know if she ended up here or whether she came here. She--I don't remember whether she was visiting Marie in Flint [Michigan]. I don't remember. Seems like she was still in Arkansas, and she came up here as a bunch of--they--and Aunt, Aunt Marie who knows everybody, knew that this woman and others was at. Aunt Marie didn't tell me that was the woman. Nobody told--A. D.-- Speaker 1: Now did your, your, your father stay in Cal--did you ever see your father again? Speaker 2: No, he stayed in California. We tried to contact him. They say he was in Bakersfield, California. He went to Phoenix, Arizona. He's probably deceased now, 'cause he'd be ninety-nine years old or a hundred and--(unclear)--he never, never--and I'm sure Aunt Marie, when she said--'cause she had contact with him up until maybe thirty-five, maybe forty years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Somehow she-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how-- Speaker 2: She let him know he had a son-- Story_ID: 512937 Speaker 1: Well, how many brothers and sisters do you, do you have? Was it just you? Were you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was me and two stepsisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One-- Speaker 1: And so you were his [Steve Porter] only son? Speaker 2: Yeah, his only son. Speaker 1: All right, okay. You had two stepsisters by your, your stepfather [Arthur Littleton (ph.)]-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the stepfather-- Speaker 1: --in Arkansas. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Littleton, Arthur Littleton, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 512938 Speaker 1: Now when you moved to Kansas City [Kansas], what was that like? And now you were about ten years-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine, might have been nine-- Speaker 1: --old. And you've told us something about Arkansas, but what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of--and life in Kansas City? Where, where--what community did you live in and what was it like? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a country boy, coming to a big city, first time riding on the train. We're looking at the lights on the train when you get off at the, the, the, the Kansas City train station. And us two, us little kids are looking around. These lights, (laughter) we're pointing at the lights, they're so bright, and we think we're in heaven. You know, we, we said wow--(unclear)--(unclear)--we, we burned candles. That's the light. We didn't have electric lights, not, not in the country. And we were so happy and idyllic, and it was just something to hear the trains, the whistles, Yellow Cab drove up and got in the cab, the cab took us across the viaduct four, four miles to Kansas City, Kansas, my great-uncle's house, Uncle Levi's house, 1029 Oakland [Avenue]. It was the sights, the sound, it was the bigness, it was the tall buildings. We're looking over at the city. You know, we were country kids. In fact as country kids, we were called country kids. They called us, called me country, 'cause country kids talk country, talk flat. I talk about chunkin'. If it was throwing, I'm gonna chunk this rock, and talk about o'er yonder in her--and they used to tease me: "You talk country; say that again country" and (unclear)--they just bust out laughing--doggone it, yonder, yonder--they, they peepin'--but chunkin, chunkin'--it's (unclear)--and then, then, then, then I get my first socialization. Experience came in elementary school. I was smart, but they put country kids back. I should have started right in the third grade--the fourth grade. They put me back to the third grade, basically, and I was too smart for the third grade, and they, they kept me there. So I was always a grade, but I never elevate me, although I knew the spelling and basically math. But--and I was from the country. I was supposed to have been automatically dumb and slow. Story_ID: 512939 Speaker 1: What school did you go to in Kansas [City, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Douglass Elementary School [Kansas City, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember it most distinctly because there were two people there that stood out, Ms. Sopraya, Soprayo, Soprano Miller [ph.], a school teacher, and Mrs. Ella V. Robinson, the principal, short, squat, bull dog-like, was a black lady, mean as hell. She'd walk the halls, pin didn't drop. Boy, she ruled that like a prison warden. I remember that. She'd (unclear)--(unclear)--the thickest stick and whip your butt quick, boy--"turn your butt around boy. I'm gon' whup the devil out of you." (Laughter) I remember when they said that. Speaker 1: Now, what-- Speaker 2: --and the parents approved of that. I'm-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --"gon' whup the devil out of you--(unclear)--I'm gon' whup that devil out of you if you learn somethin'. I'm gon' whup your hard head, whup your hard, nappy head." So you had--so I had my rude awakening--and then the bully, there's a schoolyard bully. What really got me, country kids were very friendly. We didn't do no fightin' and you know, beatin' up on each other. But I got there and the first thing happened, two, three little guys tell me "Country, we gon' protect you." I didn't know what protection was, said what you talking about? "Big Country, first of all, we're gon' see how fast you can run, see if you need protection." I said, "I can run all right." But I didn't know they gon' chase me and, and throw rocks at me. After school they chased--I could go about six blocks (laughter)--they chased me, and they were throwing rocks, hitting me with the rocks. And I had to duck and dodge the rocks, man. I mean they, they were just pelting me, and laughing. (Unclear) said chunky--"Country, the only way you don't get hit with them rocks is you gon' have to give us twenty-five,"--twenty-five cents. Then it was like $2.00 dollars a day--"twenty-five cents a week for protection. Now there's some other bad (unclear) in school they'll whup your ass. And you don't give us money, twenty-five cents, and I care if you have to borrow, ba, borrow, beg, borrow, or steal it, you have that quarter, have the quarter. Give it, give it to Blue, Blue Boy; give it to Blue. Blue is the leader here," Blue Boy, you know, whatever his nickname was. And so I was petrified, and I was--found a little guy, Kenny, was strong. And one day I forgot it. He said, "First you forgot it you gon' get a black eye," you know, he said "nigger, you gon' get a black eye." We call each other nigger. And I forgot it. I tried to get a way going--different exit way when school was out, but they caught me. He said, "You tried to get away, didn't you, Country? You better have a quarter, boy. You know, you done, you miss, you can't miss that. We get--we protecting you from getting, getting your ass whupped." So I said, "I ain't got it, man. I just don't"--he popped me in the eye, man, blacked my eye, man, and bloodied my nose. And at home I was ashamed and crying. Then my uncle and cousin told me the only way you get 'em off of you is you hide you four or five good-sized sticks in the bushes. And when they get close, you chase--you turn around and get you a couple of them sticks, and turn around and wear everything out around, and hit 'em, go wild on 'em, go mad on 'em, they told me, go crazy on 'em--that--(unclear)--(unclear)--go crazy on 'em. And I did that. On the first time I run, ran past the bushes, and (laughter) I was thinking--and they just barely--didn't catch me. I got in the house, and these two big rocks had hit the door, man, see. So next day, he said no, you didn't take no quarter. I, I got my sticks, and they got--they almost caught me. And I got my sticks, and I wore two, three of 'em out. And then I had to fight one 'em. We fought and it was kind of a draw. I was bloody, bloody, but then after we shook hands. And I learned to play basketball and (unclear). I was in, but that was my initiation. I'm sure a lot of urban kids go through still today and went through that same thing today. I didn't have nobody to protect me. I didn't have no big brothers. I didn't have a lot of friends, and didn't have any relatives in Kan--Kansas--(unclear)--Missouri, that could come to my rescue. And that's why I learned, first learned about the little gang. And there was a little group of guys, ten or fifteen of 'em that hung together. And they ran certain streets, and certain blocks, and certain territories, and they--you had to pay duty, pay dues, if you live in the territory. Even if you didn't come to the little club meet, you paid dues to the leader, and that's how he made his money. So he was sure to get ten, twelve dollars a week, which would be like fifty dollars today--kept him pressed, shoes shined, your shiny shoes, that kind of thing. He went with the prettiest little girl. This was a grade school thing, sixth, seventh grade. So I remember that experience-- Story_ID: 512940 Speaker 1: --And we had junior high school there, junior high school, seventh, eighth, and ninth grade, Northeast [Junior High School, Kansas City, Kansas]-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --Northeast Junior High. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was experience what my basketball skills picked up, and I grew a spurt. I was as skinny as a rail, but I became a very noted basketball--and Northeast was about a mile and a half way they could walk, northeast of where we lived whole different territory over near fifth--3rd [Street] and 5th Street. We lived over near 9th [Street] and 10th Street--(unclear)--(unclear), so we're in the different groups. Even then we're brothers that divide up territory. We're in a different little association. I was in Watson Brothers territory on 10th Street, Watson gang. Over on 3rd Street I'm in a different, different group, the Hendersons. Some other brothers over there ran that. But I was a good ballplayer. I was accepted, you know. And, and (unclear)--had a bully stuff, and they want me on the basketball team 'cause I could score when they pass that ball. See, now, so I--that, that was compensatory. I saw that I had something, they didn't bother athletes, you're really good, you know, and you're on our team. Man, he's good; that boy good, man. He put that (unclear), shoot that rock, you know. So that, that, my basketball thing picked up from that, you know. My grades suffered somewhat 'cause I was more concentrated on my survival and basketball and getting home, not having to pay any duty, pay that, pay that protection anymore, pay that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So junior high, it was a tranquil experience. Story_ID: 512941 Speaker 1: High school, Sumner High School [later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas] well, the high school in Kansas City, Kansas, the only high school. It was a middle class, middle to upper middle-class school, (unclear) some of the best teachers that's probably in the area, 'cause the black teachers that had master's [degrees], Ph.D.s [degrees] could not teach in the white schools, city colleges, or in the four-year schools, so, and all of 'em weren't going down South, so we had some of the best teachers in--University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], had some of the best teachers in the world, and they were just excellent. So even a like myself that came from a poor family--was a doctor son, the lawyer's son, the undertaker's son, preacher's son and daughters, they went to Sumner. And that we were so well educated at Sumner that when the city colleges were integrated in 1951, the year I graduated (unclear) to the community college, about half our class went there who were going to college. And some of the top scholars went there. They went all down there, first-year (unclear) school, and we dominated the football and the basketball team. And here was a guy like me was just the average--I was more than average, but I wasn't challenged, so I was a C student and not--I mean I didn't do a lot of talking in class but had my little group outside class. But I was good enough to score eighteen, twenty points a game. But the basketball program was so popular, we traveled over to Oklahoma, Missouri, and all parts of Kansas, man, Indiana, so popular that the football coach who was also a big funeral director in town took over the basketball coaching 'cause it was so popular from the football--from the basketball coach who should of been coach. That's why junior year I should have started, and instead of starting me, he started the son of a teacher, a guy named Iverson [ph.], Little Red [ph.], he about five-eight or nine. He couldn't play no ball, man. I'd (unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--and that was a big disappointment. Me and another black kid named Laforest Wilkins [ph.], who wanted to be the starting guard, we probably averaged sixteen, eighteen points a game. We were just that good. In fact the [Harlem] Globetrotters came down to look at a bunch of us in 1949, check us out at Sumner Recreation Center. We didn't go with 'em, you know, they looking at who had talent. But that was such a hurt. Now that was one of the big disappointments, like [Michael] Jordan being cut from his high school team (unclear). You know, you knew you were good, and, and politically you had no power. All those who control that school, the middle class (unclear)--(unclear)--were businesspeople and others who had that. And everybody, all the kids knew, you know, we should have started. Story_ID: 512942 Speaker 1: I just dropped out of the basketball team [at Sumner High School, later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas] and formed a basketball team. There's pictures in there, in the next room there in 1949 at the church. That's when I became a Methodist. I left the Baptist church, joined my wife's [June Carol McIntosh Porter] church, Mason Memorial [United] Methodist Church [Kansas City, Kansas], 'cause they have programs for, for youth. They had a program for boys, everybody had a youth like at chili and hot dogs, and then he had, you know, had a Bible time, you know what I mean, there's a social time--pretty girls there. But they did--they had--in the league, the recreation league they were always last. The church team couldn't compete. They didn't have the players. And I knew the players, and a lot of players followed me. So I recruited the best players, guys that the high school didn't recruit for one reason or another and guys (unclear)--our, our, our, our, our church team was better than the highs school team, just that good, had a guy was six-six [6'6"], six-five [6'5"]. That's tall for then. Speaker 2: So what was the name of your church? Speaker 1: Mason Memorial United Methodist Church-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Kansas City, Kansas, Mason Memorial-- Speaker 2: Mason Memorial, okay. Speaker 1: --United Methodist Church, my wife's church in fact. That's where I met her familiy--her father owned a store across the street. And then get this now, he owned a store across the street, plus he had a little concessionary inside the Sumner Recreation Center, which was across the street from where I lived, a, a block, a block and a half up the, up the street on 9th [Street] and--9th and Everett [Avenue]. And her father, T. C. McIntosh [ph.], and her mother were college graduates in 1932 at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas], as were her grandfather, Mr. Holland [ph.], (unclear) Holland. He was a college graduate from Philander Smith, he and his wife. So she--I mean he was going back to 1890 something. You know, he married her, got married in 1916. But I, but I'm looking at, I'm looking at strong, stable type families, you know. I'm looking for black role male models, and, and I'm seeing him, T. C. McIntosh, I'm seeing a couple of men, (unclear) men of that church that love sports or basketball. I went out and got the best ballplayers I could, and we won everything in sight. And they bought us new uniforms, new basketball. They had a, a van. We traveled and played around Missouri and places, played the Jewish Christmas tournament they have in Missouri. And so we, we played teams even the integrated teams or all-white teams that the high school team couldn't play 'cause it was segregated. And so everybody wanted to be a part of our team, and that's how I compensated for the slight I received as a junior and senior at the high school level. Our name got out there. The church took pictures of us. There's pictures in (unclear)--us on that (unclear). We won everything. The church took--they had church--the pastor devoted a service to us. In fact the service he devoted to us about the--he compared athleticism and discipline (unclear) I think it was Hebrews, eleventh chapter or chapter--about to run this race. And he, he made a sermon out of it. And after he had the photographers there that took our pictures, put it in the newspaper, Kansas City Kansan, and in the church paper. And that was, that shows you, now, some of the guys--half the guys I had there were not church-oriented. They weren't in the church, man, but because the way we're treated, when the doors of the--pastor opened the doors of the church, said that, "So you know meet the--to really make this your home. Young men think about that, you know. We're not forcing you." And I got up first and all ten of my guys got up, went down and joined--two of us became ministers. Story_ID: 512943 Speaker 1: You were not only an athlete, but you read a lot, went to the library. And you had an integrated library [Kansas City Public Library] there in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Kansas City [Kansas], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I-- Speaker 1: And what-- Speaker 2: --I probably-- Speaker 1: --kind of books did you-- Speaker 2: --read a book a week. Speaker 1: --did you read? Speaker 2: I liked books that were adventurous, that dealt with conquering, that is when I say conquering, where African or black people were involved and given the leadership to conquering or was it just something--and I had some white heroes to go to comic books and things like that, Superman, Captain Marvel, Popeye, you know, (unclear)--limited--but, but, but I also looked to see where I was in there, my image. I always looked. And what it (unclear) me was a--this was not taught in the high school [Sumner High School, later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas] like it should have been. They, they--'cause they--no, the curriculum was determined by the white superintendent, and so that very few blacks taught in world history. They had Negro History Week--didn't--(unclear)--Carter G. Woodson. We did the--(unclear)--always had somebody come in and espouse during that week and something like that, but a lot of kids had went over their head. So I wanted to read about that now, particularly the classic magazines. I just got a lot of the classics, colorful and I got a lot out of reading Booker T. Washington's story 'Up From Slavery' and George Washington Carver took the peanut and sweet potatoes and made a few other products. That really intrigued me. I got a lot out of reading about the--it was The Men of Morehouse ['History of Morehouse College'], Dr. [Benjamin Griffith] Brawley, and some great black men who made their way. The black man [A.G. Gaston] in Birmingham [Alabama] was a millionaire, insurance man. Speaker 1: Right, I know who you're talking about, but I can't think of his name now, but-- Speaker 2: And in the course of, course of being an athlete, what got me was the, the athletic heroes, Jesse Owens; Eulace Peacock was right behind Jesse, Ralph Metcalfe [Sr.]. The boxing heroes, Sugar Ray [Walker Smith] Robinson [Jr.], Bobby Joe Gans, "Boston Tar Baby" [Samuel] Sam Langford, way back there, reading about them, Joe Louis. At that time we had radio. I remember when Joe would fight, and we'd have radio in the store, black store, black--a black guy owned a store right behind where I lived, Mr. Taylor [ph.]. He'd have a radio loud so we could hear it. Everybody didn't have a radio. And we'd stopped playing everything and just listened, and blow by blow, and this was through all the country, black folk glued to the radio, Joe, Joe. We didn't have he--visible heroes, you know. Jackie [Robinson] was a hero, but Jackie was not as well publicized as Joe. And this integration of baseball, you know, with the Kansas City Monarchs had a new Negro League, it didn't touch black people like the Harlem Globetrotters did. That's why the Globetrotters were much more, much closer to us, a lot more of our boys play ball than baseball, or than track. Story_ID: 512944 Speaker 1: So did you ever go see a Monarch [Kansas City Monarchs] game? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, went to see one or two Monarch games. So we, we, you know-- Speaker 1: Did you ever see Satchel Paige pitch or? Speaker 2: Saw Satchel, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. And so--but it didn't have much meaning to me other than he was a magical pitcher. He could make the ball hope, and spin, and curve. He could do something to the ball and other men did too, and that's the mythical kind of thing that we got from that. But what got us so was the "Brown Bomber", Joe Louis, magnificent specimen. I remember one time Joe was (unclear)--in this auditorium, which was in Missouri. There was a big dance that went about twice a month. There'd be dancing, be 10,000 people there, dance hall in the auditorium. And Joe was there. And I remember and I walked up beside him just to see how big he was--God! You know, Joe was just six-three, was six-three. To me he was like seven feet. I hadn't had my growth spurt yet, 'cause I was fifteen (unclear). Golly, he was such a huge man, you know, like, like a giant, man. I just marveled at his power, the "Brown Bomber--" Story_ID: 512945 Speaker 1: Well, speaking of heroes, there, there were like, there were some black men that you were looking to as role models, and you mentioned them-- Speaker 2: About seven. Speaker 1: About seven-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who were they and why-- Speaker 2: First my father-in-law, the late Brother T. C. McIntosh [ph.], who was a college-educated, was a family man, five kids, owned his home, owned some other properties, owned two stores, at the same time, he, he figured he wouldn't make much, as much money teaching school as he would--and then he wa--he waited tables at night at an exclusive supper club--nobody saw him there. And he was immaculy--maculately dressed. But he couldn't make at that time $50 dollars a night, which was like $200 today, plus--(unclear)--do his store, run his store, then, then he worked for Social Security Administration [S.S.A.] for a time, weekends. So he took care of his family, saw that his kids got educated--they were fed, that they were well-mannered, you know. Now he--while he A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], he was, he was C.M.E, Christian Methodist [Episcopal]. His church was a block from his wife--his wife was born Methodist, straight Methodist--I mean ma--Mother McIntosh [ph.]. So they didn't go to the same church. He would go to Sunday school at her church, then go to his, and the church was a block away--but very independent, short man, about five-seven--but short, dark, tense, full of humor--(unclear)--proper. He must have owned five, six, seven pieces of property, property down in Arkansas that he owned and property in Kansas City [Kansas] that he owned. When his son, Wilfred [ph.], who is now about fifty-six, and Wilfred became a Muslim, joined the Nation of Islam about thirty-five years ago--(unclear) it's about that time, thirty-four years ago. He took me around to show me the property he had in Kansas City, Kansas. He told me how much he admired, he--and all and what a good job I'd done as his son-in-law, raised the family up, proud of me, and that he, he, he saw me as like his son. He said, "John, I'mma will much of my property to, to my girls, three daughters, not to Wilfred, 'cause I understand if you will a property, he gets it. He'll will it to Muhammad, Elijah Muhammad. And he can have--(unclear)--you know, he don't have to be a Christian, but I'm not gon' let Muhammad control my property. And--(unclear)--I want you to know that. And you're part of June [Carol McIntosh Porter], so y'all gon' have a piece of this property--(unclear). That property got down in Arkansas, property here, (unclear)--that 'cause the oldest child and June's the oldest. And I know, I know who you are, and I know you're all right." Story_ID: 512946 Speaker 1: Who were some of the other men that you-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. The others was Mr. Marion Caruthers [ph.], who ran the Sumner Recreation Center [ph.]. And they say that Marion Caruthers is the first cousin of Marvin Carter [ph.], the (unclear) in Chicago [Illinois]. I just found that out last year. Another was Mr. Chauncey Taylor [ph.], who was the first--well, not the first, but he was a black businessman who owned the largest store in our area. He had a store, much larger than Papa [T. C.] McIntosh's [ph.] store and more centrally located. I worked for him too, and I saw how he and Papa Mack conduct the business. When the white salesmen came in, bread man and all that, you know, sometimes 'cause of racism and segregation, they didn't often show respect to some blacks. There are some black businessmen let 'em get away with that, but not Papa Mack, not Mr. [Chauncey] Taylor [ph.]. I remember I would see Mr. Taylor and Pop--the man acted a little strange, you know what I mean. Gon' let you sit the bread somewhere else, you know. He said sir, aren't you supposed to put that bread on the shelf? You know you can put it on. I thought you had time to put it (unclear). He said, "If you don't put that bread on the shelf, like you do for all of the clients, then I'm gonna call the bread company and cancel, cancel your company out." Story_ID: 512947 Speaker 1: Mr. Will Freeman [ph.], my wife's [June Carol McIntosh Porter] first cousin, loved basketball. He was the one that recruited me from the playgrounds after the high school disappointment. And Will was educated, a college man, Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] I think, to sing--(unclear)--loved basketball. And he and another man with a coach--I can't think of the other man's name, but Will bought the--raised the money to get uniforms plus new basketballs, transportation, set up a schedule for us to travel around and play good teams, never will forget, his promise. He recruited us. He told me, "Johnny [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter], if you will help us build a, a championship basketball team, we get more pride into the Mason [Memorial United Methodist] Church [Kansas City, Kansas] and the community, I'll see that you get new uniforms and take you guys places you never been before, places the high school [Sumner High School, later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas], the high school doesn't even go play." " If you do that, I said "we have a deal," and shook hands with him. He kept true to his bargain, so that made it easier for me to be a part of that church later on too when he would join, 'cause you had people with integrity, had men who followed through. And these were kind of father figure men. Then there was Mr. Briggs [ph.]. He was a man who came from Ypsilanti, Michigan. I don't know how, he just showed up at junior high school [Northeast Junior High School, Kansas City, Kansas] I think it was. And he was supposed to become the coach at junior high and maybe high school, he got bumped. So he formed another basketball team called the Cobras and also asked me to recruit for him. So I recruited some of the same guys, the Cobras, at the church. We won everything, traveled all around, and got experience, had experiences that most black boys didn't have was fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years old, you know, in terms of travel and you know, eating in restaurants, and staying overnight nice places, you know what I mean, that type of thing. So I'd buy me some clothes, and got new uniforms, new sneakers, man, so, man, we were just, we were in basketball heaven, you know. So that, that, that had a tremendous effect upon how we perceived certain people, certain leaders, certain churches. We could distinguish this church, that churches, minister, that minister, those who promised things and didn't follow through, those who promised to follow through and went even beyond what they promised, you know what I mean, gave you a little money, you know, for your birthday, and Christmastime, or another time, and find you--if you didn't have four or five dollars, see if they could get you some work and earn you some money, kept you out of trouble, so you had those kind of men. Then there was a teacher, two teachers in fact, Mr. Curry [ph.], the history teacher, his son, Henry Curry [ph.], dead now, an honor student in my class. And I would (unclear)--he about three blocks to study with this--they were pretty well-to-do black people, you know, as--but I was a lot of study with Henry. Henry was a friend of mine. I taught Henry something--(unclear)--(unclear). He was a (unclear) ballplayer, but--(unclear)--(unclear)--he was tall guy, about six-four, gangly but short--so that he went to junior college. He could have gone straight to Ka, K--KU [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]. He was that kind of student, but he went to junior college 'cause of the relationship that he and--(unclear)--had basically. So his father had a tremendous in, influence on me. Another one was a music teacher. I didn't take music. I should have. Can't think of his name now--Mr. Ruffin [ph.] I think it was. That man was--remind me of Quincy Jones. He taught--we turned out some musicians there that was--they could play--well, they eventually play--(unclear). So I was impressed with the, the band he developed, he and another gentleman, and the Sumner [High School] band, and the marching band, and the majorettes, and the writing musical scores, and how they put on concerts when the whole community came out. That's impressive, that quality. And, and I knew it was as good or better than anything that the white high school could--high school--your--the all top white high school near here that, that they couldn't touch, touch us athletically, touch there in music 'cause--(unclear)--so that, these--my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter], of course, was a, a, a growing influence 'cause she was a man--woman who said son, I've got to be mother and father for you, I want you to know that, and I'mma trust you. You got good sense. She's the one who let me travel ten miles to Missouri, and (unclear) and go to Wichita [Kansas], go to Lawrence, Kansas. My guys on the bus or bicycle, you know, could trust me to not get in any trouble. At that time, 'cause black boy get in trouble out there--(unclear)--white black (unclear). So she could trust me to know how to conduct myself. Story_ID: 512948 Speaker 1: So your stepfather [Will Crofton (ph.)], your new stepfather didn't play much of a role? Speaker 2: No, Mr. Will had one (unclear). He worked all the time, but he was a good man. He was a good provider. His mother was invalid, and I remember she stayed with us. We had to empty her slop jar. That's another thing, that time we had an outdoor toilet. We were too poor to have an indoor toilet. We had some indoor plumbing but outdoor toilet, and the outdoor toilet, outhouse. But at night, you use a slop jar. We had two slop jars, and the slop jars where, you know you do your urine and your feces at, and you cover it up, but sometimes you didn't cover it so it smelled like hell. And we had to empty it in the morning and disinfect it with some bleach and warm water and stuff life soap and clean it out. So I can just remember just detesting having to empty them slop jars, but that was my job, plus we had a little potbelly stove in the house that we fed coal in and wood in. So I had to keep--they called wood kindling, so I had to keep plenty of kindling with it. The kindling man came out to make sure we had plenty of kindling for winter and stacked the kindling. And sometimes I had to get up late at night, twelve, two, one o'clock, stove got low and (unclear). Mama [Retha Hendricks Porter] said, "[HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter] Johnny, get up and put some fire on that stove, boy. I hear--(unclear)--it's cold in this house." And I'll get up and light the stove, the kindling, and get the heat going, and get the house heated, basically. I can remember us--another thing is, my mother never let us know we're poor, so I never, Larry, believed I was poor. I, I never acted like I was poor, however that's supposed to be. We were on welfare, but she never allowed us to believe we was poor. She didn't allow us to believe the illusion that we were just rich either, but didn't allow us to believe that we were just desperate, you know, that's anyplace--she told my sisters, said, "Hey, I can't buy you everything, but don't let these boys--(unclear)--these men you fool you now, they gon' buy you this and that, and buy your underclothes, nice things. They just wanna get under your dress basically, they wanna get your legs open and get you pregnant and go on down the street, get the next girl pregnant. That's the way men are sometimes, some men are. You've got to discern a good man from a man that's no, no 'count--no 'count." They called it no 'count--no account. When you say--let's say you was no 'count, that means you were just flat-out no good. Speaker 1: Empty, a zero-- Speaker 2: --Yeah-- Speaker 1: --nothing happening--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: He was a zero instead of a hero-- Story_ID: 512949 Speaker 1: What were you thinking your senior year in high school [Sumner High School, later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas] in terms of career? Did you have any ideas? Speaker 2: My senior year, the only thing I wanted to do was to go to city college [Kansas City Kansas Community College, Kansas City, Kansas], two-year college--'cause of my class was going--play ball, and then somehow finish my last two years of college someplace. The money, the money wasn't there. So I, I had no vocational aims. I thought I'd be good enough to play with the [Harlem] Globetrotters, basketball. And I might have been close to that. In fact, one of my nicknames was "Tricks"; they called me "Tricks", okay. I thought that I might be good enough to coach someplace, and I figured I needed to these two years of college to be able to be a good coach, at least that. I didn't think about being a businessman, although I worked for two businessmen, and three--because a Jewish person that I worked for as a grocery boy named Herman, Jewish guy named Herman [ph.], three blocks up the street, nice, nice person too, I didn't have--my only models were the men that I mentioned, Papa McIntosh [T. C. McIntosh (ph.)], Mr. [Chauncey] Taylor [ph.], Mr. [Marion] Caruthers [ph.], the history teacher, the coaches, and, and a Jewish brother, Herman, who owned Herman's Grocery Store, so that these were kind of my models. Distant models were Joe Louis, Jackie Robinson, [Ray Charles] "Sugar Ray" [Leonard] and them-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --My-- Speaker 1: But did you--okay, so you, you went to Kansas City Community College? Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Kansas City Kansas Community College. Speaker 1: This, this is 1951 that you go there, right? Speaker 2: In '53 [1953]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --associate of arts degree. Speaker 1: And you got an associate degree, yeah. Speaker 2: Liberal arts. Speaker 1: Yeah, in liberal arts. All right, is there anything--did, did you play basketball there? Speaker 2: I played basketball. In fact, a summer before last--(unclear)--Kansas City for a get-together kind of one side of my wife's family. And one of my wife's cousins, male, wife teaches at Kansas City, Kansas, Community College. And she had a book they just put out, one my--of my former professors in jewel--Jewett [J. Paul Jewell]. They just put a book ['A History of Black Education in Kansas City, Kansas: Readin', 'riting, 'rithmetic'] out on the history of Kansas City Kansas Community College. He dealt with the racism and the segregation. And he--and I went over back there, and there was my name there listed with the basketball team, '51 [1951] and '53 [1953]. Story_ID: 512950 Speaker 1: But '53 [1953] came, did you get drafted in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't get drafted. Fifty-three [1953] came, I went to Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]. I thought, which was gonna be a scholarship, but I got there, at that time Drake had a quarter system. They had Ben Mumbrey [ph.] from St. Louis [Missouri]. He was a senior; I was a junior. They had a big tall guy about six-eight [6'8"]. I can't remember his name now. He was a center, black guy. And they had three white guys as the starting team. They had two, three other black guys on about twelve, thirteen member squad. I made the squad but was on the third team, didn't get a chance to play, and didn't, didn't get the scholarship they promised. So I stayed there much of that year, and I--a Jewish fraternity, who was--there was a strong intramural league there, basketball. They recruited me to play for them. So I lived in this study house. They fed me and took care of me, gave me a little salary, and averaged twenty-six points a game for that team. I think they came in first or second. It was second. It was a strong league. And so, so for a part of the year I was Jewish, you know. And so, you know, I was a heck--(unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--make me no mind--then I, you know, I was sort of, was really something. I went out with those guys. They went out on dates. I went out with them and dated gentile girls and we--as, as a black Jew. I had been converted to Judaism. I didn't do that form--I didn't formally convert to Judaism, but they liked me so much, and I knew some of these guys, they entered Drake when I did, so we just was, just fast friends. It had nothing to do with race. It just transcended race. It was the oddest thing. Story_ID: 512951 Speaker 1: And after that year, I came back home [to Kansas City, Kansas] late that summer. And a friend of mine who's now a lawyer and named Welton Knox [ph.], he and I got to talking--and he was a year behind me in high school [Sumner High School, later Sumner Academy of Arts and Sciences, Kansas City, Kansas]. He go to University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], but he couldn't finish because his money ran out. So we decided--we looked at a, a plan they had in the [U.S.] Army called the Scarwar [ph.] Plan and was for the Army and [U.S.] Air Force had a special program for people who pass a certain test, and you work for, work for both of them. You're just a professional. So I--we entered as, on a buddy plan, and passed the test, and did that, and went to Fort Bliss, Texas, El Paso, for our training. And I went to--we both went to clerk typing school 'cause we wanted to run an office, wanted to be office managers under the commander. So we, in eight weeks we, you know, we sus--we had eight weeks training there basic, had another eight weeks in Fort (unclear). But I had some bad teeth, so I had abscessed teeth and I--they kept me in Fort Bliss, and they shipped him out, so we didn't end up in, together. He went someplace else. I went to Fort Spence [Moultrie, Georgia] for eight weeks clerk training, typist training, in Arkansas, and then from there Fort Carson, [Fort Carson] Colorado, with a unit there where I was in the office there as the clerk typist. And then from there I went to Ulm, Germany, where I spent the year. Story_ID: 512952 Speaker 1: And a friend of mine, Dr. Reginald V. Brown [ph.], who is now a school official, educator here in the school system, was from Chicago [Illinois], played basketball at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] with a buddy of mine named Ron Hamilton [ph.], Ron Hamilton. So he and I became all-stars. I got a picture in there of myself, Hawkeye Porter [ph.], basketball. I averaged sixteen points. Reggie averaged, averaged twenty-two points. So we chaptered a team over there in [Ulm] Germany, basically, you know, a team of about four, four white guys, four black guys, for eight, eight, eight black guys. And we were just, just a very good team. That was a great experience for me. I started to stay in the Army twenty years, but I saw what [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Rosa Parks were doing and had done in Montgomery [Alabama]--(unclear)--days something hit me, that I should be a part of this, that I, that I was looking for a quality of, of black leadership, effective leadership, well-trained, that the world could not deny, that I need to have some of those tools. So I decided that--in fact I was engaged to a German girl, woman, a German woman, had, she had a year and a half of college--person, educated. And I had determined that it was more infatuation, a young soldier, twenty-three, than it was love, so I broke the engagement and told her I had to go back and finish my education, wished her well-- Story_ID: 512953 Speaker 1: --I went back home, went to Iowa Wesleyan College [later Iowa Wesleyan University, Council Bluffs, Iowa], my cousin's house, who--a buddy of mine, Andrew, Andrew Henderson [ph.], down in New York, a psychologist, was transferred, worked for the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] there, he's from Kansas City, Kansas. And he--we corresponded. He encouraged me to come there, so went there on a basketball scholar and an academic scholarship. That was one of the best decisions I ever made, small college; I got my mind together academically; certainly my grades went up, you know, to the honor level; found my focus, sociology, and religion and philosophy, minors in education, physical education. I had three minors. Story_ID: 512954 Speaker 1: And so I found myself intellectually, I found my niche, and I found the first white man, Dr. Warren Steinkraus, my professor, who was a classmate of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] in Boston [University] School of Theology [Boston, Massachusetts] 1951, in vocal and doctorate, who introduced me to Dr. King, not that--by, by, by letter, okay, and letter and made a phone call. I hadn't talked to King myself. He introduced me to King--told King was a bright and black student here, and he's a potential of helping--(unclear)--that he was the first white person I met who committed thirty percent of his income to the Mau Mau cause in Kenya, to the South African struggle, to the civil rights struggle, those emerging Dr. King's, all that said. And so I never met a white person that committed. Now I can understand why he's gone through two or three divorces. The women left him. I could understand why he's been at four or five colleges. He was absolutely one of the best professors, teachers, teachers I've ever, ever met in my life. Speaker 2: Now how do you spell Steinkraus? Speaker 1: S-T-E-I-N-K-R-A-U-S, Warren Steinkraus. He's dead now. And it, it was '65 [1965] when I was in Selma [Alabama]. I took two groups to Selma in '65 [1965] with the SCLC [the Southern Christian Leadership Conference] chapter. And who, there sitting in the crowd of a thousand people around Brown Chapel [African Methodist Episcopal Church, Selma, Alabama] on the ground outside singing, was Warren Steinkraus. "[HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R. Porter], John Porter," you know, that was where he was expected to be, that was (unclear). And so for a black kid meeting a committed white person who was an anti-racist racist. So yes, cannot help being racist you white, but that doesn't mean a bad thing. But I was anti-racist. I'd fight every vestiges inside. I want a world that's open, I just want it open to all, all people, and I fight for that. So it had been costly, cost him the marriages, women, you know, even professors, other white professors ostracized him. You know, he was an honest, honest instructor. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: But he kept going from school to school 'cause he, he just, he turned too many of his students toward philosophy and religion, too many of his students changed their vocational aim 'cause Steinkraus--I mean mostly white students would change their minds about the way they saw the world and what they need to do to change the world. He was that kind of, kind of person. And he, he took, took us to Evanston [Illinois], ten of us to Evanston in 1959 to meet the late [Thomas] Tom Mboya. There was (unclear)--two Kenyan students at our college at Iowa Wesleyan, and they knew Tom. So we went to the hall, and there was the big hall there, and after Tom lectured, went back and met him, and he hugged us, shook hands. And he knew two, two of the Kenyan students, and he knew Steinkraus. And I, I just was amazed at the range of this white man's commitment, 'cause I, I just hadn't met any blacks at that point with that kind of commitment, not like that, and certainly not many of the whites. So that to me turned me on toward religion a different way. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: It taught me a thing about--I was gonna go to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and work on a Ph.D. [degree]. Story_ID: 512955 Speaker 1: Yeah, but just for a minute on [Thomas] Tom Mboya. He's such an important figure and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who was eventually assassinated I think in '60-- Speaker 2: He was assassinated-- Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Forces in the, within Kenya-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, the struggle going on between him and Mzee Jomo Kenyatta. And I don't know where [Jaramogi] Oginga Odinga fits into all this, but they were--there was a lot of intrigue going on there as the British were trying to maintain-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as much control as they could. What was your impression of Tom Mboya when you met him? Speaker 2: I thought he was as brilliant an orator as [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was. He was twenty-eight years old when he was--(unclear). I don't think I never heard anybody except, compared to King. And in some ways he had a broader breadth of the world than King, at that point--(unclear)--King's (unclear). And I was mesmerized by the depth of the man's grasp of history. Someone asked him a question at the lecture: "Are the Egyptians--(unclear)--(unclear)--[clearing throat]--(unclear)--(unclear)--Mr. Boya, are the Egyptians really African? Were they ever African? Were they ever black?" He said precise, very concise. "See, young man, not only are they African, there is no way, other way they could be. All of the anthropological evidence, the archeological evidence, their skeletal remains, the embalming process of the mummification of the mummies that have been various, and all of the physiognomy and physiology and all of the evidence is that they were very, very African and very dark." Story_ID: 512956 Speaker 1: I guess the last thing we talked, talked about was [Thomas] Tom Mboya. But you were, you were persuaded by Dr. Strein--[Warren] Steinkraus to pursue theology instead of-- Speaker 2: Right, profession--yeah. Speaker 1: --sociology--I mean-- Speaker 2: I wanted to follow [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to Boston [University] School of Theology [Boston, Massachusetts], where Steinkraus had gone and known King. And he hooked me up with King indirectly through a letter or a call from Iowa Wesleyan [Des Moines, Iowa], said, "There's this bright young man who gonna be graduated, wants to go to Boston for theology. Try to get him in. He's trying to follow your path, Martin." And I just got in too late. Just, I knew nothing about Garrett [Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] the Methodist Seminary, nothing like that (unclear) at all. So he made contacts as fel--they got three fellowships for $3,000 dollars (unclear)--$20,000 for three years, $3,000 dollars a year. Speaker 1: Now, now you were telling me off camera you were sort of afraid that it was gonna be stifling and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought-- Speaker 1: -narrow, right-- Speaker 2: --thought it was gonna be-- Speaker 1: --a narrow kind of experience? Speaker 2: --exhausting--you had to dress in black, you know, you had to pray every day, and man, you couldn't make no mistakes, and you couldn't date, and you not allowed to drink a beer, man, and you know, all that; I--all this on my mind because I'm raised in an environment in Kansas City, Kansas, where I had very little (unclear) contact with preacher men. And the ones I saw, the only thing I remember was the, the black Baptist preachers had a convention in Kansas City, Kansas, must have been 1940--'49 [1949]. It was about 10,000 of them there, and I shined the shoes up where they had this hall. And then there was a Baptist church. I used to go to the Metropolitan [Auditorium, Kansas City, Kansas] that was a block from my house. And I stopped going there 'cause the deacons wouldn't let us play basketball--(unclear)--'cause I left that church. That's why I went to the Methodist [Mason Memorial United Methodist Church, Kansas City, Kansas]. But I also remember at the convention that they had a big meeting at Metropolitan and so-- Speaker 1: Was that the nat--the National Baptist Convention? Speaker 2: Yeah, National Baptist Convention, a big one. And there was all kind of black preachers in there, man. They--and I saw more preachers there was you know, high and with their girlfriends, man, and you know--(unclear)--get what I'm saying. I, I feel like all preachers not like--I want to make that very plain. Now I don't wanna make, make people think I'm preaching myself plain, no futty-dutty now. But then what got me as a kid was I saw myself, can they come see (unclear)--there's a preacher was chasing another preacher down the street with a gun and shooting at him, you know. And it was over a woman, not his wife, girlfriend. So that, we just laughed about that and said these preachers got that, you know, drink in their hands (laughter), you know--(unclear)--(unclear)--you know, so naturally when, when Steinkraus talked to me, said Doc, you know, I--you know, he said Doc, the image you have is of the cultic form of the church. Most religions have a cultic form. That is, it has an obscure, obscurantis, people getting it, get a hold of it, and popping (unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--French groups that takes off to the right or left at the extreme and some believe that you can drink poison and not die and handle snakes and not die, that you can leap off buildings and God will catch you, you know, and get to Jesus and move forward. The devil told 'em to leap off this building, and God will catch you before you hit the ground. Jesus (unclear)--if you leaped off, he couldn't say I was committing suicide, and that would be God's will. So he says that there's a reason, religion has to be rational, [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R. Porter]. It has to--there's only four things in religion. You need to know the scriptures well, (unclear)--formal school--study the scripture for yourself. Most of the ministers are not, not trained. They don't know the scriptures. Then you need to have to (unclear) the spirits to build and you need to have the traditions as it build up, then reason, ration, reason; it has to be reasonable. Some things make sense don't make sense. So he convinced me that I needed to straight check it out. If you don't like the first year, just go ahead and go to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], work on your master's [degree], get a doctorate [degree] in soc [sociology]. So that's what I did, and it was the best--one of the better decisions I was able to make as a young man. Story_ID: 512957 Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about Garrett [Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: It was absolutely a powerful, life-changing experience. Speaker 1: Who were some of your, of your professors at Garrett that you remember? Speaker 2: Dr. Connor Thompson [ph.] taught philosophy, religion; Dr. [William] Hordern taught theology; Dr. Shockert [ph.] taught church administration, was black, one of the black professors there. In fact, they tried to get [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] there as a professor, chair for King, but he was only thirty-one years old, thirty-two, said King's not gonna leave the [Civil Rights] Movement at this point (unclear) and take a chair. They wanted to get a black at the top, black leader--said it's not gonna work--(unclear)--top (unclear). You had Dr., let's see, Hungren [ph.], he also taught church administration. Is it to--Dr. Loikley [ph.] taught church history, he's from Sweden or Switzerland. They went after the best they could find in the world. Garrett was the leading seminary. It was ahead of Boston [University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts]-- Story_ID: 512958 Speaker 1: Seminary [Garrett Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] was an epochal experience. It was as if God had led me there to the (unclear). Because it was there that I could quantum leap and grow, intellectual, cultural, moreover spiritual. I found I could do more there than I could at the college level. For example, I became a leader on the campus. Not only was I the first African American student body president of, of, of my second year, but I was engaged in entire community, Evanston [Illinois] community, black community, the Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] Community, the seminary community. In fact, we formed the first CORE chapter, Congress of Racial Equality there, some great, bright, sharp, progressive white students who worked at Northwestern and myself and some interested people. We had a hundred members. And sit-ins came out, the sit-ins broke out in January of '60 [1960s]. Jim McCann [ph.], who was the leader of the sit-in under James Farmer came up to Evanston, he and another person. I can't remember his name--to organize a chapter. We organized that chapter. We picketed the five and ten cents store down that, downtown Evanston. But we had about four, five professors, about eight, ten, fifteen, Garrett students, about twenty-five, maybe forty or fifty Northwestern students, about thirty-five, forty Evanston people. The first day we were to picket, the signs made, picket, only about fifteen people showed up. That was my first shock. Only one person from the seminary came out of about fifteen. There were about twenty black students there--the Cone brothers [Cecil and HM James H. Cone], Jim Cone, the father of black theology at that time--that was shocking--Archie Rich [ph.], who lives in Detroit [Michigan] now, and I were the only ones who showed up. The kids from Northwestern came. The people from the Evanston came. I said where are the seminary--the seminary students? We got back to school. They told us, professors, "[HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R. Porter], we're not sure this is a good idea. It's a little radical, and we can't afford to have arrests on our record." They weren't gonna get arrested at all. They wouldn't get a blemish on the record and all that. My professors let me down. Now that didn't cause me to say well, I think I'll drop out of seminary now, (unclear) say no, I didn't blame the whole school for the fact I understood that these men were, and women were people of that time, as I was. And they didn't here to visit (unclear)--(unclear) yet for this meant to, not this just the black people, negroes, but for the country at the time. So we kept on picketing. In the midst of that, the Evanston Y[MCA, later the McGaw YMCA] flew a big fat, dark black lady into play Aunt Jemima. They had the annual pancake--they had the men of Evanston Y pancake day. They make money for the Y I think. But they flew this sister in dressed as Aunt Jemima. We found out about that, found this flyer, picture--(unclear). We raised hell, went out and picketed them, man, before they could get that off the ground. We took our crew to the Y and picket them--(unclear) them--and they were Jews. The lady didn't come in. So we took action, radical action. I was respected by the seminary students or professors, that's how I got elected president the next year of the student body. I took radical action. I again made contact with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in '60 [1960], to let him know that I'll be coming out in about a couple of years, was involved--I was a, a coach of a basketball team, 'cause I had been a basketball star in college. In fact, I was the captain of my college basketball team. And they had a basketball team, and they were in a league at church, a seminary league, a seminary--and, and Garrett never could win anything, so I recruited and the seminary had a winning team, and I played and coached. And I also coached the ping pong team, played in the Evanston ping pong intramurals, and we played in the basketball intramurals too. So it was really big, broad, you know, in terms of not just being cloistered. Now there are some students deliberately allow themselves to be cloistered. They didn't wanna, you know, do nothing. And they thought that was the way a minister was supposed to be. I didn't. I thought a minister should be totally, radically open. Then I had to come, I'd come down to the city [Chicago, Illinois] maybe once or twice a month to events in the city-- Story_ID: 512959 Speaker 1: When my wife [June Carol McIntosh Porter] and I got engaged in '68 [1968], she came up here and taught school as a sub-teacher and lived in, in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] with a friend of ours. I'd come down on the weekend and visit her. We saw the Nation of Islam's first play written by [HM The Honorable Minister] Louis Farrakhan--name was not Farrakhan then. Now, but-- Speaker 2: Louis X, I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah, I forget his last name. It's on the tip of my tongue. But Farrakhan wrote this play, 'Negro Turned Backward' [ph.]. And Malcolm [X] sponsored it, 'cause Malcolm was his teacher then--(unclear)--when, when there was a theater in, in Woodlawn. It's torn down now. My wife and I went to, went to see, went there. And that's I was as close as you and I are now to Malcolm, at least enough to--didn't, didn't shake his hand, but close enough to look him in the eye. And Farrakhan standing there to (unclear)--(unclear)--around him, you know, letting him mingle around. But now, this, the seminary [Garrett Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] propelled me to be a radical activist, because [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] I considered him to be a radical activist, and considered him to be an organic intellectual, who'd reason through things, and had a reasonable understanding of, of the world as he perceived it in terms of change. So I wanted to have a similar path. So, before I--my second--my last of--second year of seminary I was appointed assistant pastor in an all-white church [Normal Park Methodist Episcopal Church, later Zion Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] with a white pastor, 71st [Street] and Union [Avenue], pastor's a (unclear) kind of, one of the finest people I got (unclear)--you, real fine, a tremendous person (unclear)--I was the first black there. The community was beginning to change, and they wanted a black assistant pastor to the pastor-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's 71st and Union? Speaker 1: Union, now a Baptist church is (unclear). It was called-- Speaker 2: What was the name of it? Speaker 1: Normal Park Methodist Church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Normal Park. Martin spoke there in '66 [1966], spoke about twelve places in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] in '68 [1968] before '66 [1966]--(unclear). There I was fully accepted. My job was to go on, on the weekend and help people make it back--who are welcome to that church--(unclear)--(unclear)--and they started coming. We recruited about ninety black people to that church who came there. And it was a great experience, great experience, great experience. And see, I had these experiences, two white guys living in [Reverend] Harry's [Connor] home. He lived in the community, his wife and three boys, just got a post card--and I needed that experience with decent, good, fair white people. That's important in my formation at this point. Now not that I had any kind of hatred for white, but I certainly hated the white system, the segregation that my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] couldn't beyond the sixth grade, and sharecropping, my daddy [Steve Porter] not allowed an education. So I, I didn't like what the system had done to bend a lot of black people out of shape. I was determined it would not bend me. That's why I was determined to get an education, get the, get the same level of education as the whites had, determined to do that. Determined to do that--that education that Malcolm said was the passport to freedom, I knew that before Malcolm said it, that education is one of the passports to your freedom, to your liberation, to your independence. And so, it was--Englewood became the place where I landed. Story_ID: 512960 Speaker 1: Two years later, '62 [1962], they appoint me to the church in about--must have appointed me in the church about May of '62 [1962], Christ [United Methodist] Church [Chicago, Illinois]--(unclear). I was at the church three months, that's May, June, July. June or July, [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] sent me a telegraph: "Dear [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R. Porter], I got it somewhere (unclear)--have a great campaign against segregation in the city of Albany, Georgia, and not enough Negro brother clergy coming to join us, we have people coming from all over the world, all over the country, we welcome them, but not enough of our people coming. Could you see your way to recruit some Negro clergy? You'll probably spend three to six days in jail, or you, you'll get arrested once you demonstrate. It's gonna take that to break the back of segregation in this town. We simply trying to desegregate so, so that blacks have an even playing field." King's words are not, not about integration, per se, but desegregate so, so we have an even playing field, get resources and do our community (unclear). And then he laid it out, so I--(unclear)--(unclear)--prayed about this. I'm about to go. So if I come back and they take the church from me, I know the Methodist gonna be crying when I tell the bishop. I ain't gon' go ask the bishop. That's another, another thing I believe in my mother [Retha Hendricks Porter] taught me, and these men I mentioned, the heroes taught me, said never be a slave, never go ask another man for your freedom. "Johnny, long as you live, never go ask a man do you have permission to do this. Only God needs that to be asked." I never forgot those lessons. So, somebody say: oh aren't you gon' ask the bishop? Bishop's white, bishop--can you--this (unclear) was white--(unclear)--you gon' ask him can you go? I say, "Hell no. I'm gon' tell them I'm going and ask them to watch the church and my family," and that's my wife's cousins--(unclear)--to watch 'em--my son, John, just three months old, Heidi Volmer [ph.] at risk. My first church, they could take the church, but they can't take my soul. I'll get another church. I got an education. But I must go. This is a prophet. This is as a, a national prophet. I know this man. And I promised him almost three years ago when I got out of the seminary [Garrett Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] he could count on me. I'm one of the trained talented tenth that King's looking for. I got to go, tell my wife, "Baby, I got to go. I'm don't, I'm not going to die, to get killed, but if it happens, y'all take, take care wife, come--(unclear)--(unclear)--I ain't going to be a martyr, but it could happen. I know they're shootin' people." I don't think I could ever be a man; I could never be God's man; I cannot be my wife and son's father, and man, husband; I cannot never be my people's man; I cannot not never do anything worthwhile. I might as well go and be an alcoholic; I might as well go run the streets and chase women preaching. This great prophet has asked me to come and help him, and I'm going. He supersedes bishops and all this (unclear) we know. He supersedes denominations. This man is sent by God beyond denomination. He is my friend; I'm going--wrote him back, called Atlanta [Georgia], I'll be there. Speaker 2: Was it hard to recruit the pastors? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I recruited--oh, it was hard. I recruited, I recruited (unclear)--(unclear) Freeman [ph.]; Reverend Leon Such [ph.], he's dead; Reverend Landers [ph.], dead; I recruited Alfinie [ph.] (he's dead); (unclear) (dead). I recruited about ten people--six, seven, maybe twelve; six, seven black; the others were white. We went, we went-- Story_ID: 512961 Speaker 1: What happened when you got to Albany [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Got to Albany, they met us at the [Albany] Airport [later Southwest Georgia Regional Airport]; then a bus took us to the church. Significance of the, of the, of the real black church, there's always a real black church in the midst of phony black church, I discovered too. And they took us to the church. The ministers with a real commitment, not afraid of the church being bombed, 'cause you all know they bombed about a hundred churches this whole period, '60s [1960s]. And these were the churches, the most active mostly. Ministers took the word of God serious--and took us to this--there was a meeting and so many people there meeting at about five churches, must have been three or four thousand people (unclear) world, all kind of people. There were mass demonstrations downtown, closed downtown down. These cash registers started backing up on the white segregation, they, they, they, they finally sit down. They took (unclear)--Albany was a hard nut to--didn't crack Albany in a month. It took, took a couple of years--got over into Birmingham [Alabama] '63 [1963] before Albany fell. But that effort loosened it up, jarred and loosened it. More than that, it put hope in black people's backbone in the black people of Albany, those who came there, and the white people who was decent, who were fair and willing to work with us, backbone in them. It made us better men and women. We were not afraid of suffering, not afraid of being killed, not afraid of being beaten, we're not afraid of even death. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had that kind of magnetism. If I would die with this man, I, I know why I died. This is rare occasion when you have this; a thousand years a man like this come along. That's the way we felt. Now, Albany, in jail, they treated us like any other prisoners. A lot of--most people in prison who were in the jail were, were black. That's a regular, regular prison--loud noise, clanging, screaming out and cussing. And we came in brothers got up off the cots, and we started singing the freedom song, praying the brothers eased up and help them, some of their cases, and writing letters, you know, so created a sense of community (unclear)--my inmates--created some sense of community. 'Cause most of us who came in were people that belonged to--Jews, Christians, or--there wasn't any Muslims at that time. Or something else where they didn't have no form of religion but morally committed to justice and peace and desegregate the society where they could bear it now. So, Albany was my first major experience at being arrested, demonstrating. Story_ID: 512962 Speaker 1: No sooner had I gotten back to Chicago [Illinois] in '62 [1962] then we were caught up in the struggle of Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], the Willis Wagons, (unclear)--(unclear)--coordinating council (unclear), which I was a member already, was-- Speaker 2: Now Willis Wagons, that's the, those-- Speaker 1: Mobiles they built on the playgrounds. Speaker 2: Mobile school units that-- Speaker 1: Units, yeah. Speaker 2: --Superintendent Ben [Benjamin] Willis-- Speaker 1: Put on the-- Speaker 2: --traded to allev--supposedly to address the issue of overcrowding, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In the black schools, 'cause the black community was, was busting at the seams and-- Speaker 1: Busting at the seams-- Speaker 2: --and-- Speaker 1: And schools had lead paint in 'em and you know, bad water pipes, and paint falling, and cold in the winter, poor heating system, whole host of our problems. And, and we had to put massive pressure on that system. But as soon as I got back and working on that, got arrested, the Willis fight at 71st [Street] and Stewart [Avenue] a couple of times with Rosie Simpson and a couple of other people; then in '63 [1963], went to wat--March on Washington, took about forty people, including [HM Reverend] Willie [T.] Barrow, introduced Willie to the movement, Willie and a teacher named Girda [ph.] Beech [ph.]. That's how they get, that get involved. Willie was going to Church of God [ph.] in Englewood. We were marching in the community, and they asked us--(unclear)--Reverend, is this thing official? I remember him saying that. "Is God in this thing that's marching? What would Jesus have to do with it?" I remember (laughing) saying--(unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--"It is of God; Jesus is all in it. We wouldn't be out here if He wasn't in it." Well, and then so we had to go to the scripture and show where, you know, Christ spent most of his time walking and marching, you know, through these dusty roads downtown in Matthew 10th chapter is what he's saying, say you gon' be dragged before council. Tell it to Matthew. You gon' be flogged and beaten by (unclear). They gon' kill you--(unclear)--(unclear)--right there, when you stand up. Said we'll see you tomorrow night (unclear). They got involved, turned it around. Yeah, you know, that's two years before he met [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson]. So, in '63 [1963], after March on Washington, there was a man out in the suburbs--I think it's Robbins--name was Reverend Billingsly [ph.], bless his soul. I don't know if he's living or not. He formed the Northern Christian Leadership Conference in [Dr. Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] name. And he was drawing down money apparently in King's name illegally and immorally, making money off of King's name. Maybe the man didn't know any better. I don't know, sometimes, sometimes in business some people don't know any better. Speaker 2: This is the N--NCLC (laughter). Speaker 1: NCLC, and he had it going. Speaker 2: Northern Christian Leadership Conference. Speaker 1: He had (unclear)--(unclear)--so that C. T. [HM Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] and them checked with [HM] Reverend [Clay] Evans and some other Baptist guys. King asked me to check with them and check with me too--(unclear). See if we could get the ministers together and form a chapter of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. However at that time, ministers were afraid of Richard M. Daley [sic. Richard J. Daley], those who, you know, were trying to build churches as fellowship Baptist was (unclear) and many other probably (unclear)--churches, some kind of--and so they, they were, they, they, they couldn't take that risk. So what they referred them to me. They said I know a guy in Englewood, former Baptist. He's a Methodist trained, has a small church, he not building program there, [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R.] Porter, Reverend Porter. He might be willing 'cause he's always marching, laying in the street, acting crazy. Story_ID: 512963 Speaker 1: That raises an interesting point in terms of Baptist and Methodist. With you being associated with a huge denomination like United Methodist Church, that, that actually operates the church, I guess. And you don't have to necessarily raise your own operating cap, capital and that sort of thing, and you're, you're not as in, in as much-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, we do. Speaker 1: Do, do you? Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, every church-- Speaker 1: But do you--are you, you're not in the kind of jeopardy a, a Baptist church would be in if-- Speaker 2: Well, oh yeah, yeah--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Don't you have some--oh, so it's about--it's no, not, not a lot of difference then? Speaker 2: The only difference is the Baptist churches with its congregational basis, the congregation and the pastor run the church. The Methodist Church is, is Episcopal connection; it has a check and balance system with the bishops and da, da, da, da in that system. And it has a support system built into a collection of ministers in churches, but each church is independent. Each church, it participates in the call of the minister, if they want, and they must raise the money to pay that minister a salary and pension and so forth and so on. Each church then determines the level of pay based upon the size of the congregation and so on and so on, its ability to pay the minister and so on and so on. No, it ain't that much different. The, the difference is each Baptist church has as much independence, each pastor of the Baptist church (unclear)--is like a bishop. He has more control directly with that congregation; then again, he may not, 'cause if you, if he messes up or he's not a strong enough leader or manager, he's in trouble; he's gon' be up out of there. Moreover, he gon'--they gon' defrock him or something, see what I'm saying. He may (unclear)--(unclear), but so and it's to say it could happen in any denomination if they (unclear). So that, no, and the Baptist/Methodist had been two of the churches that, historically, from the beginning of slavery had been out front, that our people joined the Methodist/Baptist 'cause each church was considered freer, the Baptist freer in terms of the, the preaching and the music, the Methodist freer in terms of its social involvement in the community and it's, it's reaching out, and that the laypeople are empowered to help share in decision making a lot more than laypeople in the Baptist Church-- Story_ID: 512964 Speaker 1: How did the hierarchy of the Methodist, United Methodist Church deal with you? Did they, did they, did they--were they upset with you, with your activities, or did they support you? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, there again is a little different. If you are too radical, too far out, 'cause we're all connected, the least minister much worse or the Baptist minister is more independent, can act on his own, and, and he's, he, he still may be upset like [Reverend] Dr. [Henry] Lyons was when he absconded with that money, the National Baptist Convention, that all Baptist in that were affected, but they tried to protect them, some of 'em did. They could not 'cause this stuff was just too, too obviously immoral and illegal. So he had, he had to go to, to prison now, but they tried it around (unclear). Now the Methodist system, you get out too far, we have a social creed that allows you--principles, principles allow us to be involved in matters of justice and race--(unclear)--all that basic culture and (unclear)--you know, worldwide, globally. But there are those similar who don't, don't, don't follow that 'cause you have conservatives, inde--liberal, moderates, and seen radicals, revolutionaries--within the denomination, all of them. Speaker 1: So within the creed you can justify what you're doing-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you justify. Speaker 1: --by-- Speaker 2: But I may--what may happen, some of the brethren and sisters who play the game, to go along to get along, who don't rock the boat, and who condition the people in the church, Methodist, Baptist, that this is not something we ought to be involved in. Let the radicals handle this. Let the revolutionaries handle this. That's not--the church ought to be involved in, you know, the church out. They're talking about, you know, and they, and, and they, they need some these men and women--what I think are extremely insulated and secure. They may have powerful churches, and now the insulation is (unclear), they feed the people a bunch of malarkey, that this is not something that, a work of God. And so they--and it gets to be where they're preparing people to die and go to heaven or hell, wherever, and not deal with living in this world here, you got to live in, too. So, but some of us don't buy into that total theology, and that gets us in trouble, not so much with the (unclear)--hierarchy--sometimes it's with the hierarchy, but it gets us more in trouble with our colleagues some of whom have benefited and who get along because they go with the system. Story_ID: 512965 Speaker 1: What were some of the events I guess from '62 [1962] on that you were involved in, especially around [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King's [Jr.] visits to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Larry [Crowe], I was involved in every major and minor struggle that affected our people, both locally and nationally. Someone said about me, that picture of myself in the background with Dr. King, Bayard Rustin, Bernard Lee on the back of the truck when King had to Get out the Vote rally, all-day rally, and it's about seven, ten sites throughout Chicago, including Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] and Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. We had 10,000 people out to see him. Someone said of me when they saw me with clipboard, I was (unclear)--[HM Reverend James] Bevel, someone said, "He better be, he better say what--be careful what you say and say right 'cause [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R.] Porter, Porter always right. You wanna get the minutes, take Porter, not the person, take the minutes, 'cause Porter take the minutes on everything. Porter got a book on this movement." Somebody said that of me, and I must admit there's a measure of truth to that. I enjoy taking notes, dating them, dating the, the journal, and taking on the--(unclear)--(unclear)--and keeping that in a file folder someplace. So have hundreds if not thousand pages of notes and records. And I've gone over them from time to time just so I remember them even without going back--there's a, a room there--quoting 'em. Now in '62 [1962] to '68 [1968] quotes, or '70 [1970] let me site the highlights quick. In '63 [1963], after we came back from March on Washington, we immediately began working on an SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] chapter for Dr. King. We contacted [HM Reverend Dr.] C. T. Vivian, follow up, who was a national chapter president. We found out what we had to do, what they wanted us to do. We had to send a hundred dollars to Atlanta [Georgia] to get the application. They had a hundred chapters that, that, that they (unclear) at that time. And you paid a hundred dollars for the chapter, charter, chapter fee, Atlanta, the, the headquarters. Then you immediately incorporated in the state you were in, just in case they don't (unclear) you, corporation papers; send a copy of the corporation papers to Atlanta so they know you're a--legitimate. And they signed off on King's name and C. T. as a national chapter president. That was the legitimate, legal way of managing all the people who wanted identify with, with the SCLC, King movement. And the Reverend Billingsly [ph.], who had the Northern Christian Leadership Conference, did not do that. And so one thing they asked us to do was hurry up and put it together. They called me, "[HM Reverend Dr. Kwame] John [R. Porter]--put it together, John, so that we can neutralize Reverend Billingsly [ph.] from disgracing King's name." We did that, put Reverend Billingsly down a bit, 'cause we began recruiting throughout the city and throughout the state. At our highest we probably had 225 paying members basically. About a fourth of those members, maybe a little better than a fourth of them were white--young and old people, old people who wanted to be a part of the movement, who wanted to support the movement up close, and they even go down South. I mean they did go down, you know, Selma [Alabama] with us, Selma to Birmingham [Alabama]. We, the chapter was very active. The chapter had offices--an office in the church [Christ United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], 6040 Sangamon [Avenue] there. The chapter had a, literally a volunteer staff. While we raised--we never raised more than $25,000 dollars in any given year, 'cause I remember. And most of that money went for, you know, flyers, and food, travel, mainly to get ready for demonstrations, supportive. Our role was a supportive role, not only for the activity down South, but any movement, activity up here and then coalition, partnering, collaborating with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and when the [Black] Panthers came into being, and when Jesse formed [Operation] Breadbasket, with any group that was fighting for justice. So we formed that chapter, very clear about what we would do. We were a supportive group of the struggle to desegregate the American society and to break down the barriers of racism in the class structure and all of it, and at the same time, try to get you out, get the kids in schools, and if you got kids in college and like that, and to teach what we call negro history before we became blacks, they'd say negro history--(unclear)--and to teach a nonviolent direct action. That was a main instruction, teach people how to be nonviolent on the streets, what to do, how to be, what the law was. And SCLC had the instructions laid out-- Story_ID: 512966 Speaker 1: Did you have training in terms of that with-- Speaker 2: Every week. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When new members came, we had, usually have two and a half, three-hour meeting, church, weekly. And there were always the--once we got through with the business part of it, the business part of our meeting, normally we open either with prayer, we had introduction roll call, then we had reports on activity, first activity that we were engaged in, and there were assignments. My staff director was a guy named--he's dead now--Bill Henderson [ph.], Dr. Bill Henderson (unclear)--got doctorate [degree] from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] finally--(unclear)--Dr. Bill Henderson was my staff director. Then we had college students mostly who were some work study, some not, some you paid, who organized us. Their job was to go out in the community, inform the community, organize, support, and some support--we organized little finances we sent down South, not very much. It may be a hundred dollars here and there, a couple of hundred dollars that would be very helpful in terms of the struggle there. We also put people up. People who come through that need sleep, they could sleep in the church [Christ United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] or sleep in my home next door. I lived next door to the church, the bedroll and things like that. And we would feed 'em, so we always had a kitchen, some food. So we would--people knew they could come by there and get a meal, or they could sleep in the pews upstairs in the church, in the church and things. That's the way we ran it. And so it was known. Word got out around the country that you go to Chicago [Illinois] you ain't got no money to pay no, no hotel, you know like (unclear)--like [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and them--(unclear)--and, and call a reporter or call Warren Avenue Church--(unclear) church, you can stay over there. Now there are some churches a little siddity, I mean, you know. Like I said, they, you know, they didn't allow that. The deacons didn't allow you to come sleep in the church. That, that, that was not a problem, 'cause our people struggle, make the sacrifice, some leaving their jobs, sacrifice--(unclear)--some went through divorce even eventually 'cause away from home, things like that, stress on their lives. So in '64 [1964] King came to get out the vote drive. We organized 10,000 people. He must have made ten stops in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]. That's the flatbed picture of me and King. In-- Speaker 1: That's a photo of you-- Speaker 2: Bayard Rustin. Speaker 1: --and Bayard Rustin and Dr. King standing-- Speaker 2: In-- Speaker 1: --on, on a flatbed truck-- Speaker 2: --flatbed truck. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Reverend Bernard Lee, right. Speaker 2: Bernard Lee. Speaker 1: And this is '64 [1964]. This was a get out to vote rally? Speaker 2: [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson versus [Barry] Goldwater election. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Johnson was in his (unclear)--inherit the presidency from [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy assassination. But this was before, fore he was then running for, for the full term against Goldwater, Barry Goldwater, Arizona. And so they, the, the party asked King to rev up the vote in the Englewood community, and so he, he and his people did. And he contacted people; he went around the country, city, and went around, he would speak twenty, fifteen, twenty minutes, join that crowd and rev people up and fire them, motivate them, that's what he did, did it very well. Then in '66 [1966], same time, Operation Breadbasket was formed. [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] had gone to Atlanta [Georgia]. He'd come by our chapter. He was a student at CTS [Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois]. He came here-- Speaker 1: He was at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: No, no, no, Chicago Theological Seminary. Speaker 1: Oh, Chicago Theological Seminary. Speaker 2: Chicago Theological Seminary Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All these were Chicago--(unclear), 57th [Street] and Woodlawn [Avenue]. Jesse and, and Garrett [ph.] (unclear), [David] Dave Wallace, two black students came out to our chapter meeting to see what we were about, and they came to one or two meetings. We didn't see them again. Next time we saw them they were in Selma [Alabama], the two people, they were in Selma. We took two groups there. We took eighty people to Selma on two different occasions, forty and forty, bus drove us to Selma to participate from our chapter--in sixty-- Speaker 1: To march from Selma to Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And we march part ways I think. On the last leg of the march the forty we took marched all the way to--marched to Montgomery, from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama-- Speaker 1: Montgomery, okay. Speaker 2: --to Montgomery (unclear). The--Jesse was noticed by [HM Reverend] James Bevel that he had sixty [60,000], 70,000 people there, Ron Brown Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama] in Selma--(unclear)--and the people sleep in your homes and churches, and we had to feed 'em, and then new groups would come in. You had to (unclear) and take them in the church and somebody speak to 'em, give 'em instructions, pass out material and you know, where they could, could not go, you know, people from (unclear)--and so that you wore out the, the, the seventy-five or eighty staff people, you know. I was (unclear)--so everybody that was a volunteer, they asked to volunteer. Jesse volunteered. His oth--Dave Wallace and Garrett and them, I think they came on back to Chicago. Jesse stayed down there. And Bevel noticed how dedicated he was and a great speaker, and Jesse showed him a thing or two about crowd, mass crowd behavior and I think he mastered that. And so Bevel told Ralph [Abernathy], "Dr. Abernathy, that young man is right. Why don't you put him on the staff, Ralph? Take some of the pressure off of us, don't let him--let him go out there--(unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear) another, another week (unclear)"--so Ralph did. So Ralph hired Jesse, put him on staff then, and made him his assistant (unclear). That's the way they did in the movement. And that's how Jesse got in. Story_ID: 512967 Speaker 1: [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson], he met [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] for the first time in Selma [Alabama], I mean personally met him, first time in Selma. I had met Dr. King personally in '62 [1962], when I went to Albany [Georgia]. Then I met him again in '64 [1964], when we had the Get Out The Vote thing in (unclear). I met, met him face-to-face to talk (unclear)--and spoke at the church once. Then I met him in '66 [1966] several times 'cause he spoke several times, then he (unclear)--(unclear) was a hub of activity for those marches-- Speaker 2: That, that's when he came to town to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he came to town-- Speaker 2: --march, march against housing segregation. Speaker 1: Right, delivered on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --where they had some stations across, and ours was one of the main stations where his chapter was. Now-- Speaker 2: This is [HM] Reverend [Dr.] Shelvin [Jerome] Hall and all of them? Speaker 1: Shelvin Hall, yeah. Now I'm gonna give you some facts here for the sake of the historical record. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: That even Taylor Branch and the people who have written the biographies, part of their missed. They got a lot of good stuff, but they missed some stuff, 'cause you have to be inside. And the ones that's, that were not on staff, and I was an insider, 'cause the leaders would tell me about different things, and you know, just like the (unclear) person (unclear)--Porter, so and so and so. Like one staff people would say, "Porter, ain't but two honest people at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] that--you know they ain't, they ain't (unclear)--(unclear)--they get, they get over, [Ralph] Abernathy and Dr. King, you know, they're doing something, you know, it's (unclear)--hey, every girl look at them, know those women wanna be after us, you know, but some guys don't turn 'em down." (Laughter). So you know, those (unclear)--don't let them know. Speaker 2: So they gave Dr. King credit for not, not, not being after a woman-- Speaker 1: Not being-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At least visibly, okay now--(unclear)--(unclear)--have somebody attracted about thirty-three--(unclear)--women were knocking his door down, man, trying to get in. You know, he was a pimp, charisma, man. He had five times more charis--charismatic than anybody else I know. Jesse (laughter), (unclear)--(unclear)--Floyd [McKissick], man, Floyd, man, just mess around and put you, put you in a trance, man, the cat was too sharp, you know. And I think he consciously knew that he was, he was, he was heavyweight, good looking, and dress (unclear)--but he knew he was heavy, but--and, and, and people like a heroic figure (unclear)--he sided with Dr. King. You know, you gotta have, got the bodyguards at the man's door to keep ladies out--(unclear)--out of his door. (Unclear)--(unclear) you got twin bed sets on of [Reverend] Bernard [Lee] or somebody stay in there with him (unclear)--keep the poor--anything--crazy people out of there and keep women out of there, all kind of women, black, white, brown, all colors, man--off the map. Story_ID: 512968 Speaker 1: But now the thing is, '66 [1966], several things happened. [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] demonstrated he had the leadership to organize. They wanted a beach head in Chicago [Illinois], much broader than the local chapter, volunteer chapter, okay, citywide, 'cause Chicago is key, one of the key cities, but they wanted to do it through economics so [Operation] Breadbasket came in. See, economics is the arm of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. The (unclear) formed [Operation] Breadbasket in '61 [1961]. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had borrowed the concept from. Someone talked to King and I--says I'll do it. And they borrowed it, and they made a national project. They first I think were headquartered in, in Atlanta and New York, Buffalo, New York. And--'cause, see, [Al] Sharpton was twelve, fourteen, so he was connected with it, (unclear)--Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and so forth to Breadbasket with [Reverend William] Bill Jones and with [HM Reverend Dr.] Wyatt Tee Walker and people. [HM Reverend Dr. Calvin O.] Butts--the pastor at Abyssinian church-- Speaker 2: Butts, Calvin Butts. Speaker 1: Butts, yeah. So they, there's a connection there with Sharpton. Sharpton was a youth. Now, but in--several things happened that tells you something about our history sometimes we (unclear). Jackson had a kind of a, not a falling out, but we who were with Jesse were with Jesse. Jesse is Chicago, you know. I mean Reverend [Richard] Dick Lawrence and I, a bunch of people, ministers, and his contemporaries, you know, we supported Jesse, Breadbasket, come up with him, yeah, come up with him. And Jesse was sick one day right at 57th [Street] and Woodlawn [Avenue] he was staying. And every night during the marches (unclear) we'd be in a church, and he and [HM Reverend James] Bevel would be the main speakers, you know, I introduce him out to the crowd of 500, 300, 600,000 people. And they'd be at ten churches in the cities, about eight, ten churches. Now, give it a week, organizing people for the demonstration weekend. And once he--Jesse had sickle cell traits. I think he got, got ill from that. He had to be bedridden. And [Reverend Richard] Dick Lawrence and I went over to visit him out of respect and love for the guy and working with him. And, and he's laying there in the bed, and he says something very strange. And it shocked Dick and I, and it dawned on us immediately what he was saying, but we knew that some SL [SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people were giving him a hard time, even in this two years before King was assassinated. Now I'm arguing here that Jesse had nothing, certainly directly at all to do with Dr. King's assassination. So I do not agree with those who try to revise history and say that he and [HM Reverend Samuel] Billy Kyles had something to do--that's, that simply is not true. There's no real, hard evidence for that at all. That's--was insane; he's not--Jesse wanted to be a leader, and had leadership drive and qualities, and was drive to be a leader, and he wanted to be a leader, sure. I know there's a question about the bloody t-shirt once King was shot-- Speaker 2: An the da--the dashiki with the blood on it-- Speaker 1: Blood on it, yeah, I--and, and he--when he gathered around King, he got there--whether he got there first, second, or third or not, he probably got some blood on him, it's okay; that's all right. So I'm not arguing whether he was first, second, or third, that, that, that have Bevel miss that, okay. Now, but Jesse said on his sickbed in '66 [1966] here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], to Dick Lawrence and I, as God is my witness, he said--he was frustrated because some people were telling King that he was being--do, too aggressive to in his leadership, too assertive. He was, he was usurping some of that leadership and many felt that he was usurping some of King's leadership as, in, in a sense that he was, was shaking some things or moving some--there's some jealousy and envy here too, 'cause Jackson had the Midas touch during this time. He had these companies falling line. He had pulled his brother, Noah [Robinson], up--where did he put Noah to about a year or so later from (unclear)--(unclear) to run the commercial division, so but even before that he had Breadbasket going and was very solvent, and was, began as a chapter with paid staff. They were staffed. I was not staffed out there--sending money back to Atlanta [Georgia], and Atlanta would pay the salaries here, so. Jackson was apparently doing that. But they rankled [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] 'cause rumors had got back to him and people sniping. He's being, you know, too pushy, and you know, he's Johnny-come-lately and he just got there. "Who does he think he is?" So he picked up some of this. Perhaps from family members or whatever, and obviously that would bother any, rankle anybody. So he's layin' on his sickbed, he says to us-- Speaker 2: He was sick at the time? Speaker 1: Yeah, sickle cell trait, I think-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --cold that had to be bedridden-- Story_ID: 512969 Speaker 1: Reverend [Richard] Dick Lawrence was pastor of Normal Park Baptist Church [later Love, Faith and Praise Church, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. He and I are very close. In fact, we ran the Englewood piece there, freedom movement at that time (unclear). And he said us that, "If I was larcenous, if I was, you know, wanna do the wrong thing, I could, you know, mess the movement up and including, including [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King, [Jr.], but I'm not that kind of person." But he was angry. That rankled him, and Dick and I knew they had made him upset. We don't know who they were. We could--somebody--I want surmise on tape there. But they made him angry, and I think he was referring to either his first or secondhand knowledge of some indiscretions that he had known about, being with some of their, their leadership, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--some kind of way. He didn't spout out--we didn't push into 'cause Dick and I were not the kind of gossipy guys. We were not--in fact were rather shocked, not so much that he said it, but at the implications of that, so we were mum. We didn't go tell nobody. We didn't, we didn't, until probably this day. We didn't share this with anybody. I think he knew were mature both had master's degrees, some experience for the school. And we would, you know, not the kind of ministers or leaders that would be gossipy, and we had a respect for, for Dr. King and certainly (unclear) for him and a love for them. So we--and for Andy [HM The Honorable Andrew Young] and for all that leadership, see. [HM Reverend Dr.] C. T. [Vivian] and all them made that leadership, [HM Reverend James] Bevel, [HM Reverend Albert Richard] Sampson, you name it, a bunch of them. So we respected them. And it's not that they could do no wrong, not that they were sacrosanct, but that they were--and not that they weren't human beings and flesh beyond reproaching somebody, still a finite human being. But we, we, we, we, we understood his frustration, and we somehow suddenly knew some of the source of it, but it wasn't our business to crawl into it, 'cause we were doing those marches and we had our role to play in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] pulling some gang members and others into the marches, you know, (unclear)--we had, we had a role. We had about about a hundred, hundred and ten people in Englewood that were active in that they made more than that. So we had that then. So that was that piece, so that when you hear today to jump it up a bit, somebody saying that Jesse and of course The Final Call came (unclear) to an undocumented quote, saying [HM Reverend Samuel] Billy Kyles and Jesse had something to do with Dr. King's assassination. But now there is no hard evidence for anything of that nature. And I don't care what people say. People can say well, Jackson had a falling out with the SCLC people 'cause he transferred that to King. And I don't think that is true. There was some animosity following Martin's assassination between [Ralph] Abernathy, Jesse, and SCLC, and Jesse, SCLC and Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity, later Rainbow/PUSH], you know, and so forth and so on. It might have been wiser for Ralph--Ralph's gone now--to have been a king maker, to make Jesse the president of SCLC. He had been the chairman of the board of SC--he'd been the king maker. That might have changed history entirely in terms of that, but that didn't happen. It happened the other way. Ralph fell onto--the mantel that, that King had passed on to him, he felt he'd inherited and earned. Jesse went downtown, and Jesse created the organization called Operation PUSH back then in '71 [1971]. They broke up after the airport in a meeting and that's, that's how that went. So that, to say that thirty, thirty-five years later that there was a conspiracy involving Jackson and Kyles in King's death, no, no. Whatever-- Speaker 2: That's kind of a specious kind of a charge-- Speaker 1: A specious-- Speaker 2: --right now that (unclear)-- Speaker 1: But you, you--it's dangerous because you spill that stuff out to people that are uninformed, that, that cannot document, do not have that, there's no--and to the people that are--and so, you know, it's something we, we don't need to pass on the reason I mention it here is to squelch--what I can, to say as one who has some inside--who lived back during that period with the people, that Jesse loved King, and, and Martin loved Jesse. Now Martin had some problems I think. Jesse was very forward, very aggressive, very pushy, clearly an arrogant type person, and leaders are made of that mettle, that kind of mettle, that kind of mettle, and he knew that he had leadership stuff in him, and, and, and he fought for his space, and claimed it, and took it, and certainly took his space in the press and all that (unclear) say he claimed all of the press. Well, he did that. (Unclear)--(unclear) anybody else from trying to do the same thing that wanna do that. They wanna take their time, put that energy and time away from family and home and things like, it's fine. Well, he did that. That was his choice in terms of leadership, and so that--no, I would say that, that's a rumor that does not need to be fed with any fuel. Story_ID: 512970 Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] [H.] Rap Brown [later, Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] spoke at the church out in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], I think it was, had about 2,000 people out to hear Rap speak on new politics. He was the new chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Sixty-eight [1968] [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was, Martin was, was assassinated, and the cities, 225 cities had riots (unclear). Englewood did not rebel, partly I think because [David] Dave Barksdale who was--he's dead now--was founder of the Black Disciples, Gangster Disciples. Dave was a Devil's Disciple. David sent a suicide squad to my home next to a church. So they heard about it. They asked [HM] Reverend [Dr. Kwame John R.] Porter respect they have for us 'cause we, he got introduction to Dr. King, chance to shake his hand, chance to march with him, you know. And for those guys to get a leadership in one of them gangs, that was the height of their career, meet such a great man, although they themselves were violent orientated somewhat. Now, David--I told David--I told the guys to tell David it's on. They burned up the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]; they burning in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. Don't do it in Englewood. Protect 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street]. So the record will show that you guys saved 63rd and Halsted from burning down, to keep the looters out of there, and they did that, they did that. Now let the record show that. They were never given credit for that, Disciples gang. They did that, you know. That's the kind of relationship you can have in the community when you an indigenized member, a for-real member of the community. People trust you, believe it. You ain't, you ain't faked on 'em or gone west on 'em. Story_ID: 512971 Speaker 1: Now in terms of that, Christ United Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois] was, in terms of being real, really involved in the community, seemed to have so many programs going on, so many ways to reach their community there. I mean you were, you were pastor of that church until 1992 or was it-- Speaker 2: No, two occasions. Speaker 1: --oh, oh no, no, until--yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] to '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy--okay. Speaker 2: Then I left in '71 [1971] to '74 [1974], became founding dean of the Chicago Center for Black Religious Studies here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], graduated sixteen blacks with a master's degree and religious studies, then spent five years with Young Life International, where I was an responsible for about forty-five staff people in about twenty-five cities, mostly African American staff people who worked with urban kids across the country, but to back up, back to the church. The church was a hub for, for movement active, movement activity, radical movement activity for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], for black student union activity, some university activity, for--the [Black] Panthers met there a couple of times when Fred [Hampton] was killed, other groups that were remonstrating that were tied to justice, all was identified in the struggle for liberation with the people. And we were never just on one side. While I was a founder of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership] chapter, same time I was open to the more left side of the movement, I mean SNCC, particular CORE, Panthers. So I was open to the, the total movement. When black power came to being, we were ready for it, you know. We remembered, for example, when Turangen [ph.] lectured at the Urban Transcendental Christian Missions [ph.] on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] at First (unclear) Church [ph.] in '67 [1967] '68 [1968] and laid the foundation for the Nguzo Saba, for Kwanza and his lectures, letting us know that's where he was coming from. We needed a, a, a, a cultural holiday. We needed something of our own. We don't need to compete with Christmas. We don't need to compete with the other holidays. It doesn't need to be a religious holiday, an anti-hero holiday, not worshiping any hero, but a whole people, the heroic, if not all the other tragic heroic greatness of the African people and the celebration of the first truths, what we produce, what we produced out of the womb of our experience as a people in Diaspora. Speaker 1: Now this is in 19-- Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you have that piece there that's related to these pieces here. From the Communiversity, black student union, came [Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], where I taught for a year a half, basically, and is considered one of the founding members at their thirtieth anniversary in 1998 was recognized by [HM Jacob H.] Jake [Carruthers] and others as a founding, albeit adjunct professor, there in sociology. Story_ID: 512972 Speaker 1: Yeah, let me just ask you about, before we leave the '60s [1960s] to recap some of the activities of yourself in, in terms of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and what was going on here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: As I say, the local chapter at SCLC had five kind of four side--five purposes that it believed it could pull off; say, a chapter had at the height 225 people and about maybe six or seven Latinos, about fifty, sixty white contributors, and the rest were African American, and one or two Africans. Speaker 1: Were the Latinos both Puerto Ricans and Mexicans here? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there's one or two Native Americans who got involved with us too-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I remember and come through maybe once a month, you know, 'cause we were very inclusive. One thing about us, we were very inclusive. We were Afro American black managed, and we didn't discriminate. For example, Alderman Leon Despres, who was considered--at one time was considered "the blackest alderman on the city council"-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They had six Negro alderman who did not support the black community--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And he was a Jewish alderman from Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Hyde Park--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But he was considered blacker than the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the silent six [black aldermen, William Campbell, Robert Miller, William Harvey, Benjamin Lewis, Ralph Metcalf, Claude Holman] they called them. Speaker 2: --Chauncey [ph.]--yes, sir. And Leon sent his daughter, Linda Despres Baskin, lives here in Hyde Park, out to Printer's [ph.] with us as (unclear)--the summer of '65 [1965]. She spent that summer out with us. She and her husband [Donald Baskin], we've been fast friends for the last, almost forty years since that time. I (unclear) her father, 'cause he wanted her to have this movement experience and to--and she had that experience. In the early '60s [1960s]--well, the if--let me just cite the five, folk side, one was to be inclusive of, of all kinds of people who wanted to fight, wanna fight for freedom. You wanted to fight for freedom using nonviolent methods, we were the, we were the, one of the places you could learn to do that, and you wanted to go down South and help there, and then demonstrate here where necessary if you could. You could do that, contribute some money, or send some people. You see what I'm saying, or send some money down South to [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the movement, get somebody out of jail, get a lawyer for people. Another that we focused on was not only meeting weekly, but meetings that were intentional, focused around the whole idea of nonviolent training. We trained people nonviolent--how to behave if you happen to go down South particularly, a little bit different climate than the North if you're demonstrating. It's liable to be a little more vicious, depending on where you are in the South than it would be if you're demonstrating in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], for example, against some merchants who sell bad meat, or against one of the (unclear)--(unclear) or something like that, or one of the companies here that discriminates in some kind of way. The other thing we did was that we were very intent on being a sanctuary for members of the movement from all over the country who came through. And some of them, as I mentioned, needed a place to stay, and they needed some food, they needed some support. I support was we provide a place you stay in the church, sometimes next door is my house. We can provide some food for you and so forth, or when sometimes people run out of money, then we get with workers, and we raise money and got them bus fare back down South. See what I mean, that sometimes--or get stranded or something happens. I mean their money ran short, or they went--some people went in--when a guy named Scott Smith, who wanted to go down there and work. And Scott went down, he was a cab driver. He was a member of our chapter. Scott went down South and stayed. Another, a folksinger named Jimmy Canner [ph.], black guy, he went down South and stayed, and he's still up--(unclear)--(unclear) faith. Jimmy was a member of our, our group. We always got music. We always had, playing the guitar, and we had a sing--music, music was a natural part of the movement, good music, good singing, and movement songs, freedom songs. You know, you could expect a, a lively group when you came to a meeting. And we also wanted to support the Southern struggle by any means necessary, money, sending troops, being a sanctuary, writing letters of support or protest, the press, whatever. These things we, we could do. We also put emphasis on involving students, particular high school and college students, involving them as volunteers on a part-time seasonal staff and helping us to organize people. We didn't have people just sitting around the office and twiddling their thumbs and courting and winking eyes. You had to work. You had to go out--(unclear)--what I tell people about what was going on. And we kept up with what was going on down South by having constant phone contact and sometimes a letter, people coming through, and they would send us memos to let us know what they were doing and do this and do that. And sometimes for meetings, they would set up at either this church [Christ United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] or somewhere else. And they would let us know if there was gon' be meetings, sometimes within three days. We're gon' have a group over there meeting, you know, so on, so on. We'll take a trip to [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] who became the national director in, in Chicago, and he determined that his office ought to be in Chicago and not Atlanta [Georgia]. They agreed up upon, on that. There are some people who look back in retrospect and say well, the office should have been in Atlanta, but I'm not that here and there. The office was--very best office was here in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 512973 Speaker 1: So those stayed and then too, we were strongly on the Afrocentric, the focus on the liberation of, of African American. We were not anti-white, some of the best members were white people. But it was a chapter that was--its, its focus and vision, energy came from the black folk who set the pace for what we would do, we were very independent. Politicians could not buy us. We're not for sale, so we didn't take any city grants; that's another hallmark. We didn't have any city grants, as such. The money we needed to raise, that we raised it ourself--we didn't want to be beholden. We knew we were being spied on too. And we knew there were people (unclear)--(unclear)--who there were going back and--and so we didn't feel we were saying and doing anything that was illegal, immoral, or against the Constitution of the United States, and certainly against the rights of, of African Americans, those who, who desired to be free. So that tells you something about the shape-- Story_ID: 512974 Speaker 1: --And then we were tied into the Chicago Freedom Movement, which came up out of the Chicago Council--the Coordinating Council of Community Organizations [CCCO], headed by [Albert] Al Raby and [Edwin] Bill Berry, and [Reverend] James Mack. And one time [HM] Bishop [Arthur] Brazier was the chairman of it. We were part of that hub, that citywide group of fifty organizations based at, sort of to coordinate activities that laid the stage for a coming of a [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson and later coming of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and a movement that became, you know, nationalized here in Chicago [Illinois] when King came and, and Jesse [L. Jackson] began to move for Operation Bread Basket. Now, there are also names of people that I dare not omit, [HM] Russell Adams, [HM] Lerone Bennett, both spoke here at different times when their books were pushed in '62 [1962] or '61 [1961], Russell Adams' book, 'Great Negroes: Past and Present,' Lerone Bennett's book, 'Before the Mayflower: [A History of Black America].' They both were invited to be speakers here by the combination of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people, the local people, and the Christ United Methodist Church Historical Society. That first Negro history class was taught by Professor Bill Gnats [ph.], is a white professor, progressive, liberal friend of mine, progressive, radical--he's a professor at [Woodrow] Wilson [Junior] College, now Kennedy-King College [of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. He taught the first Negro history class at the church--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is Bill--what, what's his name? Speaker 1: Gnat, G-N-A-T, Gnats, Bill Gnats. I think Bill's (unclear) probably retired by now. But he's, I think he lives here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], at least he did awhile. [P.] Sterling Stuckey spoke once or twice here. Sterling one time I think was a teacher at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy] High School [later Urban Prep Academy and TEAM Englewood, Chicago, Illinois] and later on at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], basically. James Baldwin came through in '67 [1967] and spoke at the Negro History Roundtable [Roundtable for African-American History]. Matthew Bonds headed that. You probably know Matthew now. Matthew, Matthew, they left a lot--lot of history stacked up in there with tape some place. But--and I had a picture taken with Mr. Baldwin. The Red Squad illegally spied on us, some of us who's '62 [1962] till up in the '70s [1970s]. And of course you see the list of names here, including my own, of persons who aspired on and whom the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and the (unclear) in repression had our records exonerated in 1979, basically, so I'm proud of that. Fred Hampton came through in '68 [1968] or '9 [1969]--I think '69 [1969]--(unclear)--time before he was assassinated. The [Black] Panthers had a meeting our--a follow-up meeting in our church, not a large meeting. They had a large meeting, so basically they filled only to the church and had a small I guess cell meeting there. And I remember Fred standing outside after, after the meeting, talking to him; and of course, [HM Lutrelle] Lu [F.] Palmer [II] and [HM] Vernon Jarrett. Vernon once, to the church, said [Saint] Bartholomew Episcopal Church [later Truevine Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], talking (unclear) lived there, he might have lived there too, but both were very active, Charmers [ph.], Lu [Lutrelle Lu F. Palmer, II] very active. Charmers, Lu, and I had started what's called 100 Black Men in 1980 at the church. And I then would get fifteen, twenty men going and kind of firmed that. [HM] Howard Saffold start (unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--May, another effort to reduce the crime (unclear), but I go back to '66 [1966], '67 [1967] with the formation of the Afro-American history, African American Patrolmen's League [The Afro-American Patrolmen's League, later, the African American Police League], I and Anne Langford [ph.], Attorney Anne Langford. Anne Langford was always supporter of the APL, African American Patrolmen. She helped them financially, cases, provide sanctuary in her office, and shield for them as attorney. And I, of course, helped them where I could financially in terms of their office, which was over on 71st [Street] and Jeffery [Boulevard]. I always supported those brothers-- Story_ID: 512975 Speaker 1: I think that's why when Harold Washington finally announced after [HM Lutrelle] Lu [F. Palmer, II] and a bunch of us and Starks [HM Robert T. Starks] and a whole bunch of people, [HM Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson, a bunch of us rallied enough votes and raised enough money to get Harold to the city running for mayor, I think it was either November the 10th or October 19th, one of those days, you know, the 10th at the Hyde Park Hotel [ph.], he announced to an audience of about a thousand people there. The press said that he was gonna run for mayor. And I was gathered, [HM] Renault [Robinson] called out of the crowd to give the prayer. And the prayer I gave had the lines in it: the man, the moment, and the movement have now met at a great juncture in history. And that went over the wire service across the country. But significantly, the Historical Society uses that theme for its display of Harold now. But they left out the moment. There is the man and the movement, but the theme was taken from the prayer. People don't--that yours truly gave I think November the 10th, 1982. Story_ID: 512976 Speaker 1: Oh, K. Jarrett [ph.]. You remember K. Jarrett? She's dead now. She had a radio program, I and Reverend Bunson [ph.] and another (unclear) were on there with her, this radio program quite a number of times (unclear). 'Course [HM Reverend Albert] Al [Richard] Sampson was forever involved, Chicago [Illinois], had been assigned to The Woodlawn Organization [TWO] for [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and things in '61 [1961], '62 [1962], and later on he stayed in the city and became a pastor there in Methodist Church. And of course Al's history is well-known, his history has contributed to our struggle. Let's see, [HM] Tim[uel] Black, Tim has just written a book. And I--Tim and I talked over the years about doing something jointly in terms of the Civil Rights Movement in Chicago, just never got around to it. Also, another brother whose name just skips me right now--Dr. Phil Harley [ph.]. He's retired now. I think he lives here, Montgomery Place in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. He and I talked about doing something on the movement, including the role of the black church in the movement. And we still might, might do that together. [HM] Conrad [Walter] Worrill, [HM Robert] Bob [T.] Starks began with me and--(unclear)--I placed in '65 [1965] the black student struggle, which led to Communiversity and so forth and so on and all of that, so elected Conrad, and Aisha [ph.] and a few people invited me to teach the first African history course at George Williams College in 1970 in Downers Grove [Illinois], and that's how we became friends. Story_ID: 512977 Speaker 1: As we move up into the '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], we formed a group called Black Men Against Rape and Sexual Assault in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. And out of that or from that attracted Commander Leroy [O']Shield, who then was commander of the 15th District, and I certainly hope you get his history. Leroy O'Shield actually was the first one I know of to start real committed policing. He started in the 15th District in the mid-eighties [1980s] or the late eighties [1980s] before it was beginning popular in '93' [1993], with the five prototype community policing districts-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --that formed CAPS [Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy] in '93 [1993] for the mayor, Leroy O'Shield, who was a candidate for East superintendency, at least on a couple occasions. So I need to be mentioning that. We formed the Will Feed Community Organization in 1982, to so many people hungry, needed help, so that organization still exists. I think with the people giving leadership have to do, number one, to, part of being a leader is to leave some institutions that others can live by, live to. If you're a leader and, and you don't leave a legacy and don't leave some institutions by which others can continue to be liberated by it and grow from, a real, real, real problem about what we left, what will be remembered. And the Will Feed Organization is twenty-one years old. Now it still here in Englewood, headed by a Nigerian brother who's been here about twenty-five years, John Upaul [ph.], and their still going, got 'em started to a small grant, two cans of beans (unclear) in '82 [1982]. And then from that, they tell me it grew. So it, it-- Speaker 2: The truckloads of food that come in every week-- Speaker 1: Every week--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --to feed-- Speaker 1: -feed 25,000 people. I mean so the same people, if you add them up, that's what the numbers come to. In fact (unclear) a copy. So they're still doing it with the P.E.A.C.E. Center. The P.E.A.C.E. organization, People Educating Against Crime in Englewood formed by Hal Baskin, Elder Eugene Davis, and myself in 1991, was formed when there were a 100 homicides in Englewood, and the mayor did not wanna make the 7th District a prototype CAPS, CAPS program, that is Community Alternative Policing program. And so Ronnie Watson, who was the commander then, pulled twenty of us together and asked us to work with him to both convinced the mayor that Englewood ought to be a CAPS program but also to help wherever we could to reduce crime. My (unclear) was sociologist. I took the asset, the mapping, community mapping programming that Jody Crestman [ph.] and (unclear)--John McKnight when the Northwestern University Urban Center [Northwestern University Center for Urban Affairs, Evanston, Illinois] and integrated that in with some things we were doing to reduce crime, and used that model and interfaced chapters as we were doing, and created a--and a sociological base for the CAPS program in said district and others, people had other kind of roles they played. My first Vista volunteers came from that, 'cause Ronnie told me about the Vista volunteers. I was not aware of the (unclear)--(unclear) that time and about (unclear) Rustin (unclear) Annie. Annie gave me my first Vista volunteers. And since that time I've probably, since that time had a hundred Vistas, at least a hundred Vistas have come to my program, both from West Pullman [Chicago, Illinois] and Englewood, basically, about a hundred people. And they pay--Ron's fees are about 10,000 a year and with some very, very good people who made a contributions. You well know, Larry [Crowe], when the initial part of the Chicago Alliance for Neighborhood Safety and the job they've done in terms of helping to raise the consciousness of, of the community, the community, the neighborhoods against least crime and policy work and so forth and the need to cooperate in reducing crime and violence. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, Englewood at one time, I guess in the early '90s [1990s], was being--its name was being used as the crime capital of America because of the number of killings there. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: And so the-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I remember that-- Speaker 2: --the community policing was essential, I mean the--some solution had to be found to all the violence, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 512978 Speaker 1: But right in the midst of Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] was a guy who's still in there, Hal Baskin. He's about six-five [6'5"], weighs about 268 [pounds]. He's one of the most profound leaders who come up from the street, streets to the academy and beyond the academy that I think I've met in the community. I've known him for years, known him thirty-something odd years. And Baskin formed a Peace organization. He also formed a gang deactivation program at [Paul] Robeson [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and, and Englewood [Technical Prep Academy] High School [later Urban Prep Academy and TEAM Englewood, Chicago, Illinois] in, in '92 [1992] that absolutely reduced the level of conflict between the GD [Black Gangster Disciples], BDs [Black Disciples] and other gang elements in the school, around the school, to and from the school. And whereas they're at I think less than forty, forty-four kids graduated the year before, they got that up quadruple that after the violence the crime went down. And yet the, the city [Chicago, Illinois] did not put the kind of energy, and muscle, support behind that as it, it, it could and still should. I think that Baskin's organization efforts, and what he had learned over forty-some years of living and working in that community, having been made the gang chieftain for the first twenty-two years of his life--he's now fifty-one--that man has, has some assets. He has some assets on how to stop the violence and the killing and what it takes to do, what it would take to do that. And so I think at the grassroots level, it is people like Baskin that I've been close to over the years. And coming up out of the grassroots myself out on the streets and single parent, although Baskin had a father and mother. His father was killed when he was seventy-two. But coming up through similar experiences myself, you know, and then it was a couple of stepfathers, but really having to pick out strong heroic figures for man models since the, the father model was not directly there. Story_ID: 512979 Speaker 1: The period we're in now, the '90s [1990s] to 2000 has been an epochal period, 'cause out of that period came CAPS, out of that period-- Speaker 2: That's Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the city's community policy plan, right? Speaker 1: Right. Out of that I was a research writer for what became the (unclear) Village. I encountered (unclear)--Amy Wilson [ph.] and others. Frederick Lightfoot [ph.] laid the foundation for that, did the primary writing and research. I did much of the writing and development for the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] part of those clusters, enable the city to receive a hundred million dollars ten years or nearly ten years ago, although Englewood was identified as a enterprising community not a department zone, and so forth--but nevertheless, our work was done well; evidence is there. Out of that, I began working with Kens [ph.] for a year as a community police trainer. From that I went out to West Pullman [Chicago, Illinois], became part-time pastor, retired and became part-time pastor at the Fellowship [United] Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois], United Methodist Church, and formed the West Pullman Organizing Committee [ph.] that really produced about eighty-something Vista volunteers, first four or five groups out there, including Dr. Eugene Spellot [ph.] at the Roseland Y[MCA, Chicago, Illinois], who at fifty--I remember one time--about two and a half years ago and Attorney Charles Knox [ph.], who has probably twenty-eight or thirty of these now, basically. And we had about twenty-six or thirty ourselves that we farmed out. And then there were another eight or ten in Englewood working through the Peace in St. Stevens program [ph.] there for a while, so that we have tried to continue to be activists on the cutting edge, vanguards, if you will, for the people's liberation. We're in this, in this tussle now that's close to they say $6 billion dollars they say coming to Englewood. That's what they polled from all the development. And a new Kennedy-King College [of the City Colleges of Chicago] would probably cost up to $200 million or $250 million dollars when, when it's, cost overrun when it's completed. There's a new strip mall being built primarily by the Koreans, trying to venture capital partner with them into the African American community. There will be a, a new drugstore, a new senior citizen home, new police station, new fire station, they'll be a new major store, grocery store, I think probably at 69th [Street] and Ashland [Avenue] there looks like. There's gonna be probably close to a thousand new housing units for--hopefully affordable housing units there, are gonna be, there is a team working with quality of life program that will have several millions of dollars to, to those quality of life programs in housing and human and development, human social service programs there. There's a new historical society. As you know, one of the main founders of that incorporated August 22nd of this year, 2003, located at the Kennedy--in Kennedy King College, which exists to be a repository, a keeper of the history and legacy of the living and the deceased who have in, intersected and impacted, been impacted by Englewood's making, '40 [1940] up to the present. So we're talking about probably close to a thousand people or better basically that have to be honored. So we'll be doing some of the same things that [The] HistoryMakers are doing (unclear) in a smaller sense. So HistoryMakers has been an inspiring, at least model for, for us, particularly for myself, in terms of getting this program, this Historical Society off the ground (unclear) and what it can do, particularly for young people. Our focus is gon' be on having--involving the young in, in managing, telling the Englewood story, young writers writing new copies of book on Englewood and so forth, and tour guides and whatever it takes to draw out the talent and art--been working close with John Zeigler, who's the president of the Boulevard Arts Council [ph.], who's the founder of the Englewood Community [Cultural] Planning Council, which was formed last April, pulling together thirty or forty groups to do common planning together. We have our own planning council through the Human Historical Society [ph.], which is part of Zeigler's group. But we'll do planning and a fourth of our planners have to be young people, high school, maybe some upper grade, bright, young people to have our--let our kids own this history, let them grasp it, let them absorb, let them carry it, let them benefit from it, let them--some of them jobs that can be created from this. So that's kind of where we are now-- Story_ID: 512980 Speaker 1: I'm certainly proud to be in the family I'm in. I mean the direct family I'm in. The wife I have is a historical person in her own right, Mrs. June Carol McIntosh Porter, who is a, she's a program coordinator for adult literacy, teaching adults how to teach others how to read and write, at Literacy Chicago on (unclear) East Lake, where she's been for twelve, thirteen years and really is Ms., Ms., I consider her Ms. Literacy Chicago. She's just that effective as, as an educator. I say that even if she's my wife. And all our kids are productive people. John T. [Porter] has his own market research business, Resources Plus. Joseph [Porter] is a social worker, has worked for Abraham Lincoln Centre [Chicago, Illinois] for ten, eleven years. Julia [Porter] is an administrative assistant at the church and as a J. P. Manage Associates [ph.], where they do--serves agents for musicians and also helps people to organize their activities and so forth. She'll be helping with the new historical society too. Jessica Retha Porter works right next door (unclear)--(unclear)--in the administrative (unclear) unit of Lutheran School of Theology [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Jorja Porter is a master's and she is in real estate. I think she might do prelaw possibly, basically. And then Africa, in Nigeria, Africa, Jerrianne Porter, my youngest daughter, now works with Phil [Phillip] Jackson with the Black Star Project where Saturday, the 13th of December I'll be doing a Kwanzaa history for them from 12:00 [p.m.] to 2:00 [p.m.] at 49th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue], the church there, Episcopal church there. That's kind of where I'm sure I left out a few things, but that's kind of where we are with that. Story_ID: 512981 Speaker 1: Now, we forgot the founding of Black United Front in 1980-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --in the church-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Black United Front-- Speaker 1: --which-- Speaker 2: --was finalized at Christ [United] Methodist Church [Chicago, Illinois] in 1980 by [HM] Conrad [Walter] Worrill, and Amiri Baraka [formerly LeRoi Jones], (unclear) Franklin-- Speaker 1: [HM] Haki Madhubuti, the whole group, yeah. Speaker 2: Jack Barnes [ph.], a whole bunch of people, whole bunch of people. I remember that. I got the, I got the outline, so, of that program. Man, but I also was a part of the National Black United Fund. In fact, when [Walter] Bremond passed, who found it, Los Angeles [California], he left most of the records with--he left most of the records with Doris Jones [ph.] and myself and Benetta Howell [ph.]had some of those records about of her, so that I know Henry English had (unclear) Black United Front now still on 71st Street. And when I had a kinship there were them. So when, when we say that, when someone say that [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R.] Porter probably has been involved in every major and minor venue of our our struggle and has touched it in some way been touched by it and knows the, the lay of the land and the players and events, there's a certain real element of the truth to that. I've tried to keep up with our people's history. In fact, someone had said one aspect of the name Kwame is not only one born on a Saturday but one born to keep up with his people's history. Story_ID: 512982 Speaker 1: As a reverend, what is your theological philosophy? Speaker 2: Well, I believe there is an ultimate reality. I believe that (unclear) [HM Reverend] Dr. Gardner Taylor, [HM] Dr. James [H.] Cone, [HM Reverend] Dr. Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.], and [Reverend] Dr. Charles [G.] Adams, [Reverend] Dr. Johnny [Ray] Youngblood, the late [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], Dr. Benny Moore [ph.]--Benny [Benjamin] Mays, and a number of other deep theological thinkers, that there is an ultimate reality that exists, and Paul Tillich has been help, helpful here in writing some of this messages, teaching before he passed, still exists in many works. Tillich, Tillich talked about a person arriving at a point of having an ultimate concern that you discover the deeper meanings of life and the universe itself, purpose of life, the (unclear) mission of the human race. When you discover your ultimate concern, what it ought to be, and the ultimate concern is a core reality of not so much though it includes who God is, but not so much focus God; God is God, being a (unclear)--(unclear)--in history, beyond history, transcending history, imminent in all things; God is, God is. But for human beings, mankind, to find the core reality of being and ontological reality, the nature of being, why are we here? When I studied theology and philosophy in grad school [Garrett Theological Seminary Theological Seminary, later Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] in college [Iowa Wesleyan College, later Iowa Wesleyan University, Council Bluffs, Iowa], particularly grad school, and in life, forty years after seminary, what is life? Why are we here? Where is life going? Where should it go? Why are we created? Why does the creator keep aligned life to be? Several millions of babies are born, several million people die each year, time expired, aging, attrition, accident, war, tragedy, acts of war, acts of violence, they leave there same time, hospital, mid-wifing gives birth to millions of babies, you--even as we speak within a minute or less than that they baby is born. What in the midst of the tragedy and the hunger, AIDS, midst of men killing each other, the Middle East, and Africa, and Europe and other places, over territory, protein, no control, elitist oligarchy group trying to control the entire earth, you know, against the great master of humanity. Is that our ultimate realty, what the president and others are doing or what others in other countries are doing who are premiers or who are leaders of their nations? Are we here to follow that, adhere to that? I say no, there's got to be a deeper, a deeper, a deeper reality than all that. And I am convinced after all these years of studying and being a radical activist, Judeo--I'm ecumenical Muslim, all three traditions, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, come out of the testament hegemony, out of the Abra--Abrahamic formation of being in the Old Testament. Story_ID: 512983 Speaker 1: So I'm convinced more that there is a deeper reality. As I mentioned the story of the man who was an atheist who died and was resuscitated thirty minutes later, who was declared, it was a mistake--(unclear)--what that man saw. He saw light, and music, and another, another reality that was so far beyond what existed on this earth, including some of the stuff here but much greater. He saw his ultimate reality. He came to being, what's was called in theology, ultimate being. Now, the mega churches--you asked me a question--the question is, what is their ultimate concern, therefore, their ultimate reality? What is their driving energy that drives them? Is it simply American jumbo-ism, to build bigger, in (unclear)--bigger towers when they come tumbling down, to be bigger and bigger? Is it ego to have a big crowd around them to have notoriety? I question whether some of the mega churches are even conscious of, theologically, an ultimate reality, that's why you hear them speak and preach. They're not--unless you hear--and I remember [HM Reverend] Dr. [Gardner] Taylor had (unclear)--in, in Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And Gardner was so deep in the upper reality, was a Baptist, trained Baptist preacher, not only do the (unclear) and (unclear) lectures once a week, but when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], Martin King was alive, he was a man, when King was in New York [New York], he invariably when to Concord Baptist Church [New York, New York]. Why did he go to Senator Taylor [sic.]? 'Cause here was a masterful procurator, scholar, organic intellectual, use the terms of [HM Molefi] Asante [formerly Arthur Lee Smith, Jr.], [HM Jacob H.] Caruthers [Jr.], and [Cornel] West, an organic intellectual, whom President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton drops in to hear when he was preaching. Why would they drop to hear Taylor? Because when he spoke and the content and the context out of which he spoke was similar even to when a King and Malcolm [X] spoke--Tillich. You felt you were in the presence of what's called hierophantics. You felt you were in the presence of something so sacred, so vibe, so real, whereas you said earlier about pantheism, spirit being in everything, so real that you knew that God's spirit is there. Let me just say this about mega churches. There are five or seven ways you can tell whether or not the ultimate reality, which is Father God, is present in any church, be it a storefront or be it a church that has 25,000 members. I don't remember what all said, but I do remember some of it. What are them when you go inside the temple or inside of the place where whoever is the priest, the spokesperson--if it is the experience of Isaiah, in Isaiah, the 6th chapter, first--78th verse, where he says--it's expressed, King and others (unclear) with Carter Till's church--or the experience of daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.], King's father had whenever C. L. Franklin came to preach at, at Ebenezer [Baptist Church] in Atlanta [Georgia]. Daddy King said when--they knew Franklin was coming. He said it was as if the walls were gonna cave in. What did Franklin do? He resurrected an element of that ultimate concern, as Taylor had done. Now I say to people in the Chicago [Illinois] area, you won't--you'll hear about it, but there's a preacher coming. He's not, he may not be as erudite (unclear)--as a [Dr.] Charles [G.] Adams or a [Reverend Dr.] Johnny [Ray] Youngblood or a [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.]. He had some elements. These men who can touch that ultimate concern or a [HM] Bishop [Vashti] McKenzie, the female AME [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop out in Baltimore [Maryland] and in Africa, touching on that ultimate reality, but [Reverend] Jasper Williams. Now why did [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] announce that Jasper is preaching at Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Save All Humanity Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] Saturday, December 13th at 10:00? And why do you tell people to get there early so you can get a seat? 'Cause while PUSH is not filled up unless it has a--especially (unclear) it's celebrating its December anniversary and all that. But when Jasper comes on the 13th of December, 10:00, I'll be there. I mean, I don't go to PUSH often, I mean about--now why is it they gon'--got to get there early to get a seat, because people believe that Jasper touches something in the ultimate reality, maybe not as deep as Charles Adams Taylor, or King, or Malcolm X, or Jeremiah Wright (laughter), or [Reverend Dr. Johnny Ray] Youngblood out in Brooklyn, or Wyatt Walker, or [HM Reverend Dr. Calvin O.] Butts, but he touches something. Story_ID: 512984 Speaker 1: This is a young white preacher in Houston [Texas], Joel Osteen, comes on Sunday morning preaching eighteen minutes. You probably heard him, preach eighteen minutes. What is it about Joel Osteen, young white preacher that people believe touches--he has 40,000 people in his church. He had to buy a new football stadium here in there--believe that [Reverend] Jasper [Williams] touches--and I mentioned [HM Reverend Dr.] Gardner Taylor--ultimate reality. Now, mega church preachers do not--if they cannot touch the ultimate reality, they may have a crowd there; they may be on TV some of them. But if they don't touch the ultimate reality, the core of being, people are not healed or helped; people are not really delivered to a new level of being and activity in this world and function; people are not liberated in their mind and their being to function as--the way God wants them to function, to be wholly human. But there's a belief that some men and women carry this ultimate reality or enough of it. And I mentioned the, the Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Save All Humanity Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], not the sake of [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson], but that there'd be several of, of this will come on away and the event will be gone, but so that we catch it backward a few months later, that, that, that auditorium will absolutely be filled up with people. Now, what is it Jasper brings? He brings a profound presence, and that gets me to my five things that you, you sense when the ultimate reality is there. And the mega churches may not--some of 'em at least, some of them may have that--one, when you go into temple or you hear that this person's going to be there, you expect to have an hierophantic, that is to say to have such a sacred experience that, you, you can, you feel something--Isaiah 6th chapter say that would keep a (unclear)--(unclear). Isaiah went into the temple to pray. Was nobody in the temple but him and, and God. But God was in there in a different way--said God filled the temple, and it, and, and it shook him up so, so much he had been worshipping that man, that king than God. He thought he was worshipping God. The king was a man, not--when he went in the temple, he was so turned upside-down by the power of God's presence, he said God's tram, God's presence filled the temple, said he could feel something, if he just, if he moved, there was a power there. If you don't sense that power, the sacredness--second, a sense of community unlike any other kind of community. A lot of communities out here, but you sense that this is the right place for me to be, my family. This is--there's something about this that's so authentic that this has to be right. The, the, there's something, I cannot deny that. Third, that it's like, it's like going to heaven and coming back again, it can get that--that's for the man who's atheist who to heaven and came back. It's like, it's like going into the heavenly dimension and then coming back and forth in this world with ease. I know a man named Some', Patrice Malidoma Some' [sic Malidoma Patrice Some'], West African, three Ph.D.s [degrees]. He's a shaman out of Dagara--Dagara tribe in West Africa. You might have read his book, 'Of Water and the Spirit,' or you (unclear), read it, 'Of Water and the Spirit. You read it, [Of] Water and the Spirit.' Blow your mind--He talks about the Negara people interacting with the world of the deceased ancestors naturally. Children learn that, their dialogue, they're taught, they go into that world. They see that world, interact with that world, come back and forth. They wear--the ones who's shaman wear an amulet around their, around their neck on some strange or something. It was so deep for him, this ultimate concern centering, that when he went to Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] to work on one of his--he had three Ph.D.s--he never really had to open a book. All he did was consult that world. Doug Lucerne [ph.] asked him what was in the book, what did he know. Professors were amazed. He glanced at the book, looked at the--aced every test, every exam, every textual interpretation analysis, exegesis, top of the class. And he told 'em, said, "My ancestors give me all the answers, directors, tell me what is in the book, what my thought is, what I was saying, not saying, words I should write." Professors at Brandeis shook their head. "We don't understand this. We have to give him the degree. He, he, he can tell you what's in the book without going through the entire book at all," whatever the books are. That is that sense-- Story_ID: 512985 Speaker 1: The other thing about it, when you know that the ultimate (unclear)--is that you are able to perform certain things that you ordinarily would not be able to do. They're not magic tricks. You're able to discern some of this ultimate reality. You're able to see some things that you ought not to enter into. It's like "Aunt Caroline" [Caroline Tracy] Dye I mentioned, touched the other realm, that's why the people said she could read haints, the spirits. She could touch the ultimate reality, Caroline Dye, my mother's [Retha Hendricks Porter] (unclear)--had the white folks wherever she was in Louisiana, Arkansas, so afraid of her they got out the sidewalk, whatever. She went in the store during a time when blacks couldn't try on dresses or they--blacks had to say yes sir, no sir to white people. The white folks say yes sir, no to her--yes, yes ma'am to her. She was known to some point at the person and say, "If you don't change what you're doing, tomorrow you'll be gone; they'll be having your funeral next week." And she wouldn't put a hand on 'em. They couldn't arrest her. The next day the person die, fell dead. Mean white folks were kind, "Yes, yes honey." And if somebody came (unclear)--black (unclear)--(unclear)--(unclear)--I, I owe this white guy nothing, do or do--Caroline'd say, "Give me his name, where he live at? Let me go to his house." They'd see her coming. "Auntie what you want? What, what I do?" "You haven't treat Sam right, Maxi. You owe him money. You cheated him. Pay him his money by noon, or I'm gonna send you home." That's all she would say. Now who gave her that power? That message can go on home. Said Father Divine [Reverend M.J. Devine] had the same thing, stood before a judge. Judge tell tried to embarrass him. You heard that story. "Tomorrow and you'll be gone," and then the judge died. I, I say what is that? Story_ID: 512986 Speaker 1: Or take Dr. Lee [ph.], Dr. Carol Felter [ph.]. He and twenty blacks went to Africa to work on their Ph.D. [degree] a few years ago. They came back (unclear)--their Ph.D. (unclear). He said, "They took us in this village"--You heard this story? "They took us in this village to show us the power of the shaman. There was this woman who couldn't get pregnant, you know, couldn't get pregnant. The shaman wringed the neck of a chicken, took the blood of the chicken and rubbed it on her womb, naked, you can get pregnant by it, woman got pregnant. Sitting on a bunch of hot coals that's spread out, the hot coal, (unclear) hot, hot flaming. And the shaman went into a trance, walked on the coals, coals didn't burn his feet, wasn't, wasn't a scar. Then he put them in a trance. They walked on the coals, didn't burn 'em. When they came out, they didn't know they had walked on the coals. He took 'em into the forest. Now these fire ants, about that big. They eat everything in sight, and the cut a path like that. When they get through it's like fire. You've, you've seen pictures--they make noise like rumbling water. And they were on an eating frenzy. And they ate everything, man, beast; they get you, they--you ain't--of a skeleton--(unclear)--(unclear)--the skeleton. They eat everything. And so the shaman went and stood and did an incantation right in their midst. Now these scholars, they, they studying their Ph.D., watching, and here come the fire ants. They're about three feet long (unclear)--(unclear) billions of them, leaving a black path, eating the grass (unclear). And they got to him. I say ah, he gon' eat up--eaten up. They got to him and they parted, went right around him, all of 'em, right around him. Now that may or may not be related to this ultimate reality, then again, it could be. There's a book called 'Old Africa's Last Secrets' [by Lawrence George Green] I got, old book. And one of the things the author says: There are some things in the world that Western man has not even began to fathom yet. Story_ID: 512987 Speaker 1: Sir, in that regard, is the black church becoming more African and--you know, some people want it to become more African, and some people fear it will be more African. Speaker 2: I think it is becoming less African because I think the theology, the African black theology of [HM] Dr. James [H.] Cone, and [Dr. Charles G.] Adams, and [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright, and [Reverend Dr. Johnny Ray] Youngblood, and a bunch of others have promulgated--promulgated over the last thirty, thirty-five years has been resisted by the preachers who are afraid of this ultimate reality. Oh, they talk like they respect and, and God, and they have a job-like fear in all before God, but they're just talking both part. They have disrespected this great gift by not incorporating it, and look at the results. I'm not saying black theology solves all our problems, but we wouldn't have all this killing, black on black crime. We wouldn't have all this craziness of the spirit of young black people who are dis--detached, disconnected, unconscious, unsacred. Jesus would say an enemy has done this to them, has gotten into the garden of their soul and created this destruction. It is unnatural for them to be destructive. Twelve years ago there were 2.3 million people in prison. Today it's 5.2 million in prison making America the number-one prison-industrial complex nation in the world, the so-called civilized world, number one. Story_ID: 512988 Speaker 1: In this regard, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: I would hope that the black community would tap into the depths of its great Africanized culture, not this commercialization of Kwanza we see, these groups now making the clothes, and putting their country's name in it, but they, looking African, you know, and would not be driven by simplistic materialism. We need bread to live. We need nice places to live. We need money but not be driven by money and by material things. This is a nation driven not by the spirit of no discernment, which includes material well-being, which includes mentally being healthy, and morally and spirit health but it--but not driven but justice, we're driven by deception and trickery, gettin' by, 11th commandment, if you can get away with it, do it if you don't get caught; do what you wanna do just so you don't get caught. Well, we--that's in any, anybody's loose philosophy. And what do we have as a result of that? We have a people; we have a de, de, deterioration, degeneration of family values, personal values; we have all this, and you looking to the kings of comedy, you look at these, these, these Negroes. They got every foul, full mouth, under your dress, you know. They're gone sexually mad, mad, and each is trying to outdo the other, you know. Some of the gangster rap and gangster sex rap, some of it's good, but half is good, half is bad. Now, I would hope that secondly we would discover this ultimate concern, that we would meditate, whether it's with yoga, or your regular prayer, or take--going into the dark room for ten hours and, and no lights, no television, no nothing, just meditating, just going inside, honor ourselves, define our true selves. Whatever it takes, to going off into the desert or taking a trip off somewhere, somewhere, you know, where there are not a lot of people, something different--but that we cannot continue this madness and this deception. And look what it leads to? It causes a nation's leaders to lie and to deceive itself, and ultimately, we can't win. Is Mr. [President George Walker] Bush is right--or whoever may be the president--and then we'll come out all right. Well, if he's off, then he ain't being tell the truth, then he's putting the nation in grave danger 'cause he's letting loose spirits, demonic spirits that will get into more people to wrap bombs around their bodies and get on more planes and do crazy things, 'cause they're afraid the world won't be here. They won't be a part of it, so I might as well blow, blow it up and take my life and as many as I can. Do people hate the United States na--whatever it is to be human that bad, that nineteen of 'em get on a plane and take the lives of 3,000 other human beings. What is it? Including some of their own people who were Arabs in that building? It wasn't just taking the lives of whites and blacks, but it was taking the lives of many Arabs, Muslims in that building. We've come to that. And so here our country has military people in 160 countries. Why we got 'em there? Are we--is it the ultimate concern we're searching for? I doubt that. It is a few people, not the whole. The masses of white folks are not in this. They're victims too. It's a small, small elite group that seeks to control 75 percent of the surface and its resources. You mean the rest of us have got some commonsense gonna let that happen? So (unclear)--it's not us, our grandchildren, children--our grandchildren don't need to live in a world that crazy. So, some ultimate concern has to touch more people, including my--more, more Caucasians. You gotta get close to the real reality or we will be in for some suffering that we have never known, and that is a great danger and that no mega church, no other kind of church will be able to face. And we're not used to suffering. Can you imagine if we have another hit like we had two years ago or two? It almost closed us down as a nation. But our people are not toughened by war as these other folk are. They have not had suffering, man. Many--if they didn't commit suicide, many would, would not know how to fight. So we're allowing these elders to create a world which we don't need. Story_ID: 512989 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, at this juncture, what would you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think that probably three things: one is my wife [June Carol McIntosh Porter] and I have raised our family, children, six children, twelve grandchildren. We have two boys and four girls [John T. Porter, Joseph Porter, Julia Porter, Jessica Retha Porter, Jorja Porter, and Jerrianne Porter]. They're all grown. The oldest is forty-one, John T. We have twelve grandchildren, eight boys and two girls, oldest seventeen. It is--how we have been not perfected parents or grandparents, how we have tried to be very serious black and human, seriously black and human, no separate, the two, seriously black and human, before them, at all times, consistently; and second, how we have tried to make a contribution to our people's struggle to their liberation, sometimes subtly, not having control in the press, not having high visibility in many cases but in subtle ways while maintaining a family, realizing that a lot of our colleagues who went through the revolution, social revolution (unclear)--(unclear)--and about half of the marriages came apart, something happened. It could have happened to me. The fact, my choice of living in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], was partly not (unclear)--(unclear) the, the movement, but my family was growing. After '71 [1971]--'70 [1970] became increasingly dangerous. It pulled the industrialization--pull out the support--(unclear)--a hundred police there and my wife got robbed once coming in and out the house (unclear) or attempted robbery. And our house was Grand Central Station. It's not fair to the home, people running in and out the house, you know, and it was too much for us to bear. We did not wanna be one of the handful of leaders and, and one of a few just the neighborhood there that people leaned on but people were not support and were not supporting; they were not coming to church, support with their money tithe. But they get in trouble they would come to us for help or bailout or this and that. But, so we wanted to--we had a right to "save" our family in a sense of providing a safer place for rearing the children so they would have life chances better than they might have had, had we just stayed where we were. We didn't have all the support from some of the forces within the church or within the denomination that we needed. And so we had to teach school (unclear)--teach African American studies, George Williams College [Downers Grove, Illinois]--(unclear) meet, said the salary was too low at the church. I couldn't make it on that. (Unclear)--upon the dean of Chicago Center for Black Religious Studies, which was triple my salary. And then three years later came vice president at Urban Affair Young Life [International] and my salary (unclear) four times, enabled me to put money down on this home--wife works, and the home is paid for now, nine, ten years ago, you know, bought it for $30,000; now it's worth $300,000, and--so, we made the right choice. My wife wanted to be in a community where there's a park near, a school near, and where children are safe. We had a situation where the people--children were small--guys robbing, exposing, dropped their pants and exposed themselves, predatory, sexual predatory people. So we, we had to make some change. Third, I think the legacy is in the relationship with other leaders in the city [Chicago, Illinois], particularly some of those from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Relationship--what I, what I call authentic leaders, authentic leaders, people that go to wall, through the wall with you. Some people won't go to the wall with you, in other words, you can't depend on them beyond a certain point. But I, I know more than fifteen, twenty people to wall, certainly ten of them go to wall, beginning with [Hal] Baskin, go to the wall, go to wall, in other words, lay down their life, if it's necessary--(unclear)--with you now, same way myself. So I've been with people like that over thirty-some years, struggle together and support each other. Baskin ran four times for alderman, should have--the apathy of voting--(unclear)--wasn't where he would have (unclear)--(unclear) been one of the best ever in the council, didn't make it the fourth time, no. And yet he is, has to manage a community as if he's the mayor of the community, really, Hal Baskin. He's called the "mayor of Englewood." Story_ID: 512990 Speaker 1: I think of people like--I think of the New Englewood Historical Society [ph.], a new creation that God gave me when Dr. Elmer Fowler died at age eighty-three on May 28th. I'd intended to interview Elmer. Elmer lives in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], lived in Hyde Park--(unclear) interview (unclear) a videotaped interview of him. And I procrastinated, Larry [Crowe], and I didn't do it. It hurt me so bad a tear or two in my eye, went in my office upstairs, wrote down the names of a hundred people off the top of my head who had been impacted in the second Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] who had influenced Englewood, who had influenced by it over the last umpteen forty-some odd years that I knew of. And the spirit came to me, the ancestors told me--gave me the name. I didn't pick the name, the ancestors said call it the New Englewood Historical Society 'cause there's a lot of new things coming to Englewood now. Call it that. Then later on we formed a pastoral committee on our nation, added Chicago, New, New Historical Society of Chicago, Illinois. So the New Englewood Historical Society of Chicago, Illinois, hopefully can serve, along with [The] HistoryMakers, I should add, for two--I think my son (unclear) my son John T. [Porter], who he and I have been running together now for five years. My other son very close too, Joe [Joseph Porter] and I, but John is (unclear). He's single, so we've been running together, very close--maybe seven, eight years, maybe since '95 [1995] we've been close. And I think of the father to son, I'm close to all my kids and wife now, but he has to tie because he's attached like the other kids, and, and attached to nine to five. He makes his own living too so he makes his own living independently. So but he then has seen my legacy, been closest to it other than my wife [June Carol McIntosh Porter]. And so what he did, he (unclear)--he's the expert. He (unclear) a line (unclear). And he prevailed upon the people in charge there to consider his dad [HM Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter]. And he submitted some preliminary information, and that's how I got in. Story_ID: 512991 Speaker 1: But again, I'm so grateful to God, so grateful to John T., and of course my family, and particularly, him, and to you all in The HistoryMakers, so the New Englewood Historical Society, the P.E.A.C.E [People Educating Against Crime in Englewood] organization, my legacy in the churches, I've served Christ [United Methodist] Church [Chicago, Illinois], Fellowship Church [ph.], my legacy in terms of the black power and the Civil Rights Movement and Malcolm [X], [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], [HM The Honorable Minister Louis] Farrakhan, these people who have--we have crossed paths and been supportive-- Story_ID: 512992 Speaker 1: I remind people that, that's barely twenty years ago. [HM] Father [George] Clements called me, and I took my son, Joe [Joseph Porter], my youngest son, went to the rectory on 39th Street. He told me what it was about. [HM The Honorable] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan is under attack by the press, and I want a handful of us to come together and to give him sanctuary and advice. And there were eight people there. I thank my good friend, George Clements, he included--I was the only other minister there I think--was Al there? Might have been--he might have been. But I think, I, I think we were only one. Father Clements invited me there. Now why would George chose me? George--(unclear)--he knows my--see, I know his history, another tremendous, great, great person (unclear) struggle obviously, an obvious history maker, HistoryMaker too, you know. But I think it's just like that, where sitting in a room with Minister Farrakhan where I think either I had just rented the space to him that summer at the church, '82, eight--I'm not sure. It must have been about '84 [1984], something like that--'84--somewhere along that. But I think the minister always appreciated that. He came to some brothers outside of the Muslim Islamic community for some, some, some sanctuary, some counseling, and he asked Clements to pull together people that he felt were trustworthy enough. The same thing, I was part of the twenty, thirty people indirectly that sheltered [HM The Honorable] Bobby Rush when he was a [Black] Panther, and they were trying--[Edward] Hanrahan was trying to find him, allegedly to, to kill him too. It was alleged. And we hid him out basically to secret places to stay until the heat was off, until we were able to get Mr. Hanrahan off his, off his trail, lest we forget, I think there are people who have been with us, in our corner, and I've been blessed and fortunate to have been a part-- Story_ID: 512993 Speaker 1: I know when [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] was (unclear)--I remember when Haki was doing his poetry in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. He was living there or coming through there or something, 'cause I mean he was (unclear)--he was, he was a determined brother, you know what I mean. He was undaunted. That's what I think we have to have, that--he has that ultimate concern, Haki, undaunted concerned, and a decisional person, decision. That's why (unclear)-Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] (unclear)--(unclear)--decision to go back and get his master's [degree] and doctorate [degree]. And, and to do it in a way that, that you're still responsibly black, but that you can take care of life and some things, see, see what I'm saying, and, and not get caught in the trap and saying well, we can't do this because we're gonna have to interact with some Caucasians and that will, you know, block our path, not necessarily. In fact, my wife [June Carol McIntosh Porter] and I talking last night, this strange oxymoronic thing that we look at now is the juxtaposition that in some cases, depending on your situation, you might have to have a dedicated John Brown-type of fight friend who is serious in your corner in some cases, not saying, say that, that's, the case right down the line. It's not, not simplistic. I mean that's the way this thing is, but there are some people in positions have got in there, some who were African and African American, and who don't seem to care as much as we thought they would once aperture of freedom opened up based on your qualifications, more even playing field, and you giving some back. We ought to adopt what the Mormons do. The Mormons require all their young people to serve two years in a foreign field and that they give two years, or two or four years, back to the community, Mormon community, required. And why is Salt Lake City [Utah] so strong? Why are the Mormons so strong? That's requirement. You know, what you say about Jehovah Witness. I mean you may not agree with their theology. They have requirements that you do certain things, the minister school. So some of these groups that we wouldn't maybe be involved in, but they have some disciplinary requirements of behaviors, of expectations. Now where do the rest of us fit in who are just--the generalists out here? Story_ID: 512994 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently from what you've done so far? Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe not to--yeah, there may be one thing. I saw where I planned my life out, say ten, fifteen years after my master's [degree], I would get a doctorate [degree]. I'd be a little better position to do some things beyond just church and (unclear) with that (unclear). One thing I might do differently is--two things. I might do what my son is talking about he's doing now. I might, if--studied very strongly, economic empowerment, and I might have then formed a familial--family business. And I look at the capitalist, materialistic society, where if you're a decent person--as far as that, I'm not a (unclear) or capitalist or nothing. But I might have mastered economic and business development and formed a corporation, profit or not-for-profit, that would have provided constant, enough revenue--(unclear)--you know, we're okay, but enough revenue so that we had an endowment and some funds to be able to assist the movement that many of that is within and beyond the family even. I think the second thing I might, might have wanted to do--and may still do some of it, I might have sacrificed more and sent more of my children to some--they're sharp people now--to better schools and to (unclear). I might have pushed them--like my second daughter went to North Central [College] in Naperville, [Illinois]--(unclear) education. First she went to Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida], where my colleague--(unclear)--Dr. (unclear)--was the president. But Bethune-Cookman wasn't the school for her, you follow--where support wasn't there. She came back and spent a couple of years and finally went out to North Central Methodist--(unclear)--Methodist College out in Naperville [Illinois]. And that was a place for her, you know, about fifty, sixty, eighty, ninety, a hundred black students out there and two black professors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she found herself out there totally--lifelong friends, super-qualified, picked up all kind of skills (unclear). And I think if I had to do it again I would have probably sent--if a black school like Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] or like Hampton, or Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or one of those schools, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], were giving them the full ride, (unclear), I would have sent them there to one of those schools. (Unclear)--(unclear)--suffer through some finances. The ones that went there--one of the boys graduated and one didn't graduate from there. I look at it, and I probably sent a couple of them to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] or to North Central-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so they get the tools. Story_ID: 512995 Speaker 1: --The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a brother from Arkansas, raised in the back country, the bigfoot country, the dusty roads, a Southern black boy who became a serious black man, who became a serious African black man in America, who picked up the map of, of liberation in the [U.S.] Army in 1957 when he saw the black people stay off the bus (unclear) eighty-five days and never saw black people that united before or sense, and said to himself: whatever got in the bin, whatever juice got into those people in Montgomery [Alabama] in '55 [1955], I want some of that juice. I'd like to be remembered as a brother who sought some of that cultural, the spirited juice of the Africans in Diaspora, some of the greatness of the [Paul] Robesons, and [Martin Luther] Kings, and [W.E.B.] Du Bois, and John Henrik Clarkes, and the Martin Delaneys, and the Henry McNeal Turners, and the Edward Blydens, yes, indeed, [HM] Molefi [Kete] Asante [formerly, Arthur Lee Smith, Jr.] and the [HM] Jacob [H.] Carruthers [Jr.], yes, indeed, my friend and former student, and brother, [HM] Conrad [Walter Worrill], yes, Amiri Baraka [formerly, Le Roi Jones], yes, and Fannie Lou Hamer, yes, and Benjamin Mays, and yes, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and his wife, Coretta [Scott King], yes Medgar Evers and his widow [Myrlie Evers], yes, late Betty Shabazz, yes, yes, Lu [HM Lutrelle "Lu" F.] Palmer [II], and Georgia [ph.], and [HM] Vernon [Jarrett], yes, Jarrett, yes, the [HM] Tim[uel] Black, yes, the greatness of our people, yes, the great jazz, and blues, and rock, and the best of the hip hop, and the folk singing, and the spiritual, and gospel, yes, the best of our tradition, yes, those who touched, the [Reverend Dr.] Gardner Taylors, [HM Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wrights [Jr.], yes, yes, [Reverend Dr.] Johnny [Ray] Youngbloods, Jeremiah Wrights, yes, yes, yes, and my friend that went to valley--Village Church [ph.] in Houston [Texas], Kirbyjon Caldwell, yes, these blacks and some whites, the Steinkrauses [Dr. Warren Steinkraus], who's dead now, who taught me and opened up the doors, intellectually inquiry and or--organic intellectual study and serious spiritual study, theological study for me. Yes, yes, yes, I'd like to be remembered as the one who tapped into the mother lode of the black experience and became a real African black man that our people could depend on...