 Story_ID: 629675 Speaker 1: I'd like to have you start out by stating your name for us and spelling it. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I am Alma Johnson Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], A-L-M-A, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: October 27th, 1937. Speaker 1: Okay, and our location? Speaker 2: Our location, we are in my home in McLean, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 2nd, 2006. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the chairman of America's Promise - The Alliance for Youth [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 629676 Speaker 1: I'd like--we ask everyone sort of five People magazine-ish questions-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --just short answers. I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: I don't know that I have one. Let's say chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is green. Or no, my favorite color is yellow 'cause you can look around my house and see that. Speaker 1: That's true. And-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think spring and fall are my favorite times of year, the times of transition. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Home. Speaker 1: Okay, and favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Hold fast to that which is good. Story_ID: 629677 Speaker 1: So can you tell me on your mother's side? Speaker 2: My mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] was one of five children, born to George W. Bell and Elgetha Brand Bell. They, she was born in Kentucky, which was their native home. I don't know where my grandmother was born. My grandfather was born probably around Lebanon, Kentucky. I'm not sure of that either. They grew up there separately. My grandfather was born a slave. His wife, my grandmother, was born the year after slavery was abolished. Speaker 1: Can you give their names? Speaker 2: George Wesley Bell. People were named for ministers. And Wesley is for the great Methodist minister, George Wesley [sic.], so he was George Wesley Bell. Where my grandmother got the name Elgetha, I don't know, but she was Elgetha Brand. And sh-, her father--her mother was married several times during her, her, the time when she was a slave. When she married my grandmother's father, she had three children then, and then she had several children with him. And he died, and she married a man named Holly. She grew up. It's an interesting to imagine story. Her father, Mr. Holl- her stepfather, Mr. Holly, and another man bought a former slave owner's mansion, a house with, I think it said--I've got the thing somewhere--that had nine rooms. Every room had a fireplace, two-story porticos. How they came to do this, I don't know, except that as slavery ended, people could not maintain their property. And where they got the money to do this, I don't know. But these two men bought this house, and this was the house that she grew up in. The stepfather eventually bought out the other man's interest, and so it was his house. And to pay for it they took in roomers because the rooms were very large, and a family could live in them, and they were equipped for cooking and sleeping. And she says in her autobiography, can you imagine five people living in one room? Well, we know that more people than that could live in a room. Her family I think kept four of the rooms for their family. I don't know much about her growing up after that except that she entered school when she was eight years old. But she indicates that she had already been through the primer, that first reader, so that she had a head start. Who introduced her to reading, I don't know. Story_ID: 629678 Speaker 1: She [Powell's maternal grandmother, Elgetha Brand Bell] was a very good student. The classroom, there was, it was a one-room school with all of the children in that area going there, who were sent to school, who could afford it. The school cost a dollar a year. So people, everybody didn't have a dollar to send their children to school. The teacher asked the school board as it existed for help and was told that some of her older students could be her helpers, but they had to take a teaching certificate exam. So I think she took that when she was fourteen, and then she taught the younger children. The other person was a young man, and he taught the next level. And the original teacher taught the higher grades. And because she was teaching early in the day that meant she had to stay after school to recite her lessons and fulfill her educational requirements. How far she went there, I don't know. She tells the story in her autobiography of teaching her first school when she was fifteen. Someone came to their house. Evidently, the word had passed: "Maybe Ms. Holly's [Powell's maternal great-grandmother] daughter can read, or she can teach, but ask her mother," said, "We need a teacher in our community. Can your girl come?" And her mother said, "Yes." And so the next morning she was put on a train to go to--I don't know the community. It was not named. And she lived with a family. I think people paid for their school. Those who could afford it paid money, but a lot of it was in, in produce and whatever they had. She lived with that family. She slept in the attic of this house. And she talks about waking up to find snow on her bed and having to get up early in the morning and walk the several miles to the school building. Most of them were in abandoned churches, one room. And originally she had to build the fire until she found an older boy to come in early to bring in the wood and make a fire for when the other students came to the school 'cause they weren't all children. Most adults could not read and write. African American students went to school on a different schedule. They could only go to school in the wintertime because in the summertime they had to work in the fields. And so it was after the work was done in the fields and the harvest was done that they could go to school. And so the adults who wanted to learn to read and write and could afford something came, too. Everybody was very religious. She talks about going to the church, which was not close, but riding on the back of a horse with the lady whose, whose house she lived with. She was perched on the back of the horse while the lady rode the horse, and they went to church. In those days following the slavery time, most social life revolved around the church and the school. Story_ID: 629679 Speaker 1: Her account of her early years kind of ends there, and then she starts talking about my grandfather [George W. Bell]. I don't know anything about his early days. I have heard the story that he was a boy, six or seven, when slavery was abolished and that he was sitting on a fence and heard people shouting and telling the news. What happened in between there, I don't know. At some point, he heard about Berea College [Berea, Kentucky] up in the mountains of Kentucky. And he vowed that that's, he wanted to go there. Where his early learning came from, I don't know. He went to Louisville [Kentucky] to work and worked in hotels shining shoes, or as porters to raise money so that he could go to Berea College. Berea College had several levels of instruction. It started out with edu- instruction for people who had had no learning at all and went on up until it was college level. It took people a long time to finish college; that's why many of them didn't. It took him eleven years. He went to college when he was twenty years old, and he was thirty-one or thirty-two when he graduated. He went to Berea the same year my [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] started teaching her first school. He followed the work-study program of several months at school and then out into the communities. He taught the same way she did, in, in communities that wanted somebody to come in and teach school. I don't know the year. I have it documented somewhere, but he started his own school in the little community where they lived. Story_ID: 629680 Speaker 1: So, let's back up a little bit. His father and his uncle had established a small community, his uncle, Levi Carter [ph.], and Tom--his father was Tom Bell [ph.]; his brother was Jerry Bell [ph.]. They were the slaves of a man named Jim Bell [ph.]. When slavery was abolished Mr. Bell gave them several acres of land to start life. Land then, as now, indicates prosperity, and so people worked hard to acquire land, and so they worked and bought other parcels of land around. And the story goes that their former owner helped them to acquire this land. And so members of the family began to come and settle in this little area, and it became a community known as Belltown [Kentucky], which still exists today. It is--I have not been, but it used to be very isolated. My father [Robert Johnson] used to joke and say that if the war comes we're going to Belltown. Nobody will ever find you there, up in the hills and back in the woods. So he, at some point, began a school there. By that time he was also preaching. He'd become a Methodist minister so that the building was his church, but it was also the school. In 1999, my older daughter [Linda Powell] went and found that school. That building was still back in the woods, boarded up and dilapidated. She and a cousin that she had found on the Internet--she went on the Internet looking for people with knowledge of Belltown and found this cousin, Jane Bell [ph.], who at that time had a little shop. I don't know if it was in Louisville [Kentucky] or not, but she was her guide through there. They took the boards off the windows and crawled inside. And the pews were there, just benches, and, you know, very primitive, and the pulpit. And they were ecstatic that they had found this. They also found back there an old abandoned cemetery that had the gravestones. The one that was still legible was of an uncle of my [maternal] grandfather's [George W. Bell], Levi Carter, who had been a Confederate soldier. And his birth and death are etched in the stone that is almost obliterated. Speaker 2: Now, Levi Carter was a Confederate soldier, black or what-- Speaker 1: Black I think. Speaker 2: Black, okay. Speaker 1: There were blacks who fought in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what-- Speaker 1: --Confederate Army [Confederate States Army]. Speaker 2: Yes, and I, right, but that's not much known about. Speaker 1: No, it's not. And I don't know much about it except that that's the story that's told, and it's on his tombstone. Story_ID: 629681 Speaker 1: Back to George Wesley Bell [George W. Bell]. When he was not at Berea College [Berea, Kentucky], he was back in his community [Belltown, Kentucky] teaching and preaching and going out to other communities. You've heard about the circuit riders and so forth. Well, teachers were kind of the same way. They'd go from place to place, living with a family and teaching the people in the community. My [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell]--I don't know the date; I'd have to look at it and--something written down here--the year that she went to Berea. How she heard about it, I don't know. How a, a girl, a woman, went rather than her brothers, I don't know, because that was not--they didn't think women needed education for the most part, except in those communities it was understood that in order to get anywhere you've got to be educated. And I think that they probably nurtured and, and pushed forward those that they could recognize as being capable of learning and going and doing things. It was not--we all know of strong black women who ran communities and so forth. And there are not as many of them now as there used to be, but there certainly was always that sage person in a community who knew everything and who was responsible for mentoring those children who had possibilities. But the same time, they gave those who didn't a sense of self-worth, too. You have a job to do, too. So, perhaps there was somebody like that that said this girl needs to go to school when she could be a teacher; I don't know. She went to Berea and followed the same kind of schedule of going to school six months a year and then out going to teach. And indeed, after she met him there, he asked her if she would teach at the school when he was not there, so that while he was dividing his time off somewhere else, she was teaching in the school that he founded. And she boarded in a house next door to his parents, and so that's how the relationship developed. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask: was there a five year difference between (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, because she's fifteen-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, and he was twenty. Speaker 2: --and he, and he was twenty, okay. That's what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And she never referred to any, to him as anything but Mr. Bell; he was always Mr. Bell, never his first name. Don't know why that is so, but I think that was common, too. I don't know what he called her. Speaker 2: Do you know their attraction? Why they-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --they got together? Speaker 1: No, I don't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That, she doesn't write about that. You didn't talk about things like that. In, in writings it's documented when they got engaged. They were married I think in 1892. And the next day he went to take up the job as the principal of the first African American school [Middlesboro Colored School; Lincoln School] in a community called Middlesboro, Kentucky. Story_ID: 629682 Speaker 1: There were sev-, there were five other men that you've probably heard of who were in his [Powell's maternal grandfather, George W. Bell] class, one of whom was the great-grandfather [sic. grandfather, James Bond] of [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, and in, somewhere, I'll show it to you before--there is a listing of all of them and what they went out to do. In the history of Berea College [Berea, Kentucky] it talks about communities coming to Berea and say send us someone because we have to start a school for our colored people. And one by one they would go out to, and be sent away from Berea to go start schools, and many of them became ministers, too. The local preacher, teacher was an important man in the community. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask, religion, was it Methodist? Speaker 1: Methodist. Speaker 2: It was Methodist, okay. Speaker 1: How that came about, I don't know, because the school was Presbyterian, founded by the Presbyterian John Fee [John Gregg Fee]. His, his parents' owners are his--his, his father's [Tom Bell (ph.)] owner was a Presbyterian man. The Presbyterians came to the area because they were anti-slavery. They were abolition-, well, I don't know that they were abolitionists. They were anti-slavery and felt that all of these people needed an opportunity to become productive citizens. So I, all of that is hazy. It must be written down somewhere, what went on in those--well, upstairs I have a history of Berea College. It's probably addressed in there. Story_ID: 629683 Speaker 1: He [Powell's maternal grandfather, George W. Bell] went to the town of Middlesboro [Kentucky], which was a mining community, coal mines. Speaker 2: And this is shortly after he got married? Speaker 1: The day after. Speaker 2: The day after, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They got on the train, and they went to Middlesboro, where he began to establish the first school for colored children, as they were called then. I think--we have so many labels; I think that's what they were called then. And there is a book in existence that is the yearbook of, for that school that gives the history of that school, put together by its alumni and sent to me. I didn't know many of those things that are written down there, but it gives the history of, of the discussions that went on to form a school. There was not a school board yet but people in the community talking and getting together and saying this is what we need. I do know that the colored school was in a, an abandoned store, and it started with maybe thirty students. My [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] did not teach in the school, but she worked in the community, she did all of her life, you know, knowing people, helping them, telling 'em how to do things, helping raise their children, being sure they went to school. The history of Lincoln Normal [Middlesboro Colored School; Lincoln School, Middlesboro, Kentucky], as it, as the school was called finally, talks about him asking the school board for another teacher and when that person came and then when a, a permanent building was built. And the community itself, the, the African American community raised several thousand dollars among themselves to help build this school. As time went on, and of course, Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] was active in founding Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and educating people in how to make a living--we poo-poo that kind thing now--but teaching a trade and how you can go and be the best that you could be, but have a way to make a living. And so he began to do the same thing there. He--there's correspondence with him trying to raise the money to build a model home so that young women could learn housekeeping and all of that--and I have a picture of that building--and then buildings that would house classrooms for teaching trades like shoe repair and blacksmithing and things like that so that people had training. And the history of him, his, his crusades raised the money and get these things built is documented, and, and I have those papers. He also founded his second church there, and it was built quite near to the school, adjacent to the school. And so, this reached out into the community on all, all fronts. Story_ID: 629684 Speaker 1: I don't think grandma [Elgetha Brand Bell] did much teaching after she was married. She raised the children. They had five children. One died when, when he was a year old of scarlet fever I believe. But four children were born. My mother was one of them. All four of them went to college. All four of them became teachers. My mother was the youngest. Their oldest child was, I think it was Rosa Brand who--Rosa Holly [Rosa Brand Holly] who was, Rosalie [ph.] her name was, was their oldest daughter and then my uncle, George Crenshaw Bell. And the children are named for people that my grandfather knew at Berea [Berea College, Berea, Kentucky]. Crenshaw is for one of his classmates that, who went out to be a teacher, too. My aunt, my mother's closest sibling, was Vivian Fairchild because the president was Fairchild [Edward Henry Fairchild], so she was Vivian Fairchild Bell. Don't know who my mother is named for. She was the youngest, and she was Mildred Eliza [Mildred Bell Johnson]. I have a picture of Mildred Eliza and Vivian Fairchild sitting on the front porch of a dilapidated little house in Middlesboro [Kentucky], which is where they grew up. Rosalie, George and Vivian all went to college in Knoxville [Tennessee] at Knoxville College. My mother went to Kentucky State, which was Kentucky State College for Teachers [Kentucky Normal and Industrial Institute for Colored Persons; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] at the time. My mother's father, George Wesley Bell [George W. Bell], died before she finished college. He died I think in 1924. I'm not sure how. He had high blood pressure and had a stroke. By that time the older ones were grown. Rosalie had married a schoolteacher. His name was Bernis--Bernis Smith [Bernis Branner Smith], and they in turn started teaching around in different communities. Her children talk about being taken to school with her, didn't have babysitters, take 'em, sit in the classroom while she was teaching. She and her husband eventually moved back to Knoxville, where he started a newspaper, and I think she stopped teaching then. I'm not sure. But he had a newspaper called the Flashlight-Herald. You can still see that building and smell the printer's ink in it. But they lived there all the rest of their lives, and their three girls grew up there, my first cousins. All of them became teachers, too. My uncle and aunt, George Crenshaw Bell and Vivian Bell, went to Birmingham [Alabama] because they heard of new schools being started that needed teachers, and so they went there to work and worked in several schools. My grandmother by this time was doing nothing but taking care of my older, of her older daughter's children and feeling very much put upon. So her other son and daughter said, "Mama, if we buy a house, will you come?" And she said, "Yes." So together they bought a house, and my grandmother and my mother came to Birmingham. Unfortunately, the grandchildren did, too (laughter). They followed their grandmother, and she was still taking care of them. And I, of course, knew that house. Story_ID: 629685 Speaker 1: So let's go back to the history of Berea College [Berea, Kentucky] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --because it's an interesting history. Speaker 2: I don't have the dates in my head, but Berea College was founded to, by the Pres-, by a Presbyterian minister [John Gregg Fee] to educate the people of Appalachia, the poor whites who lived all up in the hills whose ancestry is mostly Scotch. And they came to the country to work in the mines, and they lived in the hills very isolated. You know, you've heard, well, the feud of the Hatfields and the McCoys were growing, was going on when my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] was growing up. It was real, and it existed between tribes of people. It's just like tribes anywhere who have differences over ownership of territory and people and all around. It's interesting how much there, the, the cul-, those cultures mirror other cultures across the world. I'm thinking, for example, the practice of bride stealing went on up there in the mountains, goes on today in Pakistan and in the hills of Afghanistan. In the areas in Pakistan outside of the, of the control of the government, there is a whole area called the tribal areas, and the government has no influence in there. And things are very, very primitive there where wife stealing, bride stealings, stonings, all that still goes on in the same kind of, of hills that existed down there in the hills in Kentucky. But anyway, Berea was founded to educate them and the children of freed slaves. That, that was not there in the beginning, but as slavery was abolished, they said these people need to be educated, too. And so Berea was an integrated institution dedicated to educating people who had not had the opportunity in the basics of education: reading, writing, arithmetic, how to live, how to manage property, how to have a skill. Many of the buildings at Berea were built by the students. The bricks were made by them, and the buildings were built by them. And those same buildings are standing there now and are occupied. Berea College today furnishes all the water and electricity for the surrounding area because that's where it originated. It was a town in itself with the main purpose of educating. It is a work-study school, so this lets people come who can't pay tuition. Today, a student goes to Berea, they're immediately assigned a job in one of the areas on the campus or in the county. You might work in the water plant or the electric. There's a, a very big handicraft industry preserving the crafts of Appalachia, and those are still taught. And then there is a hotel in the, on the campus that is run for tourists. It's run by students, all the aspects of it, and they, they're they, that's where they learn hotel management. There's a craft store in there that sells the crafts that are produced not only on the campus but still up in the mountains, weaving and quilts and woodwork and wooden toys, that kind of thing. Those are still available there, and people are still learning those skills. Story_ID: 629686 Speaker 1: Berea [Berea College, Berea, Kentucky] was integrated until 1904, when the State of Kentucky decreed that it is unlawful for people of different races to be educated together. And not only is it against the law, but you will be fined, but the students themselves will be fined. I have the paperwork that documents that law [Day Law of 1904] when it went into effect and then the act, the, the, the documentation of Berea College suing the State of Kentucky for the right to continue as they had been going and educating everybody together. They lost the suit, and they took it to the [U.S.] Supreme Court [as Berea College v. Kentucky, 1908]. But the Supreme Court ruled that nobody's civil rights had been abused by refusing to let them do that, I think maybe a Fourteenth Amendment issue. I don't remember, but there is the documentation of that argument before the Supreme Court. Speaker 2: So in 1904, when this, you know, is overturned, then what happens to the student body I guess at that point? Speaker 1: It became all-white. Speaker 2: Became all-white, I see. Speaker 1: It became all-white. Speaker 2: And was, and what happened to the black students at that point? Speaker 1: Well, they began to be taken care of by the historically black colleges [HBCUs]-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: --because those were in existence by then and, and before then. And so that was where they started to go for education. How they paid for it, I don't know. Story_ID: 629687 Speaker 1: Now were there any stories that came out of the integrated Berea College [Berea, Kentucky] that your [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] or your [maternal] grandfather [George W. Bell], okay, talked about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I saw for the first time last night; I maybe paid attention for the first time last night, a letter that was written by my grandmother the year she was ninety. Berea College was reaching out to her for her to talk about her--they invite-, invited her to an alumni something. And she wrote saying, "I don't think they knew what my race was, and why were they inviting me? And I told them this, and they insisted that no, indeed, they did. And this gentleman wanted to come and call on me. And I still did not trust him, but I said fine, I will receive you in my home. And he came to say we need your story, and we want you to be a part of the alumni at Berea." Of course, she was too old by then. She was in her last days by then. But she talks about that and thinking this must be some mistake. They cannot be reaching out to me, but indeed they were. And I don't have a copy of that, but in '56 [1956] or so, she wrote for the alumni magazine and had a poem published that she had written. And, and I think--I may be wrong, but I think then she was the oldest living graduate of that period. And she didn't actually graduate she says in her letter. She said, "I'm not really an alumnus. I, I was educated at Berea, but I did not graduate." And they said, "No, we still consider you a part of, of our alumni." Speaker 1: So that indicates also that there may have been a lot of--that must have been an abrupt break, that case-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: --and some bad feelings, or that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were some bad feelings. My aunt [Vivian Fairchild Bell] who did the, the family tree and who is the source of much of what I know about that time, she, she lived beyond her brother [George Crenshaw Bell] and her sister, and she's quite a character. She talks about going back and them wanting to talk to her about it. And she will say, "Well, of course, that was after we were no longer allowed here, and the state took care of that," and expressed her, her feelings about it. It, there were some, there was a lot of bad feeling about it, as it was in anything with the tensions that existed in that period of people, of whites trying to reclaim all control. Story_ID: 629688 Speaker 1: Bell, the slave old-, holder Bell [Jim Bell (ph.)], any other information about his background or why, or these two boys [Tom Bell (ph.) and Levi Carter (ph.)]? Speaker 2: We don't know. My daughter [Linda Powell] was researching this. She has--I don't have a picture of his house. I said, "Oh, we ought to go by it," but a picture of the house that he lived in. There was some question about why he went to get these two boys. Were they his children? But nobody knows; nobody knows what his attraction was and why he was so good to these two boys and, and being sure that they were moving forward and had a way to make a living in a place for their families. We don't know, maybe out of goodness of his heart but maybe some other connection. We don't know. Speaker 1: And the other, the thing that you told me that sort of surprised me was that hillbillies, basically, you know, were mainly Scottish descent? Speaker 2: A lot of them were Scottish. That's where you get those little accents that you hear, about. And, and, and down in, in Virginia there are those who say about and--I can't pronounce them, all those, but they're--it's the remnants of, of their dialects. Story_ID: 629689 Speaker 1: The other thing, just 'cause we, because we didn't say it, your, your, your [maternal] grandfather [George W. Bell] presented your [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] with a book (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know that my aunt [Vivian Fairchild Bell] that I talk about, in telling me about them, came forward with this book, which was literally in tatters. It had a, a leather cover that had disintegrated, and it is the works of Milton [John Milton]. And inscribed on the front page it says from George to Geaty [ph.], Christmas, 1988 [sic.]. And I thought, wow, the works of Milton, and this he's giving as a, as a gift to his intended, if you will. I don't know if they were engaged at the time. Maybe it was just a courtship gift. I don't know, but that was his gift to her, and it is one of my prized possessions. The inscription is fading. I, I doubt that there's any way to preserve it now, but it was very special to see that. Story_ID: 629690 Speaker 1: The other thing that always interests me, when you see people's writings from 1800s, early 1900s, their script is absolutely beautiful, no matter what the level of their education. And I don't know if that was the Palmer Method that was taught, but the handwriting is the same for anybody coming up through that period. But it is absolutely beautiful. Everybody wrote a beautiful hand, and I think they took pride in it. We can't write anymore at all. Speaker 2: Now talk about the Palmer Method. Speaker 1: That just rings a bell with me. I remember when I was starting to school. Actually, our notebooks that we learned to write in had on the cover of it the letters that you were supposed to trace to duplicate these letters. The person that taught me to write did not write that way, and I don't know where she learned. It was very square, almost like cuneiform writing. And that was the way we learned to write, which messed up everything entirely, because you tried to get away from and go to the slanting, so nobody can write. But that Palmer Method of writing was taught universally I think. Where it came from, I don't know. I'll have to go Google it and see. It, it never occurred to me. But the handwriting is the same. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: No matter who it is, no matter what race, no matter what country they come from, that style of penmanship is what's there, and it's very interesting. Story_ID: 629691 Speaker 1: Was there any other indication in this story on your, your mother's [Mildred Bell Johnson] side of the family of, of, of relationships between blacks and whites? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: None. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And then in Belltown [Kentucky] was all black? Speaker 2: All black, still is, and it's still a remote little country settlement. Speaker 1: And how, how many people or--? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, it's pretty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. But it was a black town formed by the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, and I think it would be stretching it to call it a town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a little community of houses-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --and a church. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's go to your father's side, and let's talk about that-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --because that's northern. It's a-- Speaker 2: That's northern (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's northern-- Speaker 2: --as opposed to southern. Speaker 1: --as opposed to southern. Speaker 2: My father's side, I don't know. Speaker 1: Give your father's name. Speaker 2: My father's name was Robert Charles Johnson. He was the son of Ernest Robert Johnson and Alma Smith, Alma Ethel Smith Johnson [Alma Smith Johnson]. Background on them, we don't know. My grandmother appears to be all white. She may be a mulatto. I don't know. She was a woman I remember well, very, very white with straight, straight hair and blue eyes. My grandfather had similar characteristics, but the African American in him you could see, in his nose more than anything else, but, again, with straight hair and, and different features. Now, as I say, we don't know where they came from. We have pictures of that grandmother with the family that she was raised in, but it is clearly an all-African American family. She knows no other family. Her, one of her brothers, the, the family that she grew up in, said that we never really knew. We just knew this white man would come to the house to talk to mama and papa. And they would go in the dining room and close the door and talk, and then he would go away. Whatever family she came from supported her. They gave that family money because they owned their house, too. How did they own their house? They owned this house in Elyria, Ohio. I've visited there as a, a very little girl. So what the story is there, we don't know, but she grew up in that family. Nobody talked about the education that they had, but they were obviously educated because she did teaching herself, not classroom teaching I don't think. Her husband, Ernest Johnson, was born I think in Oberlin, Ohio, a large family. He had no sisters; it was all boys. We think that that family is a product of a melding of freed slaves and indentured white servants from--there was a calling of indentured, former indentured servants in Pennsylvania, on the border with Pennsylvania and Ohio. And they intermarried with freed black slaves, so we think that that is the basis of that family. I saw a book once that talked about people in Oberlin, but that family was not mentioned at all. And it was a, it was a book about blacks in Oberlin, but that family is not mentioned, so I don't know their history. I don't even know where the two of them met. I think my grandmother was quite young. She may have been sixteen or so when they married. Story_ID: 629692 Speaker 1: My [paternal] grandfather [Ernest Robert Johnson] was a boat builder in Ohio. He was a skilled cabinet ba-, builder, really quite extraordinary. I don't know the year. We can figure it out from when my father [Robert Charles Johnson] was born. He was born in Lorain [Ohio]. What they were doing there, I don't know. They went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] to be a part of that college community. They, I think from stories that they told and that my father told of working of the farm, worked in teaching the vocational aspects to students 'cause my father talked about working on the farm. And my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] taught homemaking, and she was an accomplished seamstress. When I was a child she made every stitch I wore except my shoes and socks, much to my consternation. Everybody else would go get new clothes. We were going to the fabric store. But she was quite, quite a good seamstress. And so that was what they did there. My father grew up on the campus of Talladega College. He went from elementary school through college on that campus because schools then used to encompass all of that. Remember, blacks had to have somewhere to go to school, and so that's how schools were formed. There was another school like that that didn't have quite as--I don't its history, but I know it was there over in Marion, Alabama, where it was called Lincoln [Lincoln Normal School, Marion, Alabama], I think it was called Lincoln, too. And it was a boarding school for blacks to come in for, to learn. And it was church-related because in later years my parents used to run a summer camp at that place, at, at Lincoln. They stayed in Talladega [Alabama]. I don't know when they moved to Birmingham [Alabama]. It was after my father was an adult. He had graduated from Talladega, and he went to live and work in Tampa, Florida. I'm not sure what he did. My grandmother was a formidable woman. She did not tolerate people being out of her control, so she soon made him come home. Story_ID: 629693 Speaker 1: He came to Birmingham [Alabama]. He worked in the steel plant before he went into the school system. And he, he did not go in the school system as a teacher. I think he entered as a principal, and he was principal of a lot of schools. Speaker 2: This is your [paternal] grandfather [Ernest Robert Johnson]? Speaker 1: My father [Robert Charles Johnson]. Speaker 2: Your father? Speaker 1: My father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My mot-, his mother [Alma Smith Johnson] and father had moved to Birmingham. Speaker 2: To-- Speaker 1: What they did as work, they went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 1: --from Talladega [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Talladega to Birmingham. Speaker 1: --to Birmingham. I don't know what year. Speaker 2: You don't why, why, and you don't know-- Speaker 1: I don't know why. Speaker 2: --what precipitated that. Speaker 1: No, unless it was the jobs that they went to. Birmingham was an industrial town with-- Speaker 2: Do you know what town--what, what year that might have been that they moved? Speaker 1: Unh-uh, I'd have to figure out from my father's birth date when he would have been twenty years old. Speaker 2: Okay he was born--wait a minute--(unclear) doesn't say date-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I have birth, oh, I'm s-- Speaker 1: I wrote it in later 'cause I had got the information-- Speaker 2: In eleven, '03 [1903]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, 1903 he was born. Speaker 2: --nineteen o'three [1903]. Speaker 1: So probably about 1920-- Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty [1920]. Speaker 1: --or so. Speaker 2: They worked, they went-- Speaker 1: They went to Birmingham. Speaker 2: --they went to Birmingham, okay. Speaker 1: Birmingham was an industrial city, steel mills. Speaker 2: So growing. Speaker 1: It was growing. It was just beginning to, to pick up steam. And that's a whole 'nother story. The steel mills were there, the coal mines that, that were there, iron smelting, because in the mountains there, there was a, there was the iron ore. The, the soil is very red. And in fact, the mountain that has (unclear) on top of it is called Red Mountain, and it had a strong vein of ore running through it. And so that was why it was formed, the town was formed. And people who worked in the mills lived in company villages. The company built little, little two, three-room houses. You remember Tennessee Ernie Ford's song ['Sixteen Tons'], "I owe my soul to the company store." Everything was bought at the company store on the basis of what your--they usually didn't collect any money. They went to the store for their supplies, and then their, their salaries were docked. My grandmother and grandfather worked in those communities, my grandfather as some kind of teacher but also providing the recreation for the men. And my grandmother worked teaching the women about budgeting and running a household and how to shop and all of that. Speaker 2: Now is this in Talladega or also-- Speaker 1: No, that's in Birmingham. Speaker 2: This is in Birmingham they were doing, but they didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They did, that's what they were doing-- Speaker 2: They did it in Tallade-- Speaker 1: --in Talladega. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They did the same thing in the villages surrounding--there was one, I remember 'cause I was there, was run by Tennessee Coal and Iron [Tennessee Coal and Iron Company], TCI, and it was their village that they worked in. And they did that until the beginning of World War II [WWII]. Story_ID: 629694 Speaker 1: In World War II [WWII], part of the time they were still out at the village [run by Tennessee Coal and Iron Company on the outskirts of Birmingham, Alabama]. But at some point a change was made, and my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] became a social worker for Red Cross [American Red Cross]. She handled veterans, and it was in the, in the Service to Armed Forces [Services to the Armed Forces] branch, and she was a caseworker. People would come in for help, and she would decide what they were gonna get and, and all of that. I can remember the telephone ringing in the middle of the night and people--there was one man who was forever coming around. I remember his name was Grover [ph.]. And I could hear her on the phone saying Grover, "I just gave you money. What did you do with that?" But, you know, was always coming to look for Ms. Alma. I need such and such thing. People would come and ring the doorbell looking for her to get help. Papa [Ernest Robert Johnson] by then was teaching woodworking to returning veterans, and that's what he did for the rest of his working life. He taught mostly at night in the, in the schools that were formed for veterans returning. Story_ID: 629695 Speaker 1: We were very fortunate. We had a car. We had, we owned our house. My father talks about buying that house for $10,000. I think his payments were something like $25 a month. And it was quite a nice house. It was a big white house with pillars on the front porch and, and about fourteen rooms in it. And I--and in that community [in Birmingham, Alabama], all of those were houses that had been owned by whites before who had moved on. But it was a very settled, middle class community. Speaker 2: Now how did your parents meet? Speaker 1: At church. My father was friendly with my uncle. They had met through the school systems. And by this time everybody, except my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson]--she always stayed at the Methodist church, but the rest of them joined the Congregational church. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And churches had socials for people to meet, probably call it a singles, singles party. What did they used to call 'em in college? Mixers. But one of the things that--young women would prepare a picnic lunch or a supper, and then they were auctioned off. And men would bid on them so that they could have dinner with the person who had prepared the basket. And that's the way they met. And he would go to visit. He was going to see my mother, but my uncle always thought he (laughter) was coming to see him. And my [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] tell the story that she called him out of the room one night and said, "Crenshaw [George Crenshaw Bell], come here. You, you shouldn't stay in there. He came to see Mildred [Mildred Bell Johnson]." He said, "He did not." She said, "Yes, he did. He did not come to see you." And Uncle George stormed into the room and said, "Bob [Robert Charles Johnson], you didn't come to see her, did you? You came to see me." And he said, "No, I came to see her." So that was their--I don't know how long they courted. They were married in 1936. And he lived with his mother and father [Ernest Robert Johnson], and we lived with my grandparents until they died. Story_ID: 629696 Speaker 1: Now they were married in 1936. How old were they when they were married? Speaker 2: She was twenty-nine or thirty years old. Speaker 1: That's right. So they were older (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I was born when she was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: People didn't get married-- Speaker 1: See-- Speaker 2: People who were working-- Speaker 1: Did not get married. Speaker 2: --didn't get married. And women who were schoolteachers didn't get married 'cause you couldn't stay in the school system if you were married. If you were married you had to leave. I don't know if it was 'cause you were taking a job away from somebody who needed it. Pregnant women were never seen by children. That was a bad example. So, you definitely weren't going around there then. It meant sex existed. So, when women married they went out of the workforce. My mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] was not going to do that. She had two children, me and my sister [Barbara Johnson Greene]. We are three years apart. And she was bored out of her mind. She was keeping house. Everybody else was working. And she said they would come home, and they--and she would say, "I'm tired." And they'd say, "What are you tired for? You do, you've been home all day." And she thought, they don't know what it takes to keep a house clean and two children and have the dinner on the table when everybody comes home. So, she decided she wasn't going to do that. She talked to the--there was an organization called the federation of women's clubs [Alabama Federation of Colored Women's Clubs]. And it was all the black clubs, and they, I guess the officers of them all belonged to one called women's federation. So she talked them into buying an old house. It was a magnificent old house right next door to the hospital where I was born, which was nothing more than a little white wooden house. And she started the first licensed daycare center in the State of Alabama. Story_ID: 629697 Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] decided she was not gonna stay at home. And so she started this daycare center because everybody worked. Everybody had to work. I laughed when the women's lib [women's liberation] movement came along and they, women were fighting for the right to work. I said black women have always worked. In fact, you were liberated when you didn't have to. When you were a person who could stay at home and live in the manner that you liked to, that was your liberation, not going out into the workforce. My friend Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton], who I've known most of my life says, "Your mother was my idol." She put on a suit, and she had an office. But that came after the daycare center. She ran the daycare center maybe five years. In the course of that time, she also started the first Girl Scout troop for black girls. And it began with young women in the neighborhood who she'd see out there doing nothing. And so she started a Girl Scout troop. Meantime, the powers that be in Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] said, well, maybe we need to start this program among--we were Negroes by then--Negro girls, and so she was hired as--she was sent to New York [New York] for training, the national office for training in being a Girl Scout executive, how to run a camp, all of that kind of stuff. And she came back to Birmingham [Alabama], and she had an office in the Red Cross [American Red Cross] building, where the Girl Scout offices were. And she became--what was her title--field director, and it was to develop troops all over the county [Jefferson County, Alabama]. And so that began her going out to many schools and places after school. My father [Robert Charles Johnson] would get through with school in the afternoon and go pick her up. And the afternoon would be spent going from one school to another, getting women in the neighborhood, training them, doing training sessions, and setting up Girl Scout troops throughout the county. Speaker 1: But this is amazing because you said your, your mother didn't drive-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --right? So your, they really worked in a partnership-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right? Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used to say with Girl Scouts, when somebody's involved everybody in the family was, too. My father was a Girl Scout, too. Speaker 1: Now, this was--I'd like to go back a little bit. So, this, we're in the 19-- Speaker 2: You're in the 1940s. Speaker 1: --forties [1940s], okay, in Birmingham. Story_ID: 629698 Speaker 1: You were born, you in thirty-- Speaker 2: Seven [1937], um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) seven [1937]. Tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up. Speaker 2: The very first memory I have--I don't have any before then--is standing on the edge of my sister's [Barbara Johnson Greene] bassinet when she was born and looking at her, and she had blue, blue eyes. There was always, and we never overcame it, a sibling rivalry. My, my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] said I never referred to her as my sister; it was that's my mother's baby (laughter), and that was it (laughter). I was the little pampered princess. My grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson], my father's [Robert Charles Johnson] mother, worshipped us, but she was very, very strict, controlling--my poor mother, living in that house, never had anything to call her own. She talks about having bought a set, set of mixing bowls. These were hers, and they were brand new, and they were sitting on the counter. And my grandmother came and said, "Ah, I need a wedding present. Give me those bowls," and off she went. She talked about putting on layaway for me and my sister--this was very popular then--little white bunny fur coats and hats and paying on them a little bit at a time until she got them out. My grandmother took one look at 'em and said, "That's an extravagance," and took them back to the store. Nobody ever crossed her. My mother was a very patient lady. She got along with her very well, but I cannot imagine that tension. Story_ID: 629699 Speaker 1: Now this is your grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] on your-- Speaker 2: Father's [Robert Charles Johnson] side (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) father's side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. She said she wanted not-, my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] said she wanted nothing more--the housing project was brand new then. These little brick bungalows all down there. She said, "I wanted one of those little houses so much, but we couldn't afford it." And I think that probably if they could have, my grandmother wouldn't have allowed it. She--I remember when I had graduated from college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and I had gone to Boston [Massachusetts] to live and had my own apartment, and one of my cousins coming to visit and saying, "Your Grandmother Johnson was alive, you never would have been here." I said, "That's right," I never would have left home. She was a domineering woman. She domineered her husband [Ernest Robert Johnson]; she domineered her son. She was a strong, strong woman. My father was so attached to her. And that must have been a strain, too. I can remember when she died, he would not allow her body to leave the house. He called the funeral home and said, "Come out here, but do not bring the meat wagon." They embalmed her there. She stayed in that house until the body left to go to the church for the service and the cemetery. And I can see my father sobbing and just so distraught at them taking his mother out of the house. That was so upsetting to me. I was ten years old then. He was, he was so very close to his mother. I don't know how she approved of my mother, but I guess she did. And they lived together until she died and then my grandfather many years later. Speaker 1: Oh, he lived, he lived much longer? Speaker 2: Um-hm, he did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but he-- Speaker 2: My grandmother died when she was, she was a young woman. She was sixty-two, sixty-three years old. She had a very severe heart condition. Speaker 1: So your mother, that allowed her some freedom after you were ten? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --that gave us--well, working was definitely-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --freedom for her. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: That got her out of there and-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and moving. And then those salaries allowed them to hire a housekeeper and somebody to be there with my grandmother as her health declined and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and to keep the hou-, it allowed them to have a housekeeper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother didn't have to do that anymore. Story_ID: 629700 Speaker 1: But I remember as a very young child I started cooking dinner when I was about eight years old because everybody worked. And when you came home from school you had to wash the breakfast dishes and start dinner because people didn't come home from work until 6:30 or seven [o'clock]. That was my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson], my father [Robert Charles Johnson], my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson], my [paternal] grandfather [Ernest Robert Johnson]; they didn't come in until, 'til after six [o'clock], so that was your job, helped you learn a lot. But she--back to her career--she went to work for Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and became a Girl Scout professional and was quite successful at organizing troops and then having established camp--remember that well, too. There was an African American woman--I don't know why she had it--Ms. Pauline Fletcher. She had a camp out in the country--it's not as far out of town as it was then--with quite, quite a series of structures on the property. I don't know; there may have been four large huts that would accommodate ten or fifteen beds. There was a big dining hall at the top of the hill, really big, big kitchen, the pump outside for the water. And most groups use this. Church groups use the camps, Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. My mother had worked there with my--my grandmother, my father's mother, also worked with white teens. And so my mother worked with her in that, and so they would use that camp. I told people I went to camp long before I ever wanted to. I think I started going to camp about six months old, and that was what you were doing the summertime. If it was summertime, you were out at Camp Fletcher [Camp Pauline Bray Fletcher, Bessemer, Alabama]. There was a creek, and that was where you learned to swim. And people would come from other states there, too, because here was an established facility with a director. Ms. Fletcher lived down in a house on road, and there was a caretaker who had a house. But when my mother became Girl Scout director, that was where the Girl Scouts went to camp until she got the, 'til the council had enough money I guess. They bought a property outside the city limits on the other side of town where we eventually went to live. That became the Girl Scout camp, and then she developed her own camp [Camp Bessie McDowell, Marion, Alabama] with its raising the money for their series of buildings and so forth. Story_ID: 629701 Speaker 1: Now let me ask a little bit about the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and your mother [Mildred Bell Johnson]. So you're saying the camp [Camp Bessie McDowell, Marion, Alabama] that she established, was it a black only camp? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. But then it got integrated in? That's-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was looking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It never got integrated. Speaker 1: It never got integrated, okay. Speaker 2: When it, when integration came along and it got integrated, the black camps didn't exist anymore. They didn't use the facility anymore. She had a relationship with other communities outside the state because I can remember going to camp outside of Atlanta [Georgia]. And I don't know how many girls went, but she was helping direct that camp there. And that director's name was--she was a beautiful woman. I don't remember what happened to her. Her name was Phyllis Dews, and she was head of Girl Scouts in Atlanta. And so they worked together and then sometimes would have that combined camp. And it was a wonderful experience. At the one in Atlanta, we didn't live in huts. We lived in tents. But you learned all those things, how to set up a tent. It was great survival training. My mother was, she loved the out of doors. Her idea of vacation was to go camping, which none of us liked. Our vacations were usually spent in the Smoky Mountains' [Great Smoky Mountains] parks. Because they were national parks, they were integrated. It's the only place you could go, and so we would go to the Smokies in the summertime. I don't think we had tents. We just slept out on the, on the ground, but that was vacation. And I have a picture upstairs. It was, it was where people went for their recreation generally. There's a picture upstairs of my [maternal] grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell] holding me as an infant, and my mother's sister, Rosalie [ph.], and my mother sitting on a wall in the Great Smokies. So, if you had a vacation spot that was it. Usually, summertime you went, you spent driving around to visit relatives. We went to Ohio to my paternal grandmother's [Alma Smith Johnson] house. And I don't know how they knew them, but I know that all along the way I can remember stopping at people's houses to spend the night 'cause it was too long a drive. And so there were people along the way that they knew, and there were people who lived very modestly because I remember a lot of wells. That, that sticks in my mind as--and I was under five then, probably under four. Speaker 1: When you have these memories? Speaker 2: When I have these memories, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, of the, of the, of the-- Speaker 2: Of the, of the-- Speaker 1: --of the trips? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 629702 Speaker 1: Give me your sister's name? Speaker 2: Barbara Rose Johnson [Barbara Johnson Greene]. Speaker 1: And you were--and so that memory of her--how old were you? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: Three, okay. Speaker 2: That's my--I, I can still see that baby's face. I don't remember much after that. I remember, (laughter) I have another memory of peeping through the crack in the bathroom door. She had a great imagination. She was probably very lonely because I didn't play with her. So (laughter), she was in there playing and talking away to the, whatever she had in the bathtub with her. But she always carried on conversations. She loved to play school. She hated to go to school, but she loved to play school. She would have the dolls sitting up on the steps, and she was always teaching and talking back and forth. And I can remember peeping through there at her and going telling my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson], that girl's crazy. She's in there talking to herself (laughter). I was not nice to my sister. Speaker 1: So you were, you were jealous of her like--was it because-- Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know how--you were used to being the on-, only child. Speaker 2: I think I wanted to be the only child. Speaker 1: Child. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I was the oldest, and I remember they said you know, I went, I went back in the crib, you know, when my sister came. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 629703 Speaker 1: Can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up [in Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: I just had a brief smell of the pantry between our kitchen and our dining room. There were great cupboards that lined it that had canned goods in it because you canned at the end of summer. And what I remember, I can remember smell. I don't think I liked to eat it. But one of the things that they canned or put up for winter was squirrel. Yeah, this was a war [World War II, WWII]. There was no meat. And men went hunting. My father [Robert Charles Johnson] didn't. People whom he knew brought us squirrel and rabbit, and that was--I can see those pots on the stove. And they were stewed and put into big jars, and then they were all on these shelves. I still do canning today because that brings back that memory for me. In our kitchen--was a big kitchen, probably as big as this room, if not maybe a little bit bigger--there was an old iron stove that in wintertime was always going. There was a gas stove on the other wall, but what I remember most are the pots on this iron stove. And it was before the days of central heat, so in the morning when you got up you went to the kitchen. And our clothes were put in the oven so that they would be warm for you to put on. And there was usually oatmeal on the stove, what you had for breakfast. And the other thing that you always got was cod liver oil, nastiest stuff in creation, but that was part of the morning ritual. And in the springtime you had sassafras tea to get your system ready for the change of weather. That's what I remember. Speaker 1: And you said also before that you remember that the sound of em-, I mean the smell of embalming fluid. Speaker 2: That was on the back porch. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was also on that back porch, the embalming fluid, there was a shelf along one wall with big jugs like this. They were not clear. They were kind of milky. I don't know what was in 'em, but that was on a shelf. You didn't go near that. But this back porch was enclosed. It wasn't open. It was also where the washing was done. And there was a big bench that had tin tubs on it. But we were very hotsy-totsy. We also had also had a washing machine, one that had a ringer, and I can remember my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] putting the clothes through. And the thrill of wash day, if it was summertime, was that the rinse water, you could take the tub outside and you could play in it. That was your swimming pool, and you could run and jump in the, in the water. There were three tubs. One had the soap and hot water in, and the water came in in a hosepipe. There was no water on the back porch. I don't know, I don't know where the hot water came; I guess from the kitchen. There was the soapy water tub, the rinse tub, and the bluing tub. Speaker 1: The bluing tub? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now what is a bluing tub (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bluing would whiten clothes. In fact, in some-- Speaker 1: It was bleach? Speaker 2: It's not bleach. It's bluing, and it's still sold in--you can every now and then see it in a catalog that has country stuff in it. People used t- it, it whitened things. People with white hair used to put it on their hair. But you put the clothes in there after the rinse. The Clorox or the bleach went in with the soap and water, but the bluing was the last step. Eventually, maybe by the time--no, that was much later. I was out of college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. No, no, I wasn't, high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. They finished off that, well we no longer had tin tubs to watch in--wash in--when it was the days of automatic washers and dryers. By then my [paternal] grandfather [Ernest Robert Johnson] was retired, and he, and we had a television set. We didn't get a television set 'til I was thirteen. But he watched television all day, and so he'd buy whatever he saw, so Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] washer and dryer. Betty Furness used to advertise. And we came home one day, and there was a Westinghouse washer/dryer in what had been the pantry. And so then the tubs and things went away on the back porch. And it was enclosed, and linoleum put on the floor, and furniture bought, and it was a sitting room off the kitchen. Story_ID: 629704 Speaker 1: Now what--you've covered smells and s-- Speaker 2: One other thing that I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and sights, but you didn't cover sounds, but go on. Speaker 2: The sound that I remember most is the train at the foot of the, a block down the street [in Birmingham, Alabama]. You would hear the freight train at night. And I did not sleep well as a child. I don't know why. I was, I was afraid. Of what, I don't know. But I would hear the train on the tracks down there. And the other thing that scared me to death until I was an adult I think was the sound of a siren. You could hear it way in the distance, and that was a very frightening sound for me, don't know why. It had no, no connection. Also, the other prominent memory was the day Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was bombed. And I am upstairs coming out of my bedroom, and my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] is on the telephone. Someone has called to tell her that. And I can remember the look of horror on her face and her saying what is going to happen to us. And then the air raids, air raid practices, drills, they were done I think at least once a week. And everybody had very heavy curtains to cover the windows, heavy drapes be-, and my mother would even put a blanket over the radio. The radio had a little dial in it like that with a light, but a blanket would go over that. The idea was that no shred of light is supposed to be able to be seen from the air. And so the siren would blow to signal an air raid warning, and you'd go around and close things, and cover up all the lights. And (laughter) remember me talking about the Barbadian who lived down the street? His name was Reverend Hawkins [ph.], and he was the air raid warden. And his job was to go up and down the street to be sure there was no light seen. And I can remember his accent 'cause he went around to say, "Oh no, there's a light I see over there." But he walked--I don't know what area he covered but on our street at least--to check that no lights were seen. And I don't know how long it lasted. After a while it was--all clear was sounded. Speaker 1: Now there weren't a lot--he was from, he, Barba-, from Barbados? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: But that was not typical to have-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). I, he was the only person I knew. And how he came to Birmingham [Alabama], I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't know, okay. Speaker 2: He had two daughters who were schoolteachers, and I don't know what he did for a living. Story_ID: 629705 Speaker 1: This street, what was the name of the street, or do you remember the exact address (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was 11th Avenue in a community called Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama]. It was a hilly area. White people lived in several different com-, areas around Birmingham [Alabama], the Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama] area, which is where the high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] was that my father [Robert Charles Johnson] eventually became principal of, and that's where the housing project was, big, big housing project that stretched for five or six blocks, built I guess around the end of the war [World War II, WWII]. I'm not sure when that housing project was--it couldn't have been because my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] talked about wanting to live there. I don't know when it was built. They lived in Smithfield. We lived on Enon Ridge, and this was where the people with property lived. Speaker 1: On Enon Ridge? Speaker 2: On Enon Ridge. Speaker 1: On, now how, how, how many blocks was Enon Ridge? Was it a-- Speaker 2: Oh, it covered maybe five blocks from west to east and about eight blocks up the hill and over, covered a lot of territory. And that's where the professional people lived-- Speaker 1: So who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the doctors, the dentists, the schoolteachers. Speaker 1: So do-- Story_ID: 629706 Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your neighbors' names? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give them? Speaker 2: Um-hm, across the street from us were the Hudsons. And Mr. Hudson [B.H. Hudson] had had a bank downtown. It was called the Penny Savings Bank [Alabama Penny Savings Bank, Birmingham, Alabama]. His son and daughter both were teachers. His daughter, Pauline [Pauline Hudson], taught at the high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] when I was there. His son, Burt [B.H. Hudson, Jr.], was an older man when I was a child. He was either a school principal--I think he was principal of a school. Up the street was Sam Sullivan [ph.], who also was principal of a school. Across the street from me were the Pruitts [ph.], and she was a teacher, and he did, he repaired radios. Next door was Mrs. Anderson [ph.], and she had a candy kitchen in the back of the house that sold candy to all the stores in the Birmingham [Alabama] area. She made peppermints, peppermint sticks, and peanut brittle. The smells, that's another smell because you could smell them when they were cooking. And it was kind of a public activity all the time because trucks were coming and going to take the candy out to stores. How she started that, I don't know. Next door to us were the Davis' [ph.], and the father of that family was dead. It was just the matriarchs, Aunt Mary Lee [ph.] and her sister, Aunt Sue [ph.]. I don't know what Sue's last name was. She had been married. And their daughter, her daughters were teachers too. She and her sister ran a restaurant downtown called the Fraternal Cafe [Birmingham, Alabama]. It was thrilling for me to be allowed to go to the cafe. I didn't, wasn't allowed to go very much 'cause the, considered a bad area down there on 4th Avenue. It's where all the black people hung out, and so little girls weren't supposed to go down there. And sometimes at night I would be let to go when they were going to close the restaurant. And it was great fun to be in this restaurant and smell the smells in there. And it was all--the smell I remember was cabbage. It must have had something else, but I do remember that and the cornbread and so forth. Story_ID: 629707 Speaker 1: And so we'd go by her [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] house, and the streetcar was down there, shared the same tracks that the train did. And we'd get on the streetcar there, and at the next stop we picked up two other children whose parents wanted them to go to school, too. One of 'em had an aunt that taught at the school. I had a cousin by that time who was teaching there, teaching first grade, and we'd ride the streetcar. It was a great adventure. We'd save rocks to throw out the window when you went over the trestle that forded a little stream. And then we would have to get off and walk a long way, not on sidewalks. I can remember meeting the man who was taking cows out to the field. I never knew what his name was. We called him Butterbean [ph.], but he, you always met him driving a few cows to a field somewhere, and we walked on to South Pratt [South Pratt School, Birmingham, Alabama], which was really an excellent school. There were two--there were six teachers. I went through it pretty rapidly. I stayed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 1: --in the first grade two or three months. Speaker 2: Wait, I want--there were six teachers in the whole school? Speaker 1: Whole school, that was it. Speaker 2: So how many students in the whole school you think? Speaker 1: I don't know. Not--there couldn't have been more than fifty. Speaker 2: And it went from what grade to what grade? Speaker 1: First to fourth. Speaker 2: First to fourth. Oh that's interest-- Speaker 1: And then you had to change schools. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that. That's an interesting division. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Wait-- Speaker 1: I don't know why. Speaker 2: --first to fourth and then-- Speaker 1: First to fourth and then you had to change. The children there went to a school called Council [Ensley Council School], which was in Ensley, Alabama [Ensley, Birmingham, Alabama]. I did not. I went to Lincoln School [Birmingham, Alabama] where my father [Robert Charles Johnson] by then was the principal. Speaker 2: I see, okay, okay. Speaker 1: And I walked there. It was, it was a good little walk, too. Speaker 2: Okay, so first to fourth, that was the name of the school? Speaker 1: The name of the school was South Pratt. Speaker 2: South Pratt, and how long did it take you to get there? Speaker 1: Maybe forty-five minutes. Speaker 2: Each way? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, so were you going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We left home about seven o'clock in the morning and walked down and got on the streetcar, and got to Pratt City [Birmingham, Alabama], and would get off and walk to the school. Later on when I start taking music, I would get off the streetcar in Pratt City and walk to my music teacher's house. I don't know how I got home from there because I sure would have been by myself, and I don't--they wouldn't have let me do that. But I do remember I hated it, going to Ms.--I don't remember her name. I can see her now, and I can smell her piano. But South Pratt School went from first to fourth grade. Story_ID: 629708 Speaker 1: Tell me about your experience there [South Pratt School, Birmingham, Alabama]. I mean what kind of student were you and--? Speaker 2: I was a very good student. I was much more advanced than the children in my classroom. So I only stayed in four--first grade maybe four months. And then they said, "No, we can't, she, we, we can't teach her and teach these, too 'cause she already knows this." Scho-, the classes were just divided in the first junior and first senior, so the upper half and the lower half, so and each one occupied a semester. So I was in first junior maybe three or four months, and they moved me into first senior where we worked more on that handwriting that became very square. Ms. McCaw [Effie J. McCaw], who was the principal, taught that one. Didn't have enough to do, and it was time for promotion, so then I went to the second grade. I don't think I'm six yet. I stayed in the first half of second grade several months. Well, second grade was all in one room. I simply moved to the other side of the room to, so that I could have their instruction. I went from the first through the fourth grade in less than two years. I was ten years old in the seventh grade because there were no gifted and talented programs. There were no special instruction things for students who were more advanced, and so the solution was to promote 'em or skip. It was called-- Speaker 1: First-- Speaker 2: --skipping. Speaker 1: Skipping. Speaker 2: My friend Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] went right along with me 'cause nobody ever separated us. Speaker 1: So she skipped along with you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. She, she shouldn't have, but she did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hers didn't catch up with her until we got to college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: I see. You meant the fact that she had been promoted. Speaker 2: And didn't really-- Speaker 1: She wasn't understanding as much. Speaker 2: She, she was not as advanced. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 629709 Speaker 1: How did the two of you--you say that friendship goes back to your being two. Can you tell us about--because when you were describing your neighbors you didn't really describe-- Speaker 2: Okay, they didn't live on the same street. We lived on this street, this Italian grocery store right here, and then there's a hill that goes down the hill to where the gro-, the railroad tracks were. She lived on that street. My very controlling [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] collected people like nobody's business. She always had somebody whose life she was running. And there was a woman from Talladega [Alabama] who was a little balmy. Speaker 1: When you say a little balmy-- Speaker 2: She, she may have had Alzheimer's and we didn't know it then, but Ms. Alberta [ph.] would just show up. She would maybe have on a house dress and her bedroom slippers, and she'd gotten on the bus and come to Birmingham [Alabama] and walked to our house. And then she'd stay there for a while until my grandmother took her home. I do not know where Ms. Alberta came from, but she would take me for walks. And the big excitement of the day was the City of Miami [Florida] coming through down on the, on the train track. It was the first diesel engine, and I can see that it was all painted orange on the front, and it had a, you know, a horn rather than when you would hear it blowing and here it would come. She would walk me down the hill to see the train. And we passed Yvonne's [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] house, and she was out front with her grandmother, and that's the way we met. Speaker 1: Wow, so you're, you're two at that point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, so she--how, what was the ba-, so then are the--so, the woman who was-- Speaker 2: Balmy. Speaker 1: --balmy-- Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] then went to, to meet her mother to see who-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --this was, where her child was going, so we would have play dates. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We would go back and forth to each other's house to play. And if we would, the entertainment on Sunday was going for a ride, she might go with us. And then when I was old enough I was allowed to walk down to her, her house and she to mine. Speaker 1: Now did she have brothers or sisters? Speaker 2: She was an only child. Speaker 1: Oh, she was an only child. Speaker 2: Her mother was an only child. She is faced right now with tearing down her mother's house. And she--that street is all deserted. Nobody lives there anymore. Our house was taken by the freeway the year Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and I got married, and so that whole street does not exist. But her mother's house was still there, and she, she does not want to tear it down. Her mother was born next door in her aunt's house. This house is over a hundred years old. Of course it's falling apart. Her mother in her later years developed Alzheimer's. But Yvonne would have to put her in the car every morning and drive her to her house, and she would stay there all day. She had a caretaker for her. But she was not happy if she was not in her house. So then she died and the house is there, but it needs to go. But that was a long-term thing. I think, I think Mrs. Echols' mother had been married in the house right next door. So, it's, it's an old community. Story_ID: 629710 Speaker 1: Let me understand what you're like as a young person. Are you precocious? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Are you--you said you were the little princess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I think you described yourself. So, who, who, who is this young person, and what does she, what's influencing her, and what did she think about? Speaker 2: You know, I always knew that Birmingham [Alabama] was not where I was supposed to be. I never felt at home there. From my earliest remembrance, I gotta go; I don't live here. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And so I was alway-, I always felt like a stranger there. I always was looking forward to the outside world that I read about 'cause I read all the time. I read everything I could put my hands on. When I was at my grandmother's [Elgetha Brand Bell] house, my mother's mother, my uncle [George Crenshaw Bell] slept in the back in what was called the sleeping porch. And there were bookcases all around the room filled with books and hundreds and hundreds of National Geographics. I would spend hours back there on his bed--I can smell the smell of the room; he smoked Camel cigarettes--looking at these pictures. I can remember seeing the pictures of pygmies. It was the first place I read the 'Wizard of Oz' ['The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,' L. Frank Baum]. Those must have been the original books 'cause they had all of them by Baum [L. Frank Baum]. And the drawings were so fanciful. And there was nothing in Birmingham like any of this. It was an ugly, dirty town, and people, for the most part, were very demoralized. I have a white friend who I've become very close to who's from Birmingham, and we've always tried to figure it out. She said it was the same thing in that community. And she, too, felt I gotta go. Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because this was a place that people had moved to for opportunity. Speaker 2: For work. Speaker 1: For work. And it's, it's a company town because it's a steel mill, you said a steel mill town, right? Speaker 2: It was a company town, but the company bosses did not live there. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: They formed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did they live? Speaker 2: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: They formed this town and kind of left it to grow and not grow on its own. It never had much structure. The history of bad relations between the races comes from those bosses saying to the poor whites: "You better watch these; they'll take over." They would pit one against the other to keep some measure of control. Lillian Hellman wrote about in--what was the name of that book? I don't remember, but she wrote about it, that that was the beginning of this stamping down and stomping because they pitted the poor whites against the blacks and to, to establish a hierarchy for somebody being in control. Speaker 1: Now do you know the poor whites, though, were they--what, what ethnic descent do you, they were? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. There were-- Speaker 1: They weren't the Scottish? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Were they Irish? Speaker 2: No, I don't know. Speaker 1: Yugoslavia? Speaker 2: They were--nope. I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know where any of those people came from, but-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --all of 'em filtered there from other parts to work in that industry. They were people who were not successful anywhere else that they were. Story_ID: 629711 Speaker 1: You said you were very aware of black and white. So tell me what your first--did you ha-- Speaker 2: I knew that more blacks lived in poverty than whites. When we would go for rides, my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] talks about us passing through black neighborhoods and me saying, "I don't want to look at this. This is all gray. I don't like this," and getting down on the--I can see myself down on the floor of the car. I don't want to see that. Speaker 1: But that was not the neighborhood you grew up in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not where-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we lived. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It was when you went for a drive or you went to visit somebo-, we weren't going to visit on a social basis. It may have been a-- Speaker 1: Taking like-- Speaker 2: --student that my father [Robert Charles Johnson] had to go see about. And as I say, my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] collected people. Yes, she did make their lives better, but she also controlled them. I have a friend now who live--she was a contemporary. No, she was younger than my father, woman who lives in Detroit [Michigan] now. And my grandmother somehow took over their family and dictated what they would do, and where they would go, and made sure she went to school. And, and I played with her younger sister but on a very limited basis. I was never allowed to go there. They lived in an alley, and we weren't allowed to go in the alley. And I can remember one little girl who lived--I don't know who she was. She lived in an alley behind us. And I was out front on my steps one day, and she said to me, "Your mama won't let you play with me." I said, "Yes, she will." She said, "No, she won't. I'm not allow-, you're not allowed to play with me." And I was really very disillusioned that my mother was a very fair person. That would not be so, but it was true. I would not have been allowed to play with her. On each corner--and this was true throughout every community--there was an Italian grocery story. I played with those children. We all played together until you started school and then the separation. We never played together again, once you start school. But up until then they were in and out of my house. I was in and out of their store. We always played out front together. I don't know what--there was some prejudice against the Italians down at the other end of the corner 'cause I was not allowed to play with those children. I remember one day coming home, and we'd come up the street and go around the back to park. And those boys were out front. And my father said to me, "Don't go out there," and I went anyway. I went and, down the steps. I couldn't, I was not seven years old, but I was going out to play with them. And boy, he came outside. That's the only time my father swatted me. "I told you don't go out there." I don't know what was the matter with him. Maybe they were racist; I don't know. Story_ID: 629712 Speaker 1: Did you remember ever getting called out of your name? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: Never (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No experience like that? Speaker 2: No, never, nor my sister [Barbara Johnson Greene]. And I don't--I do know why. People make allowances if you were fair. That was the difference. My girlfriend Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] and I used to go to the lunch counters in the five and dime just on a dare. They-- Speaker 1: Wait-- Speaker 2: --wouldn't refuse to serve us. Speaker 1: They didn't? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: So do you think they were confused? Speaker 2: No, they knew. I think they did. Or maybe they didn't now. We would lie about who--I remember one woman saying, "Where are you girls from?" And we said we were from Puerto Rico or somewhere. But it didn't stop them serving us. And we would just giggle about it. We knew we were doing something we weren't supposed to do. We would go and drink out of water fountains that would say white and say, "Ah, that water's the same color." But nobody did anything to us. We were pretty little girls. Speaker 1: I see. So there were allowances made? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, but no one tried to put in your place. This is what I find-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: 'Cause I always want-- Speaker 2: Not even in department stores where blacks were usually not allowed to try on clothes. Speaker 1: You know what I find, I find interesting is that why people chose to not pass or chose to be black. Speaker 2: Some did. Speaker 1: I'm trying to figure out-- Speaker 2: Some did. Speaker 1: --what was the--'cause I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't-- Speaker 1: --keep thinking-- Speaker 2: I never wanted to do that. It never entered my mind. I had another friend [Edith Shirley Edwards] in college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] who really could pass and did. She was from Mississippi. And I remember one day when I was going home, she said, "Don't you go down there and get on that Jim Crow coach. I don't ever ride on that. You just go get on the white coach and nobody gonna say anything to you." So, I decided I would try it. I went and I sat in the white waiting room in the train station. Nobody said anything to me. And I was going towards the train, and I was about to get on the white coach when some black boy from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] came on. "Hey, you going home for the weekend?" So I just kept walking (laughter) to the one where I belong. That was my only ever attempt to do that. Speaker 1: You know, 'cause that's the only thing I can think of, is that people got called out. Story_ID: 629713 Speaker 1: You know, because I'm trying to figure out, like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know why my [paternal] grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson] lived that way. Speaker 1: That, now that is, that is-- Speaker 2: I do not know. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, you mean becau-, well-- Speaker 2: The one that's white. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Why did she adapt this? And she didn't have to do that. Speaker 1: But clearly, the people she loved and knew were, were black. I mean there's no, I mean that picture-- Speaker 2: But you know what, in, in those days nobody faulted anybody for crossing the line because life was easier on the other side. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: So there were many people who did. Speaker 1: But did they come, did they ever come back, or they crossed over permanently? I mean I just-- Speaker 2: I don't know; I really don't. Speaker 1: I wish more were known about this-- Speaker 2: I do, too. It, and see, that's-- Speaker 1: --or even-- Speaker 2: --another thing that people don't talk about. They don't talk-- Speaker 1: It's really-- Speaker 2: --about all these shade differences. Speaker 1: They don't, the, the color issue. Speaker 2: The color issue. Speaker 1: You're the first one. Really, you know, in your generation and above, I've had a hard time getting people to talk about the color. Younger, I've had some people talk about it. But I, I'm very cur-- Speaker 2: The only people who called me out of my name were blacks. Speaker 1: And what did they, what would they say-- Speaker 2: They call-- Speaker 1: --high yellow? Speaker 2: There was a--you were high yellow, you think you white, or there was a movie where Ethel Waters had a white daughter. Speaker 1: Yes, that was-- Speaker 2: And so you were called Pecola [sic.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was that daughter's name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was of snide reference. Those were the only slights I ever had. Most of the slights that I have had have come from the black community and not the white. 'Cause with white community I could ignore them. That wasn't part of my life, and it had nothing to do with me, so I did not feel slighted by that. I never felt oppressed by segregation. I was mad when I couldn't go places. And my idea was, I'm as good as you are, if not better. And I do not have to live with this, and it does not affect me. And I will leave and go where I don't have to live that way. Speaker 1: But you were very aware of your black ancestry. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: So it's not anything that you wanted to reject. Speaker 2: No, I never wanted-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --to reject that. Speaker 1: --did you ever have, like, some I've heard had library cards with, or they got them with white on it? Speaker 2: No, because there were black libraries. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: My godmother was the librarian of the, of the black library, and later my aunt [Vivian Fairchild Bell]. So no, I didn't have anything. Now, the same friend [Edith Shirley Edwards] who urged me to pass, I went to visit her one year over Christmas. And her father, who looked really like a white man--I mean there was no way to think he was anything different--her father said, "We're gonna test this voting business," 'cause that was when they would make people take a test. And so he said, "If they refused to let you vote, then we're really gonna have a fit" because we were, we were seniors at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And you went everywhere dressed up. We dressed up. We went down to the courthouse. I was a little scared, marched right in there. They never questioned her one bit, and they knew good and well she was black because her father was active in that town. And she was registered to vote. But they were just making the allowance. Her father still didn't have a way to push the issue or chose not to. I don't know. Speaker 1: So did she eventually pass-pass or not? Speaker 2: I don't think she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She just conveniently-- Speaker 2: --ever passed. Speaker 1: She used-- Speaker 2: Actually, her first husband was Carl Stokes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They were divorced, and then she did marry a white man in Cleveland [Ohio]. But she has never, she's never said she was anything else. Speaker 1: Okay. But she did marry someone white in Cle-- Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: Okay, after Carl Stokes. Speaker 2: After Carl. Speaker 1: Huh, that's fascinating. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 629714 Speaker 1: First through fourth you're at-- Speaker 2: South Pratt [South Pratt School, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: --at South Pratt. And then at fifth grade you go to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Lincoln School [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Lincoln, where your father [Robert Charles Johnson] is the-- Speaker 2: Is the principal. Speaker 1: --the principal. And now that's located closer to where you lived. Speaker 2: Closer to where I lived. It was walking distance, but a distance of about six blocks maybe-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on roads that were not paved through very modest housing, poor housing 'cause it was surrounded by poor housing, to this big brick school. In back of the school there were houses that had the places where you learned trade. There were, you know, the, the boys' classes. I don't remember what those were, but I know that in fifth grade, first you had home ec [home economics], in which we learned to embroider pillowcases, and make place mats, and learned to crochet; we learned to knit. I never had a cooking class. There were, there was a cooking class. And one house had the music teacher in it. Everybody went to music, and we sang a lot, and we put on programs, which were hilarious, my first deciding to be theatrical. I was reading Charles Lamb's 'Tales of Shakespeare' [sic. 'Tales from Shakespeare'] and I decided I was gonna put on a play, and she let me. We did 'The Tempest' [William Shakespeare]. And there was an ugly, ugly, stupid boy in my class, and I put him in the play. Of course, he was the monster, Caliban, but he was so thrilled 'cause nobody had ever paid him any attention. And we put this play on, on the stage at Lincoln School. And I think maybe I was seventh grade, ten or eleven years old. But the music school, music hall, one of them was the lunchroom. And all the food was cooked there, and vegetable soup was a staple at lunch. I can smell that. The next building down was the gym. It was a bigger white house that didn't have divisions in the center. We never did anything. The boys kind of played basketball a little bit. Mostly, we just sat on the bleachers in there for gym period. And then there was the band room. And the marching band was quite something. The music teacher was a nephew of W.C. Handy. And I went to be in the band simply because I wanted to be a majorette. But to be a majorette you had to play an instrument too, so I learned to play the saxophone. And my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] allowed me to be a majorette for a little while, but nice girls didn't really do that. You didn't walk around in little short skirts and shaking your bottom around. So I don't, I'm not quite sure why she let me do that, but it was only for a very little while. Story_ID: 629715 Speaker 1: Then, down the hill, dirt hill, there was a whole cluster of white-framed buildings, and that was the first part of the high school; it was called the annex. And we'd stand up there on the hill and look down at those kids, and they looked so big. And how old was I when I went there? I was twelve. Speaker 2: So when you were twelve you were in what grade then? Speaker 1: Ninth. Speaker 2: Ninth, gosh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, ninth grade, which is way too young. It is not a -- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --good thing to do. Speaker 2: So you were taking leadership even, like, when you said you did--directed the play ['The Tempest,' William Shakespeare]. I mean you were all of ten or eleven. And then, you know, you're doing these other things. So what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 2: Okay, 1954. Speaker 1: I was sixteen years old. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: February 1954. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: January 1954. They had two graduations-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --a year. I graduated in January and went-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in February. Speaker 2: --this is Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So Lincoln-- Speaker 1: Lincoln--Parker Higher School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] came next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My father [Robert Charles Johnson] by that time was principal of Parker. Speaker 2: So now how was it going to a school that your father was principal of? That's what I don't-- Speaker 1: That is not fun-- Speaker 2: That's what I thought. Speaker 1: --because everybody is looking at you, and the teachers you know are gonna report any little misstep. Speaker 2: So you and your mother [Mildred Bell Johnson], you never had any breaks. Speaker 1: No, and I couldn't go to--there was one other high school in town; that was only two-year. But my uncle [George Crenshaw Bell] was principal of that one. And that's where Condoleezza fa-, Rice's [Condoleezza Rice] father [John Wesley Rice, Jr.] worked. Speaker 2: That's amazing. Speaker 1: He was, he taught at Ullman [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and was the counselor there. I didn't know her. She was a little girl. I was grown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --when she was a child. But, Parker High School with your father as the principal, nobody ever gave me a valentine. Nobody was ever gonna talk to me because my father, my father was a much respected, feared man, which I guess you had to be to maintain order. This high school had the dubious distinction of being the largest black high school in the world. It was simply because it was the only four-year high school, and everybody had to go there. And so it had a real cross-section of kids there. All of the bad ones were there. We lived--the school was very controlled to keep outsiders out. There was no fence around the annex, but still, people off the street didn't wander in. The men teachers pa-, patrolled it and kept outsiders out. At the main building, which for some reason was built like in a Spanish adobe, was white stucco with a tile roof. My father was the third principal of Parker. It was started by a man named A.H. Parker [Arthur Harold Parker] and was Industrial High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. It had--you only stayed at the annex for ninth grade. All the rest of them were at, at the main building, which was three blocks up the street, ten through twelve. As I said, my father was principal there by that time. There were over four thousand students in the school, had a fence around it. Once you went through those doors, you did not go off that school ground. Story_ID: 629716 Speaker 1: What year did you, wh-, how old were you when you went off [to Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen, okay, but you went off as a regular student? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a regular freshman (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But that's still young-- Speaker 2: Same age my grandson is. And I look at him and thought, oh god, I wouldn't send him to college. Speaker 1: Right, that's, that's-- Speaker 2: He wouldn't even be able to go. Speaker 1: Right, that's young. Now, I wanna go back to just some of the conversation about, you know, Parker [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and, and the student body and your father [Robert Charles Johnson], how he managed things. Speaker 2: Um-hm. He was a very strong, courageous man, hardworking. By that time, of course, he didn't do other jobs. His whole life was that, that student population. And as I said, my mother's [Mildred Bell Johnson] brother [George Crenshaw Bell] was principal of the other school [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama], so they could talk and coordinate. They had a magnificent basketball team. The football team was undefeated. The band was--everybody came out to see Parker High School's marching band. It was the premier place, and people were very proud of it. We all wore uniforms so that you were identified on the street. So the kids, if they got in trouble, you knew about it. But I don't think anybody re- no, we sort of resented the uniforms. The uniforms were there from the very beginning to, to, so that poor children didn't feel different other people whose parents could buy them--nobody spent that much money on clothes then but so that there was no difference. The girls wore royal blue dresses, and the boy-, don't ask me why they were royal blue. The boys wore khaki pants, and I think that they were all army issue. There was one store downtown that sold 'em. They were heavy wool khaki pants. I don't, I don't remember what they had to wear for shirts, but we couldn't--we could wear navy blue, but you couldn't wear light blue, and you'd get sent home if you were out of uniform. And you could take liberties and put on a colored thing over your blue blouse. But I can remember being sent home 'cause I was out of uniform. I had on a navy blue skirt, and I had on a light blue blouse, and I had a yellow wool jersey over it. And the girls' advisor came along with somebody and told who had been turned in for being out of uniform and said, "May I see what you have on under that jersey?" And I lifted it up, and she said, "That's not the uniform. You'll have to come to my office." (Laughter) And my father said she came in scared to death. "What must I do? Alma's [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] out of uniform." He said, "Send her home. That's what you do with everybody else." My [paternal] grandfather [Ernest Robert Johnson] was furious. Of course, by the time I got home, he'd gotten somebody to iron something for me so I could put on the right thing and go back to school. But it was very strict. They did away with uniforms maybe my senior year. I was a little disappointed because seniors dressed differently. Girls could wear white, and boys could wear black, which distinguished you as the senior ones there. But that was the year they did away with them. Story_ID: 629717 Speaker 1: What are you like during this period? Are you--you know, you had painted a picture before of a person who, you know, would get in her [maternal] uncle's [George Crenshaw Bell] ba-, you know, room and-- Speaker 2: And read. Speaker 1: --read National Geographics then. Speaker 2: I still read, but I was unhappy because I had no social life. There wasn't anywhere decent for young people to be going, so I certainly wasn't going to be allowed to go. I really had no social life. Kids did not--there was a little small group of us that had parties in each other's houses, but that was only maybe eight people. And we would get together, and that, that was your social circle, as such. And we didn't go anywhere else but to each other's houses; didn't stop you from getting in trouble, but we went to each other's houses. People had parties in their basements. And my house, it was usually in the backyard in the summertime and my, with my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] always there at the grill. We were heavily chaperoned, just as well. We had a little bit of freedom. Around Christmastime--I don't understand this phenomenon--roller skating was a very big thing. Everybody had roller skates. The first sound you would hear on Christmas morning is somebody on their skates. And the kids would go from all over town to an open area behind the community center down there in the housing project. You would skate there on the city streets, and then everybody was down there skating. We were allowed to do that. Another gathering place was over on the Southside [Birmingham, Alabama]. We were not allowed to go there, 'cause the Southside notoriously had bad things going on, shootings, stabbings, a lot of really bad stuff went on in the Southside. But that was also a skating place, and kids from my side of town would skate all the way across town to there, don't know why and how that came to be. And they never skated at any time except Christmas for about a week, and then that was over. So my social life was considerably limited (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Limited. Speaker 2: And you're really looking forward to the time when you left. Story_ID: 629718 Speaker 1: When I went to college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] said she was so amused when I called to say we're allowed to stay out until, oh, I think during the week it was 9:30. And as freshmen, you had to be in the dormitory by 6:30. And it was study hour from six [o'clock] to nine [o'clock]. You were not allowed to go to the library unless you had special permission. That required a special permission to do that. And then at 9:30 for forty-five minutes you were allowed to go to the student co-op. Of course, if you wanted to make a mad dash for it, you could run somewhere else. But you'd better be back by 10:15 or else you were gonna get in trouble and go on social pro-, probation. And you were not allowed to ride in cars, nope. Nobody even had a car. The medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] was across the street. They had cars. But I remember the first time I went downstairs in that dormitory and all those med students were down there, they scared me to death. I thought, oh, my God, those are men. They finished college, and now they're in another school. I'm not having nothing to do with them (laughter). They were too old; I was sixteen. So that was a different experience. Story_ID: 629719 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go--just one thing I wanna go back 'cause it was said while we were off camera. And that was how your father [Robert Charles Johnson] scheduled every--there were four thousand students, and he did every one of their schedules. Speaker 2: (Nods head). He did every one of them. It occupied all of his spare time and all, all summer long-- Speaker 1: It (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which he did in addition to teaching summer school so that he would have extra money. He and my [maternal] uncle [George Crenshaw Bell] both taught at Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] summer school. Speaker 1: Now tell me, during the, were there trips you made during the summers growing up? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: So everything was--so, your mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] at this point, is she doing Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: She's doing Girl Scouts. She's traveling around. Speaker 2: In the summertime she, she, it was all directed towards camp. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And camp did not go all summer. I don't remember which months they were, but it wasn't, certainly wasn't all summer. Speaker 1: Now are you raised as Congregationalist? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay, you are, okay. Speaker 2: I was raised as a Congregationalist. Speaker 1: Congregationalist, okay. And, and were there any, any other memories, like, of holidays or special things that come to mind before you go off to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Any other-- Speaker 2: Holidays were kind of low key around my house. As a young child when Santa Claus came, that was the highlight of Christmas morning. My mother never cooked Christmas dinner. That was not a big thing in our house. Christmas was over after you opened the presents and so forth. Sometimes we went down to my grandmother's house but not every Christmas. We went down there at some point, but it wasn't a big thing. I can remember a few years back, we always do Christmas at my son's [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] house. And somebody said--or maybe it was gonna be at my house for that year for some reason, and I said, "What do you cook?" I said, "'Cause I never had Christmas dinner, so you all have to tell me what it is you want to eat and so we can put it together," (laughter). Thanksgiving was a little bit more, but it did not involve a lot of people. I'm not even sure my other grandmother came to the house where we lived. As a teenager, there was always a football game that day. It was a high school football game. And you went home and had the turkey dinner, and sometimes there were other people there but not often. There was, there was not any big entertaining. Story_ID: 629720 Speaker 1: The only entertaining that went on in my house was my mother's [Mildred Bell Johnson] club, the Semper Fidelis Clubs [Semper Fidelis Club], which had generations (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now-- Speaker 1: Semper Fidelis. Speaker 2: Semper-- Speaker 1: Fidelis-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: Always faithful, that was the name-- Speaker 2: Okay, I haven't heard-- Speaker 1: --of the club. Speaker 2: --of that, okay. Speaker 1: Well, it's still in Birmingham [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Huh. Speaker 1: --with the grandchildren-- Speaker 2: Semper Fidelis. Speaker 1: --maybe even some of the great-grandchildren of people who were there. My grandmother [Alma Smith Johnson], my father's [Robert Charles Johnson] mother, was a member; my mother was a member. I was gone. My sister [Barbara Johnson Greene] became a member when she was in (unclear). She was not that faithful to it. Speaker 2: So this was a social club? Speaker 1: It was a social club. Speaker 2: It's a social club, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: --sure, sure, sure. Speaker 1: And they met I guess once a month-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --would, I guess they did good works in town, maybe raise money for things and scholarships or so forth. But that was the only club my mother belonged to. My mother and father were not a part of the social scene of Birmingham, if you will. Speaker 2: Now who was the social scene? Was A.G. Gaston the social scene? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He was the business (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He wasn't either. They didn't do, they didn't do a whole lot of social stuff either. Speaker 2: Because when your build-, building a business you don't-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He lived in a big wonderful house, but Mrs. Gaston [Minnie Gaston] didn't entertain. Later, when they--I don't know if they built that house or bought it and added on to it. They had kind of an estate out in the country by the time I was grown. They'd moved from their house downtown. There were a group of people who gave parties and went to dances and, but my parents didn't. Speaker 2: Okay, they were the educators, the hardworking educat-- Speaker 1: But a lot of the educators were part of it. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: They just did not-- Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: I understand it now that I'm--maybe as older--no, I've felt that way a long time. I don't like social things either. I don't go to--just 'cause it's there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's time for the Alpha's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] dance or the Kappa's [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] dance, and unh-uh-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --no. My father said when children that I've raised start going to the dances it's time for me to stop. Speaker 2: That's good. Speaker 1: And so I remember when I was a very little girl them going maybe once or twice. But then once I, we were school age they didn't go. Story_ID: 629721 Speaker 1: Now do you remember names of society families there [Birmingham, Alabama] that were--you would consider more society? Or did you experience that more at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: More at Fisk. Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this: so, why was it chosen--what, who cho- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why did I go to Fisk? Speaker 1: Yes, who chose it? Speaker 2: I had nothing to do with it. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I didn't even fill out the application. It was just, that's where she's going. Speaker 1: Your mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] or your father [Robert Charles Johnson] or both (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My fa-, I think both, probably with them deciding that that's where I was going to go. Speaker 1: So this-- Speaker 2: My sister [Barbara Johnson Greene] had no choice. She went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. She didn't want to. She wanted to go to Fisk, but she was never asked. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness. Now, when, 1954 you say is when you went, or you graduated [from A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], so you went that, that fall [sic.]. Now that was the year of Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. Did you, did that have any impact. Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Not at all? Speaker 2: None-- Speaker 1: Okay, I understand. Speaker 2: --at all. It was kind of out-- Speaker 1: It was far away. Speaker 2: --there on the periphery, but it didn't really-- Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: --impact us. There were probably some students at Fisk who were activists and aware of that, but that was not-- Speaker 1: That's right. And Fis-- Speaker 2: --on my radar. Speaker 1: --and Fisk wasn't, it wasn't on its radar anyway period. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 629722 Speaker 1: Tell me the world that you entered in when you went there. First of all, you're very young. Were there others, young ones like you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, there was the basic college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] over there with those children. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they were really children. The boys would be out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you say the children, how old were they? Speaker 2: They, they had come from tenth and eleventh grades in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the only grownup thing they did was going to school. But otherwise, they lived in con-- Speaker 1: But tenth and eleventh would be your age that you were. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So why are you calling them children? Speaker 2: I felt that I was an adult. I dressed like an adult. I looked like an adult. They didn't. I dre-, I wore high heels all the time. With Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], everybody dressed up to the nines every day. You were not allowed to wear pants except on Saturday morning before twelve o'clock, otherwise, no slacks, no Bermuda shorts, no none of that. You were dressed. You wore heels and stockings to school, and it was very clothes-conscious. It was a, a big thing to be--dressing was a big thing. The boys were not quite as involved in that, but they always looked pretty good, too. I remember stepping out of that taxicab and thinking oh, this is wonderful. Look at this pretty place, and look at all of these handsome people dressed so well. Yes, this is where I want to be. Speaker 1: So it was good then. Speaker 2: It was good. Speaker 1: It was what--all of what Birmingham [Alabama] was not to you, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even the town of Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Was, was much different? Speaker 2: It was called the Athens of the South. It was very different. Speaker 1: Okay. I hear that Nashville's more cultured-- Speaker 2: It, oh-- Speaker 1: --in many ways. Speaker 2: --yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and always was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think because of all of the universities that are there. It's a very big university system. Many of them have merged now. Fisk resists it. It would be better for them if they would enter into that system 'cause then they wouldn't have as much trouble with money. But they have stayed separate. But most of all those schools have merged into one-- Speaker 1: I didn't know that, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) university. Speaker 1: 'Cause [HistoryMaker] Hazel O'Leary-- Speaker 2: You know, Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee]-- Speaker 1: --is there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Hazel O'Leary is there still. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she was at Fisk when I was there. Speaker 1: She was? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 629723 Speaker 1: Now who else was there when you were there? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] David Levering Lewis, Richard Thornell [Richard P. Thornell], Curtis Patton [Curtis L. Patton], who was--I don't know if Curtis was president of a college in New England or not. But, let's see, who else? [HistoryMaker] Hazel O'Leary was behind me. Aaron Douglas was the art teacher. Speaker 1: That's pretty wonderful. Speaker 2: I don't know. I'll have to find the yearbook. Speaker 1: That's pretty wonderful (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't keep up with alumni. Speaker 1: Right, but that's pretty wonderful that--now, tell me, the student body, was it primarily fair-skinned? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: It wasn't? Speaker 2: That had been a thing at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] before. You know, if you didn't pass the paper bag test, you were not--the charter says it was founded for the mulatto children of slaves-- Speaker 1: It was? Speaker 2: In the very, very beginning. Speaker 1: I see. Oh, I didn't know that was, that was its heritage. Speaker 2: That was written somewhere in its heritage. Speaker 1: Okay, huh. Speaker 2: But then that's not true when you look at the picture of the original Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers]. Speaker 1: That's right; that's true. Speaker 2: No, people were not predominantly fair. That used to be a reputation, too. Speaker 1: Right. Now who was the president when you came-- Speaker 2: Charles S. Johnson. Speaker 1: Charles S. Johnson, huh. And no relation though? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me how large was student body? Speaker 2: Three or four hundred. Speaker 1: Oh, I thought it was-- Speaker 2: It was small. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I didn't realize how small until we went back. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was the commencement speaker, and maybe it was my twenty-fifth anniversary. I know it was a surprise at how small the school was and what, what a short area it covered, but it was, it was very small. Speaker 1: So tell me how your world opened up for you there. Speaker 2: Well, you met people who were just like you. All of 'em had been achievers, and their parents were all professionals. You felt for the first time among peers. And of course, you had all that freedom (laughter). You could stay out until 10:30. No, my days at Fisk I remember very fondly. But I went to summer school one summer so that I could graduate with the class I went in with. So I graduated from Fisk in three and half years (laughter). I was ready to go. I didn't wanna stay any longer. So that one summer I went to Western Reserve [Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] to take courses to get the hour requirements. Story_ID: 629724 Speaker 1: I'm not gonna tell you that my college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] career was stellar, but it was certainly a learning experience. I was not a great student, but I was happy with it. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now why were you not a great student do you think? Speaker 1: 'Cause I didn't apply myself. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was a shock to me when I first went because everything had always come easily. I never had to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --study before. I don't think I really knew how. And it took me almost a year and a half to learn how. One day I said to myself--I remember when my first semester's grades came home and I cried. I'd never had a C before in my life, and I think I had three. And I--my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] didn't say anything. Nobody ever said one thing to me, but I had disappointed myself. And I said to myself one day, you're not doing this for anybody but you. Nobody but you is going to benefit from this, so you'd better figure out how to do this. So I learned how to arrange my schedule, so I managed to arrange my schedule so that most of my classes were in the afternoon. I could get up in the morning and start studying and go to the library before my classes started. And once you did, then that made all the difference. But before, there were too many other things I had to get accustomed to. I had to learn how to be on my own with nobody watching over me and telling me what I'm supposed to do and nobody to tell you where to go. There were boys who liked me. Speaker 2: That's what I was gonna say. It was social-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --wasn't it? Speaker 1: It was social. Speaker 2: And really, with women, it wasn't, there wasn't the burden on really performing, and a lot of people-- Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: --are looking for their husband. Speaker 1: --there was not. That's exactly right. I was not sent there for that purpose, but some people were. We had one professor, a white professor, in history. He was wonderful. He would pace back and forth in front of the class, chain smoke. And he'd light one cigarette from the butt of another and keep on talking. And he'd say, "You young women are in here. You're here in cold storage. You're too young to get married, and your folks park you here until you get a husband and then all these fine brains are wasted, off you go." And it was true, and there were some very smart girls in that class. I saw one of them last week. Her name was Enid Johns. And I can remember her sitting back in the back. I don't remember what Enid went on to do. But I saw her at a funeral a few weeks ago. No, girls, you know, they did their work, but they, they were there to get married. Not many of them were worrying about a, a, a career. Speaker 2: A career. Speaker 1: And those that were going were probably gonna go teach. I had no desire to be a teacher. I was determined I was not going to be a teacher. Speaker 2: Because you had been around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody-- Speaker 2: --so much of that. Speaker 1: --in my family had been a teacher. And I, I wanted to do something glamorous, that's why I was a theater major. But I graduated knowing that this is not a way to earn a living. Story_ID: 629725 Speaker 1: So now, you graduated as a theater major? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: I was the first class of speech and drama majors out of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. It was the first year they had a major. Speaker 1: Wow. So now who were the teachers teaching that? Speaker 2: Nobody you ever kn-, heard of (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Gladys--no, Lillian Voorhees was a little white lady who had come down from Massachusetts somewhere, and Gladys Ford [Gladys Inez Ford] was the black professor. She had a doctorate from Western Reserve [Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] I guess. They comprised the speech and drama department. Dr. Voorhees did have contacts with theater communities all over the country, because at one time she tried to get me to come here to Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.]. At another--when I was approaching graduation she wanted me to go to Cleveland [Ohio] to Karamu Playhouse [Karamu House]. Truthfully, I didn't have the nerve. You would have to be a bit aggressive to set out to go do that. Your life was--that kind of career was even more limited than it is now. Heaven knows it's very limited now. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So there would have been nothing. I was not aggressive, and I didn't have--I wasn't ready to go off on my own and know what it is you have to do to go places. I'm in the epit-, in the position where everybody has told me what it is you do next. I don't know how to do that for myself yet. It was a long time before I learned. Story_ID: 629726 Speaker 1: Now Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton], was she at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] with you? Speaker 2: Yvonne flunked out of Fisk. Speaker 1: Oh, she, but she came with you? Speaker 2: She came with me. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I told you she went everywhere with me. Speaker 1: Okay, huh. Speaker 2: But she-- Speaker 1: The same year? Speaker 2: --flunked out--yeah. She went with me. We went together on the train. We were roommates. And we had a silly woman who was the house mother. I can see her now. She didn't know us apart. One day I had been home for the weekend, and she calls me into her room: "You come to my room." And I went in there, and she said, "Did you have a nice time at home?" I said, "Yes, I did." "Did you tell your mother what you're doing?" I said, "Excuse me?" "Did you tell your mother what you're doing up here?" I said, "What am I doing?" "Oh, stop being, stop being coy with me. You and I both know you're on scholastic probation." I said, "Excuse me; I'm not." "Yes you are too. Don't you stand there, missy, being smart with me. You know you're on social probation." I said, "No, ma'am, I am not." She said, "Aren't you Willie Von Echols?" I said, "No, ma'am. I'm Alma Vivian Johnson [HistoryMaker Alma Powell]." "Oh." I said, "And she doesn't know that." She said, "Yes, she does." I said, "No, she couldn't know that, or I would know it." She said, "She knows it." But she never told me. And she was on probation for that semester and then had to go home at the end. But in addition to not--well, and, and teachers at the high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] had said to my father [Robert Charles Johnson] she shouldn't be going there. That's not where she ought to go. But we'd never been separate. In addition to not really being able to keep up with the work, 'cause heaven knows I wasn't the first semester either, there were the boys. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She was a pretty girl, and the medical students [at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] liked her, and they were much older. And so she was partying and not going to class, and it was set up for failure. So she left, and it made me very sad. But I was cleaning up the room, and I would find papers of hers. And I was shocked at how much she really didn't know. This was, this was really bad work. It was elementary school maybe. And it made me very sad because we were inseparable, and I really never knew that she, she--think of the pressure she had to hide that. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And she had trouble for a long time. She never did finish college. She went to Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and she did the same thing there. Speaker 1: Did she ever marry a doctor? Speaker 2: She did (laughter). She certainly did. Story_ID: 629727 Speaker 1: And you know, at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] you talk about, about people being sent there for husbands. I remember, oh, there was quite a social, very social people in Cleveland [Ohio], along--I can see that row of houses. I mean it was a row of mansions. And I don't really know what all the men did. Most of them were doctors and dentists. But I remember the daughter of one of them transferring from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to Fisk for social exposure, in other words, to get the doctor, and of course, she married one. But my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] never, nobody ever mentioned that fact to me. I didn't know I was supposed to go find a doctor, and I don't think I was. So that was not ever part of my thinking. Story_ID: 629728 Speaker 1: So you went home [to Birmingham, Alabama] because of, after graduation [from Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went home after graduation. There was nothing for me to do. I was nineteen-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --years old. Who hires a nineteen year old? Speaker 1: So what did you do in that year? Speaker 2: My parents [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Charles Johnson], my mother talked about me going to work in a school as a registrar, but that never quite worked out. I was just at home for a while. And there was a man who had a public relations agency that did marketing for products to black communities. He was only attracted to me 'cause I was an attractive woman, too, but he gave me a job. And so you would see me doing Imperial margarine and Coca-Cola, the ads for that. And one day, I don't know what the ad campaign was, but we went to the local radio station for me to do the spot. And there was a woman who had a noontime show. I don't remember what her name was. She was really funny, and her show was funny 'cause it was so ridiculous. And then I did the spot on the show. She interviewed me. I talked about the product. It was probably Imperial margarine. That's one I remember most. And the next day, the radio station called and said this woman was sick and could I come and do the show. And I ended up having this radio show. Speaker 1: At age twenty? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Wow, s-- Speaker 2: 'Luncheon with Alma,' beautiful lunchtime (unclear)--no, 'Luncheon with Alma,' news from the women's world, helpful household hints, and beautiful lunchtime listening music. So I did that for a year, and I would substitute for the guy who had the late night show. (Laughter) And they would always tell me, you can't play that same kind of music at night 'cause in, in my show I would play progressive jazz, Erroll Garner. And, and that wasn't played on black stations. I would play all of that on my show. And at the show that ended at midnight they said, "You can't play that." And I think that the engineers would probably set up the, the records that were gonna be played that night. But again, I wasn't allowed to go by myself. My brother-in-law had to drive me over there. I only did that for a while, but I was at the radio station for a year. Story_ID: 629729 Speaker 1: And that was when I applied to graduate school. And the way I ended up at Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] was 'cause I wanted to go somewhere I had never been before. Speaker 2: But that's far away-- Speaker 1: That's what I wanted to do. Speaker 2: --and north (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanted to go far away. Yeah, and north, where you would have freedom. I saw the advertisement for Emerson in a theater arts magazine. And I wrote for information and decided this was what I wanted to do. And I knew you couldn't--they had theater, but I knew that that wasn't a way to make a living. So I was gonna do speech pathology and audiology. Speaker 2: So how was that experience? And how was Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: I loved Boston. Speaker 2: You did? Okay. Speaker 1: I loved Boston. And due to this day, Boston has everything in the world you want to find. You just have to know where to look for it. I had a friend from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] who was working at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And she had a car, but she didn't drive it very often. And so I would take her car on weekends and just drive and get lost. I knew every corner of that city. I could always find my way home because I lived near the John Hancock Tower [sic. John Hancock Building, Boston, Massachusetts]. And so I would just turn in that direction and look for the tower and head there. When I went to Emerson-- Speaker 2: Now what year is this? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], the fall of '58 [1958]. I was twenty-one. Story_ID: 629730 Speaker 1: I was engaged by this time to a fellow from Cleveland [Ohio], simply because you're supposed to be engaged. Most of my friends got married soon as they graduated. I didn't have anybody. Speaker 2: How did you meet him from Cleveland? Speaker 1: When I went to Cleveland for summer school [at Western Reserve University; Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] my cousin was his tutor. And so she--well, back up. When I graduated from high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] took me to Cleveland on a, on a, for a graduation trip. My mother by this time had expanded her activities. She was a professional Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] worker, but she was also active in the national church. And in Cleveland that year, that January, the Congregational church [Congregational Christian churches] and the Evangelical and Reformed churches merged. It was a big merger. And my mother by this time occupied national office. And so she would go to all of their meetings. And this was really what took her out of the country. She would go to Europe for meetings with church groups and Puerto Rico. And she would, she was really expanding her world. And so she had taken me to Cleveland as a graduation present. And my cousin bought some theater tickets and got this young man to come and take me to the theater. That was the first time I met him. And then when I went there for summer school, they went to church and said, "Oh, you know who's here? You ought to stop by this afternoon." So he came by with all of his friends, and that was the way that started. Speaker 2: And how long were you engaged? Speaker 1: Maybe two years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I didn't really wanna get married. (Unclear) was--I just had a ring. He went into the [U.S.] Army, and I began to see, this is not anybody I want to marry. I'd look at him coming down the street and thought, now are you gonna be happy seeing him walking down the street and say there comes my husband? And I decided no, (laughter) no, I am not. He was awfully nice, but that was not--he didn't have a lot of ambition, and--it was not to be. Story_ID: 629731 Speaker 1: I was supposed to live in one dormitory [at Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts]. And when I got there, the housemother informed me--I don't think anybody asked me. No, she, they did say that there's a job in the other dormitory as assistant to the housemother, and it will pay your room and board, and would you be interested in that, and I said, "Yes." And that's how I came to live in the building that I did. It was at the corner of Berkeley [Street] and Beacon [Street]. It was a house that had built, been built for a granddaughter [Ellen Wayles Randolph Coolidge] of [President] Thomas Jefferson and then was serving as a dormitory. Now it's part of the library. But it was this wonderful old townhouse with huge rooms and beautiful marble fireplaces in the bedrooms and the big parlor and backroom, and then dining things were in the basement, the, the, the caf-, wasn't a cafeteria. We were served. But anyway, there was this building, and I thought it was wonderful. It was right there. I was looking out onto Beacon Street. And I would love to explore Boston [Massachusetts] and all the places I had read about. You, you were just one block from the Public Gardens [Public Garden, Boston, Massachusetts], and you could walk all over Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts]. It was something completely new to me. And it was the first real association that I had with white students, 'cause there weren't any other black students. It was maybe two. And we had the most eclectic little group of people. Most of them were Jewish, yeah. One boy wasn't. But we were just a group that all ran around together. Speaker 2: So this was a freeing up experience (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a very freeing up experience. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 629732 Speaker 1: Did you like the speech pathology program there [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. I liked audiology better than, than speech pathology-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --and I never practiced speech pathology. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is-- Speaker 2: I was hired eventually-- Speaker 1: --the difference between the two? Speaker 2: Audiology is just hearing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --hearing problems. Speech pathology deals with speech defects and speech development. You work with stutterers and people with sound substitutions and so forth. Audiology is more technical. You do testing and evaluation of hearing losses and then the training of people with hearing losses. I taught lip reading-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and auditory training-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --being able to listen. I learned, after I was hired, I learned the hearing aid business, but that wasn't part of my training-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at--and one of my professors was probably responsible for pushing me on into that. He taught an audiology class. What did he teach? But he was very much a mentor. He was Jewish, out of New York. And we did a lot of our, all of our clinical work at the VA hospital downtown, the VA clinic. And so we would go there in the afternoons to learn the ropes there. And he was constantly mov-, he found me the job that I had. He heard that they were looking for an audiologist and called and said, "I've got somebody you should see." I can remember a job as an audiologist opening up in some hospital and him encouraging me to apply for it. It sounded wonderful. It was a GS [General Schedule]--(laughter) sounded wonderful and it was a GS-9 or 10 [GS-10] schedule; more money than I could ever imagine having as a single girl. But by then I had met Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], and I wasn't going any-. There was another job that was offered to me through him as the audiologist for the State of Rhode Island, but I didn't want to move to Providence [Rhode Island]. Story_ID: 629733 Speaker 1: Who set you up on this blind date to meet? Speaker 2: We weren't really set up. I had gone to a conference, American Speech and Hearing Association Conference in Chicago [Illinois]. And when I came home my roommate was busy telling me about this guy she met the weekend before. Her aunt had told him to look her up, and he, she had gone out with him and what a guy he was. She said, "And he's coming back this weekend, and he's bringing his friend with him." I said, "Oh." That was the only argument Jackie [ph.] and I ever had. I said, "I don't go out on blind dates. And how do I know what's walking through that door? I don't go out with soldiers. I am not gonna be here." And we used to run around with people who you have heard of, Maynard Jackson was a law student, Howard Moore [HistoryMaker Howard Moore, Jr.], who was [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis' lawyer, and a whole bunch of others. There were a whole bunch of boys that lived up on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts], and we would party with them every weekend. I said, "I am not going to be here. I am going up on the Hill." And she said, "If you stand me up I will never speak to you again." I said, "Okay, but whoever it is, is gonna be really sorry." (Laughter) And so, I proceeded to dress up like a femme fatale, in the tightest thing I could find, in heavy makeup, and with a cigarette in my hand. I was not gonna be attractive to whoever this was that was coming. And (laughter) he walked in the door. He looked like he was about twelve years old. Here was this short, short haircut. His--now Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] face as a young man is very Asian, too, these high cheekbones, and these slanted eyes, and rosy cheeks. I thought oh, my God, who is this baby walking in here. So we talked, sat and talked for a little while in the living room, and I said, "Excuse me." And I went in the bedroom, and I washed my face, and I changed my clothes, and I came back out. I'm sure he wondered what on earth was going on, but I didn't want him to think that I was some slut. Speaker 1: So you had changed your, your opinion at that point. Speaker 2: Yes, it was evident of the kind of person he was when he walked in the door. And the young man that she was seeing actually is a good friend of ours--he lives here--was Michael Heningburg, very handsome, from a very prominent family. His father [Alphonse Heningburg] was an educator, and his brother is Gus Heningburg, that's up in, big in politics in New Jersey, very respectable people. And so, I changed my opinion. And in conversation that night I said to him, "How long are you in the [U.S.] Army for," because I never knew anybody that made a career of it. Everybody I knew had their time counted down to the minute. And he said, "I'm making it a career," and I thought, (laughter) what kind of nut is this? I never heard of this. I never had any relationship with anybody in the Army except people who were there briefly who'd gotten drafted. And I tell you the truth, that if I had been living at home, Colin Powell would never have gotten through the front door. My father [Robert Charles Johnson] would not have allowed him in. Speaker 1: Do you think because he was foreign born? Speaker 2: No, because he was a soldier. Speaker 1: He was a soldier, okay, and not, and not a teacher, not an educator? Speaker 2: Not a professional. Story_ID: 629734 Speaker 1: Tell me what was the attraction? What was the attraction on his part, and what was the attraction on your part? You came from two different worlds. Speaker 2: Oh, there was a great physical attraction. He had already heard about me. His best friend was a guy named Ronnie Brooks, who was then doing a doctorate. I've forgotten what school, but one of his classmates was a guy named Joe Gales [ph.] who was from Birmingham [Alabama]. In fact, we both graduated from high school at the same time and received a scholarship honor; wasn't a, no, I don't think there was any money attached to it. But we both were the outstanding students from our respective high schools, and so our pictures were made together. Anyway, Joe Gales was a classmate of--Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], Brown, they were at Brown. And he had told Ronnie about this girl he knew that was in Boston [Massachusetts], and Ronnie mentioned it to Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], but Colin had already met me by then. Colin said, "Forget it. I'm already there." But when you asked me what it was that attracted me about him, he was simply the nicest man I had ever met, and he was an adult. He was not playing games like most guys do. When you are young, single, professional woman, you meet a man in those days the first thing they would say is, "Where do you work, and do you live alone?" It was big thing to have to, have a girlfriend who had a job, and was a professional, and had an apartment, my goodness. But they were just on the make, and Colin was not this way. The boys who were in law school were not quite like that. They, they had their eyes on a career, and they were working hard in law school. And you were simply somebody you had fun with. No, there was no pairing off with anybody. It was just a group of people who were together. Speaker 1: Now how long did the two of you date before--? Speaker 2: We met in November, and we were married in August. Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Short. Story_ID: 629735 Speaker 1: So what are your parents [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Charles Johnson] thinking of this? Speaker 2: My father did not meet him until he came for the wedding. Speaker 1: Oh, he-- Speaker 2: My mother met him. She (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you meet his side of the family before? Speaker 2: Um-hm. We met, as I said, we met at Thanksgiving time. And when I was getting ready to go home for Christmas, he said, "You know, you really ought to come to our house for New Year's Eve. My folks [Maud McCoy Powell and Luther Powell] have a whale of a New Year's Eve party." I thought, sounds goods, maybe I will. And we talked on the phone a couple of times over the holidays. My sister [Barbara Johnson Greene] by this time was married. Her husband was in medical school, and she was having her first baby that Christmas. So I was in Nashville [Tennessee] with her waiting for the baby to be born. And as soon as Gaye [ph.] was born--she was born on the 30th December--I got on a train and--no, plane--the next day and went to New York [New York] and went to Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] family's New Year's Eve party, and it was quite a party. They used to have this every year, all the West Indians in the world that they knew. It was the liveliest, happiest thing. And remember, I come from a very small family. I always--my friend Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] had lots of cousins. I didn't. I had three, and they were much older than me. Here was this great big loving family and just ready to--and, and they knew how to have fun. My people didn't know how to have fun. My parents didn't drink. Here, this was no, there was no stigma to people. That was part of the partying. It was rum and Coke [Coca-Cola], and, and happy music, and lots of dance, and wonderful food, and people just coming, coming, coming. It was so happy. It was when I met his sister [Marilyn Powell Berns] and her husband [Norm Berns] and (laughter) his dear Aunt Baro [ph.], who he was, he was her favorite, and she was his father's sister. Every time I turned around, Aunt Baro was right beside me looking me over. I would turn around, and she would be at my elbow looking me up and down. And Colin not thinking--well, we were driving back to Boston [Massachusetts] the next day, and I was staying with my roommate, Jackie [ph.], who lived out in Amityville [New York]. And he said, "Why don't you just spend the night here because then we can get up in the morning and leave." He had no idea that there is no place in this house for me to sleep. It was jammed full of people already. His sister simply said, "Where is she gonna sleep?" And I said, "Oh no, I couldn't, I couldn't do that." And I went on back to Amityville with Jackie and caught the train in in the morning, and we drove to Boston. And I think it was right after that we kind of knew. Story_ID: 629736 Speaker 1: And I beg-, we began to go down to New York [New York] for weekends at his parents' [Maud McCoy Powell and Luther Powell] house. My mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] had been on a trip to Europe and was coming into New York, so I went down to meet her and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she was traveling internationally-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --by this time-- Speaker 1: --by this time. Speaker 2: --for the Girl Scouts [Girls Scouts of the United States of America]. Speaker 1: No, for the church. Speaker 2: For the chur-- Speaker 1: By this time, my mother was the first woman and the first black to be vice moderator of the National Council of Churches. So she held national office, and she was traveling all around. And so that was when she met their paren-, his parents. She came to New York, and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] came to the hotel to get us. Speaker 2: So what did she think? Speaker 1: She was, she liked them, and they liked her very much. It was a very nice dinner. Story_ID: 629737 Speaker 1: Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had had one other girlfriend that he was engaged to. She did not want him to be in the [U.S.] Army. She wanted him to get out. She didn't want any part of that. And I remember his father [Luther Powell], hearing about the story about his father taking a walk with him and telling him, "You need to really think about who you marry because you're going to go places, and you need somebody you can take with you." And they had decided that I was the person he could take with him. They were lovely people. I felt so close to them. My mother-in-law [Maud McCoy Powell] was probably closer to me than she was to her own daughter [Marilyn Powell Berns]. And so the reason we got married so soon was he had orders to Vietnam. Speaker 2: Which is--okay, so this is, is this Viet--it's 1963, right? Speaker 1: It's 1962. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], okay. Speaker 1: They only had advisors in Vietnam. The world at large did not know there was a war going on in Vietnam. It was not in anybody's consciousness. I can remember Colin--(laughter) and I laugh about it now 'cause people used the same analogies. I can remember him talking to the neighbors next door trying to convince them about why we are in Vietnam and the domino theory of Communism, blah, blah, blah; if one country goes, the next one--all of that same propaganda that we here now about other things. America had only advisors in Vietnam at the time. The French had been there before and told us don't go there. It's not a war you can win, but we don't, don't listen to people. And so we began with advisors to the South Vietnamese the-, and their army. And Colin was in the second group of advisors that went over. Speaker 2: Now what, what rank was he at, at that point? Speaker 1: He was a first lieutenant. He, when I met him he had just come back from his first assignment, which was in Germany. And he'd come back to Fort Devens [Massachusetts]. And that was my introduction to military life, going out there on weekends and seeing the families, the structure of the [U.S.] military. The military was the one truly integrated place in the world then. And here you were, and there was never any discussion or any tension back and forth. You had the officers club; you had people's houses to go back and forth to. It was a wonderful, wonderful family that I thought, yeah, I can live in this. It has a structure. It has its own culture and customs, and that was very attractive. I loved the parades. I loved all of it. Speaker 2: So it had structure. Speaker 1: It had structure. Speaker 2: It had structure, but it was, it was still a more--it was, it was--what do I say--a more family environment than you had grown up in, in many ways (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --well, but, but reaching out-- Speaker 2: More sharing-- Speaker 1: --with lots of people, sharing. Speaker 2: --with lots of different people. Speaker 1: Yeah, lots of different people-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and socializing and having a social life. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 629738 Speaker 1: You get married, and then he's shipped off [to Vietnam]. So how was that? I mean this is what--did you know what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I-- Speaker 1: --you were entering into? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I had a pretty good idea what I was entering into. And I went in knowing that this is what life in the [U.S.] military is about. We, we were married in August, and in September we went to Fort Bragg, North Carolina. And mind you, Fayetteville [North Carolina] outside is segregated. Inside Fort Bragg, it is not. We could not find a place to live. We were not authorized housing on post because he's only there for six weeks. So we're looking for housing in segregated Fayetteville, North Carolina. I hate to tell you the places that were shown to us. One place was a shotgun house in the middle of a field that people were using as a dumping ground, paint cans and all this. The house was clean enough, but there was nothing around it. It was just this house. Well, it had to be furnished because we had no furniture. And he found an old man, a, a black man who, you know, was a notary. He was the one that was recommending places for people to live. I don't know if he sent us to that place, but I remember driving over to his office and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] going in and asking about a place to live. (Laughter) I did not meet the man. I was out in the car. Colin said he picked up the phone and called his house and said, "Ms. Mary [ph.], you know those folks we got living in the back room? Kick 'em out. I got somebody else I want to put in there." So we drove over to this house, and it was a very small house, very dark with boxes from Valentine's candy hanging on the wall, you know, the satin boxes, those with the decorations, and a lot of people sitting around on couches. And they showed us the bedroom. It was a little, little bedroom in the back, and you would be allowed to use the kitchen. You had to have your own sheets. We did have those in the car. But that just wasn't--and what was I gonna do all day while he was gone? Story_ID: 629739 Speaker 1: That night we went to have dinner with a white couple that he had been in basic training with, and they were in his first assignment in Germany, and they were every good friends. And we went to their house for dinner. Joe [Joseph Schwar] wasn't home yet. And we were telling Pat [Pat Schwar] the stories of us looking for housing [in Fayetteville, North Carolina]. And Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had about decided she's gonna have to go home [to Birmingham, Alabama]. And Pat said, "No, you don't. You'll move in with us." And Joe came home about that time. She said, "Can't they, Joe?" He said, "What?" "Move in with us." He said, "Sure." They lived in what we called, then we called (unclear) housing. It was a little house. On the first floor you've got a combination of living room, dining room, and the kitchen, and in upstairs you had three bedrooms and one bathroom. They had three little boys. They put all of those babies in one room. One of them was four months old. The other two they put in, in the same bed, and they gave us the boys' room, double-decker beds. And we lived with them for six weeks. It was the most wonderful time. Those little boys had two sets of parents. It was, this was our family. She, they were from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Pat didn't understand segregation. We went downtown shopping, and she said, "Let's go over here and get a Coke [Coca-Cola]." I said, "Unh-uh, you can go; I can't." She said, "Why? That's stupid." I said, "No, it's against the law. You can have a Coke there; I cannot." Oh, so we went home. Another night, sitting around, she said, "Let's go bowling." I said, "Unh-uh, you can go; we can't." Her neighbors all thought she was crazy for let, for taking us in. But she never gave it a thought. Our children grew up together. And we would go for long times without seeing each other, but once you were back together, it was never any different. And her family--no, Pat didn't have any family left. Joe's mother and sister, we all just became a family. I used to say, "Pat, why don't we get a great big house and all of us go live in it and kind of have a commune?" It was a wonderful, wonderful experience. Speaker 2: So they--okay, we have to change tapes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Right. Speaker 2: They were in the service, too? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They had, he and Colin had come into the [U.S.] Army together (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Army together. Speaker 1: He was a West Pointer [from the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and Colin always joked with the others. They called, called 'em all ring knockers. You know, it was that look. Speaker 2: Ri-- Speaker 1: Ring knockers, West Pointers. Speaker 2: The West Pointers-- Speaker 1: Wear their West Point ring; they were all known as ring knockers. Yeah, you ring knockers. But it was such an easy relationship that you never would imagine could exist. Story_ID: 629740 Speaker 1: Okay, so he goes to Vietnam. Speaker 2: I went home [to Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: You went, you went home. Speaker 2: Oh, let me tell you what happened while we were at Fort Bragg [North Carolina], the Cuban Missile Crisis. Everybody got promoted because they were building up the forces. So Joe [Joseph Schwar] got promoted first to captain, and then a few weeks later Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] did. But everybody was on alert, which meant when the men left in the morning you didn't know if they were coming home. And I have vivid memories of him handing me a hundred dollars and saying, "This is for you to get home if I don't come back." I don't know how I would have gotten out of Fayetteville, North Carolina, to get to Alabama, but I guess I would have figured it out, maybe a bus. But it was a very tense time. The Cuban Missile Crisis was very serious, and then the Russians blinked. And then he went in to Vietnam. I went home. I was pregnant, went to my parents' [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Charles Johnson] house. They, by this time, had a new house out in the country then, not now, in fact, right down the road from the Girl Scout camp [Camp Bessie McDowell, Marion, Alabama] that my mother had started, had built. Story_ID: 629741 Speaker 1: And it, that was the year of the civil rights demonstrations, and Civil Rights Movement came to Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: So there was a lot of turmoil in Birmingham (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was a lot of tension, a lot of turmoil; it was a war zone. My mother-in-law [Maud McCoy Powell] called me and said, "You know your husband's gonna tell you to leave there." I said, "No, I'm not leaving here. This is where I live." Back up to the wedding, his mother and father [Luther Powell] weren't gonna come to Birmingham to the wedding. His sister's [Marilyn Powell Berns] husband was white, and they said they were coming. And Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] father said, "Well, I'd better go. If they're gonna lynch Norm [Norm Berns], I need to be there." Nobody ever raised an eyebrow. So they were very uncomfortable with me being in Birmingham. It was a tense time, to say the least. My father [Robert Charles Johnson] was principal at Parker [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], my uncle at Ullman [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. And you know, it was the students they, they used for the marches. While they were very sympathetic to it, they felt it was their obligation to keep their students in school. He said, "Their parents sent them here. Nobody is going to take them out." So there were always those confrontations with the people who were trying to take--and all kind of rumors went around. I heard that they broke into the school, and they knocked my father down, and they took the students out, never happened. But they were both so tense at night. I can remember my uncle sitting at the table saying, "The children, the children. Why did they have to use the children?" And I said, "Uncle George [George Crenshaw Bell], the children are the only ones who could do it. It has to be the children." Speaker 2: So was it the children leading 'em, or was it the children being t- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The children were the marchers. Speaker 2: They were being told to do it. Speaker 1: (Nods head) They, the, the leaders of the movement brought in the chil-- Speaker 2: Corralled the children. Speaker 1: --because they couldn't use the adults. They couldn't do it 'cause they'd lose their jobs-- Speaker 2: Their jobs, right. Speaker 1: --and their livelihoods, so it was the children. And their parents were sympathetic. Parents got to the place where their children left in the morning, they'd give 'em their toothbrush and something to eat 'cause they're probably going to jail. But it was for the cause. It was time now to end this. Speaker 2: You know, that's interesting 'cause I remember in [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni's interview, she talked about her [maternal] grandparents [Emma Louvenia Watson and John Brown Watson] getting her, you know, that, getting her to march. Her parents [Yolande Watson Giovanni and Jones Giovanni] didn't know it. But they were like, "Oh, my granddaughter can come down there and march" (laughter). And she said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I never heard Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speak, but my aunt [Vivian Fairchild Bell], and my aunt didn't go either. She said, "oh, my God." She said--she was the librarian then. She said, "They say he is such a spellbinding speaker that by the end of his speech, everybody rises up and says, 'I'm coming, I'm coming.'" And I think she really would have been there, but having to be sure of her security-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you didn't do it. It was not the privileged people who were the marchers. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was not, and which makes me feel a little bit guilty about it 'cause they're the inheritors. The poor people are still poor. Story_ID: 629742 Speaker 1: The day the church was bombed-- Speaker 2: Were you there the day the church was bombed (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was six months old. And my mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] and aunt [Vivian Fairchild Bell], my sister [Barbara Johnson Greene], and her little girl had gone to church. And before we left--we still didn't have mail delivered out there; we'd have to go in town to get the mail--my uncle [George Crenshaw Bell] called and said, "Don't come through town." I just heard a bomb go off somewhere. You heard this all the time. He said, "A bomb just went off. Don't come through town 'cause I'm not sure where it was. Go the back way." So I drove the back way to church. And the baby was fretful, and I went into the office so that he wouldn't disturb the service. And the phone started ringing, and people were--men, the men in the church were coming in and out and going outside and coming back. And I asked them what had happened. They said, "16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] was bombed, and there's a mob loose and it's coming this way." And I called my father [Robert Charles Johnson] and said, "What should I do? They, they bombed 16th Street, and there's a mob coming." He said, "Come home right now and come the back way." And I can remember driving home and actually being on the street where we used to live. And they were, the blacks were out in the street with big rocks, and they were furious. And I stopped for a stop sign, and some man said to me, "You better get home 'cause you are too light-skinned today." And I started driving. I remember having to stop for a train, and there was a carload of whites beside me, and I was scared to death. But I finally decided this must be what it's like to live where there is a war going on. It's not going on everywhere; it's just in some places, and you always have to be on the alert. But it doesn't mean that life doesn't go on. Outside of that downtown area life went on. Story_ID: 629743 Speaker 1: Except one day I was out--and as I say, we lived in the country, and I was out hanging diapers on the line, and I heard shots. And it was time for my parents [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Charles Johnson] to be coming home. Their house you couldn't see from the road. It's, it was up on a hill, and all you could see was the, their roof. So I ran and tried to look down on the road, but I couldn't really see anything. And they finally got home safely, and I told them about it. And we found out later that another couple was going up the road. And as they turned into their road, a carload of whites drove by and just shot at the car. And they were hit down the side of their face and arm. But just, this was the kind of just random stuff that went on. And a story that I tell and is absolutely true is in--and I don't know what was rumored to be going on, but there was going to be the possibility of trouble. We lived in the same neighborhood where the people were who bombed the church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. Everybody always knew who bombed that church. He lived right down there in Tarrant City [Tarrant, Alabama]. It was years before they were brought to justice, but everybody always knew who did it, and Tarrant City was right down the road. So there was one night, I don't know what the threat was; I don't remember, but I remember us putting the babies into the lower level of the house and my father giving me a gun and saying, "You sit in that window, and I'm down here. And if anything comes up that driveway do not ask any questions, just shoot." Nothing came, but people were always on the alert and armed for--because at Arthur Shores' house there would be bombings and shootings. And that was right across the street from our church, so it was quite possible that there was someone coming towards their house. The bombings in Birmingham [Alabama] had gone on for many years before the movement, and that was just kind of an accepted thing. You knew it was; you'd hear about a bombing; and you'd go see where it was, and it was usually when some had, was moving out and into another neighborhood and testing out the waters. Speaker 2: So that, that area, that, like, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis calls Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama], was that the reason it had gotten that name (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was the reason it got the name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was where the-- Speaker 2: So when you-- Speaker 1: And her, her family's house was up there. Her family went to our church. Speaker 2: Okay. So when you say that they had been many years before, how many years, ten years, five years? I mean-- Speaker 1: At least ten. They would just be random. But whenever people would move into--in fact, Angela's parents' [Sallye Bell Davis and Frank Davis] house was on the edge of an area that had been. And I, I think they probably received threats, but they were never bombed, but a house on, in their area was bombed. Yeah, it was Dynamite Hill. Story_ID: 629744 Speaker 1: So Co-, he's over in Vietnam. You're experiencing your own sort of Vietnam in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How long is he over in Vietnam? Speaker 2: He was supposed to be gone a year. The other day I heard somebody referring to the war in Iraq: "And we're going to begin to pull the troops out." And I said, I've heard this before. First year my husband was in Vietnam, all the troops were gonna be home by Christmas. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] came home a month early. Seven years later we're still in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Wait a minute; he was there seven years? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He was there a year. Speaker 2: He was there a year. Speaker 1: A year. Speaker 2: He was there twice. Speaker 1: Okay, he went twi- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the first time, this was all gonna be over. We're bringing all the troops home. All the troops are gonna be home by Christmas. It was also the year that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed. He was killed the week before Colin got home from Vietnam. I was sitting--I was watching it the other night--watching television when I saw Lee Harvey Oswald get shot. My father [Robert Charles Johnson] and I were sitting there watching the television, and we saw this happen. And my father said, "What happened?" I said, "Somebody just came and shot him," all this happening right in front of--the other night on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] there was a show about the news media and how it grew from that particular incident. It was the first time that television became ascendant, and it was called bringing the news. And so, you were seeing all of this from the very beginning of that day, and of course, it brought back a lot of memories. But, yeah, Lee Harvey Oswald and (unclear) were there, and that was two days before Colin came home. Story_ID: 629745 Speaker 1: When he was over there, he didn't know about his son, Michael's [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] birth, right? Speaker 2: There was no-- Speaker 1: Way of communi- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) communication at that time. There was no telephone-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There's no telegram. We had a code that the letter, when I was to write when the baby was born, and on the outside write baby letter because he was up on the border with Laos and A Shau Valley [Vietnam]. So, I don't know how often they got a drop of mail and food, but it wasn't regular. So that when people saw it down in Seoul [South Korea]--not Seoul. What's the name of-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam]. Speaker 2: Saigon. Too many wars in my life. In Saigon, where, where the mail came in. When they saw baby letter, they were supposed to get it up there to 'em. His mother's [Maud McCoy Powell] letter got to him before mine did. It said, "We're very happy about the baby." And he said, "What baby?" So he had to get on the radio. It was the kind where you cranked and, and went through and said, "Is there a letter there?" And that was the way he got the letter. And he did not see Michael until he was nine months old. Speaker 1: Wow. It's hard to think of, too, you know, but those things happen. Speaker 2: Well, while we were at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] in those years lead--in that few weeks before he went to Vietnam, I met a colonel and his wife who were--he had been one of Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] superiors in Germany. And in the conversation, it was at the officers club, it was oh, Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] and Colin just got married, and he's going to Vietnam. She said, "Yes, we were married at the beginning of World War II [WWII], and I didn't live with my husband for six years. I never saw him for six years," which is totally unbelievable. I worry now about the troops who are in battle and in danger because they have more than one thing to worry about, because with email, you're constantly in contact with your family, and that's hard. You have a wife at home who's dealing with things and can vent to the husband who's there, who is being faced with really serious danger. And I can't imagine the stress that this creates. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: My neighbor up the street has a son in Vietnam, nice little privileged boy--not in Vietnam, Iraq--who joined the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. His father took him and showed him the world and tried to get him to decide what he wanted to do. He decided he wanted to go be a marine, and he's in Fallujah [Iraq]. He has a telephone from his father, so he can call whenever he wants to. There's something surreal about him calling up and saying, "Hey, dad, listen to this," and holding it out so that you can hear the sounds of guns and bombs. This, that, that's a strange kind of war, which I don't understand. But to have that kind of contact back home, I'm not sure how you do that. Story_ID: 629746 Speaker 1: So now, when Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] came back [from Vietnam], where, where you stationed at that point? You moved from Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: We moved from Birmingham to Fort Benning, Georgia, where he was going to yet another school. By this time it was the advanced course, where he met up with all those people that you met in the basic course. So, again, it was a lovely--well, he went and worked at the Infantry Board before the class started. Once again, we were not authorized housing because--he was going to be authorized housing for the class, but we weren't authorized housing for him coming in early. Columbus, Georgia's still segregated. We lived in a house in Phenix City, Alabama, belonged to an [U.S.] Army chaplain who was away overseas somewhere. Across the street from me they didn't have running water. When that lady got ready to do her laundry, she had to hook up a hose to her neighbor's outside spigot and bring it over and put it on her porch. This was a nice little ranch house. It was a very nice little house, but it kind of sat in the middle of a field, too. And up the street there were houses--up the road, it wasn't a street-- there were houses that surely must have been left over from slavery time. They were that kind of little shack with no windows, very run down, maybe two rooms in them, but those were right on the same road. Now, several blocks from there, there's Colin Powell Boulevard [General Colin Powell Parkway, Phenix City, Alabama]. So it was very, it was an experience to go for the dedication of that. Story_ID: 629747 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, because this is, this is still like the mid-'60s [1960s], right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And what is--and you're a young, you know, young mother, young wife [of HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. Now, and you're getting--so even when at Fort Benning [Georgia], you weren't on the base yet. You-- Speaker 2: Not until the fall--not until the summer. Speaker 1: Okay, then you started base life. That is when thing sort of opened up and you started-- Speaker 2: It was magnificent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were authorized housing because he was in the class, and they set aside housing for them. The housing that we had was really quite special for that time. It had hardwood floors, a dishwasher, and centrally air-conditioned. So, what more could you ask for? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Right now it's substandard housing. But that was where we really started to live. And everybody around you was in the, had come to be in the class, too, so you had that closeness, a constant social life. We shared babysitting. There was a couple around the corner who--we would share. Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was a baby. I started my volunteer career. I started volunteering in the Red Cross [American Red Cross]. And when I became pregnant with Linda [Linda Powell], I volunteer in the OB-GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] clinic because you're never sure. You--in the [U.S.] military you take who's on duty when you deliver, so that way I figured I'd know all the doctors. And so I volunteered at the hospital once a week. And I would drop Michael at my friend's house around the corner. She did substitute teaching. So on the days when she had a teaching job, she brought her children to my house, and so we swapped off. There was a nursery on post. There always was in, and on military post, not as advanced as they are now, but I never used it. I never used it. They had a big buildup for Vietnam [Vietnam War]. The war was taking another turn, and everybody on the street moved. They were all gone back to Vietnam. And so to fill those houses, they made everybody who lived off post moved on post. So now all of our neighbors were the military doctors, who were then in the military to repay their education being paid for. Everybody's child on--we all had children the same age. And so everybody was back and forth and in each other's houses. It was wonderful. It was like, it was better than a college campus. You had a dormitory, your own house. But there around the corner is walking distances to club with the swimming pool, and it was idyllic. Speaker 1: So in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very integrated. Speaker 1: Integrated, a lot of activity, everything-- Speaker 2: A lot activities. Speaker 1: --was around the base. Speaker 2: Everything was on the base. You didn't-- Speaker 1: So you had the BX [base exchange] and-- Speaker 2: --have--now, that's the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the-- Speaker 2: The Army has PX [post exchange]. Speaker 1: PX, okay, sorry. Speaker 2: And the Army doesn't have bases; it has posts. Speaker 1: Posts, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Have to make those distinctions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had to learn 'em, too. Story_ID: 629748 Speaker 1: The main post is so beautiful. I don't know how far back it dates, but it's very old, and it's along the Chattahoochee River. And the houses are just very gracious old houses. The commanding general's house was so beautiful. I used to drive by there and say I wanna live in that house. It's a great big, sprawling white house, sitting up on a hill surrounded by trees but with wonderful porches, just the ideal of gracious southern living, sort of what you might have imagined a plantation; in fact, it had been a plantation house. I think it was called Riverside [Fort Benning, Georgia]. And I kept thinking, I really want to live in that house, never did; never lived in one of those big houses on the post either. But it was like a college campus. Then you had the excitement of the troops marching. And there was the parachute school there. There was (unclear)--no, I think they may have moved it. There was a training center for foreign officers, so that you had this connection. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], after he got, after he finished the class, was assigned to teach at the infantry school. And I remember one of his (laughter) charges. He was a Middle Easterner. He was not Iraqi, but from one of those countries. And they were having great difficulty with him 'cause he was over there making remarks to the officers' wives around the tennis court, you know, little sexist things and, you know, not, just not proper. And so I remember we had him in our house for dinner, but Colin had a little talk with him. And I also remember that it was just after Ramadan was first (unclear) of Ramadan, and it was he won't eat until after sundown. This is his first meal. And whatever you do, you don't serve big pieces of meat. You know, in those days you, you entertained, you had steak. They don't eat big pieces of meat, so you gotta learn how to fix--I don't remember what I fixed. But I remember him being there for dinner and us having a hard time conversing. He didn't speak English that well. But then, somehow we got on a discussion about the Koran [Qur'an], and then he was able to be articulate. And we would go back and forth looking at things in the encyclopedia. And we talked to him about the Christian religion, and he would talk to us about Islam. And he gave me a copy of the Koran that I have in, in there now. But we got to know him and helped him, "No, no, this is taboo in our society; we don't do this, and you don't talk to women this way and approach like that." I often wondered what happened to him. I don't know. He may have been from Yemen. I don't know where he was from but one where they have, still have the same archaic fuse. But you were exposed to (unclear) sort of the rest of the world through that military culture, and you had that basic thing in common. Speaker 2: So where were you moving then? Speaker 1: Then--we stayed at Fort Benning [Georgia] for three and a half years. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There, we were pretty set-, settled. A lot of people came and went for Viet-, back and forth to Vietnam. Colin still didn't. He was kind of living on borrowed time. Story_ID: 629749 Speaker 1: We went from there [Fort Benning, Georgia] to yet another school, and that was the Command and General Staff College [United States Army Command and General Staff College] at Leavenworth [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas], which is--he was by then a major. Speaker 2: So he's on a track clearly. Speaker 1: He's clearly on a track. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so you were sent to this school to prepare you for service on a general officer's staff, on a command staff, to be a staff officer. Many people in that class are at a point where they're gonna be promoted to lieutenant colonel and go out to commands themselves. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was still too young for this. He was thirty--no, he wasn't thirty. He was maybe twenty-nine. But we went to Leavenworth. Once again, there's not enough housing on post. This was the year they had doubled the size of the class to provide officers to go to Vietnam. So somebody who was teaching there found an apartment for us. But once again, it was like a miniature military post 'cause everybody in the apartments were in the class. And it was also, it was integrated. It was the first time we had served with a number of black officers. Most other places it was just us. We're here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is in at Fort Leavenworth? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Here for the first time there were a number of other black officers. Speaker 2: So who were they? Who were they? Do you remember? Speaker 1: Nobody who became a general. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There's not any name there that you-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --would know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But across the street from us there was a French officer who had served at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam, one of those who had said, "Don't go there." There was in our class a German officer who was the son of the man who carried the bomb to kill Hitler [Adolf Hitler], in the, in the attempt to assassinate Hitler before he died in, in where [Berlin, Germany] he died. But his name was von Stauffenberg. One of his children is married to children of friends of mine now, so it just goes on and on, this connection. So you had this international community and a very close-knit group. Lots of social life again. It was the most fun I ever had. We all lived in different stairwells; again, all children the same ages running around. Some people had older ones who were there to babysit if you, when you had--and we lots of parties. And we were there for a year. Story_ID: 629750 Speaker 1: Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] graduated second in the class [at United States Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas], which gave him an even higher profile. But by this time he's going back to Vietnam, and I went back to Birmingham [Alabama]. Shortly after he got to Vietnam, a general named General Gettys [Major General Charles M. Gettys], who commanded the Americal Division [23rd Infantry Division], read about him in Army Times and said, "Get this man up here; I want him on my staff." And so he went to somebody who became a godfather for him, who recognized this is somebody who I need. And so he was on General Gettys' staff, which involved him in the massacre at My Lai [Vietnam]. It had happened before he got there. I've forgotten what his job was. The job that General Gettys gave him was a colonel's job. He was a major, and he, he said he remembered the day they came in and said let me see your files, because the massacre had been done by off, by Americal troops to these--this is, and I've the stories of it. It was an awful, awful thing that we did, that those men did. And only one I think would, Lieutenant Calley [William Calley] went to jail. You don't remember that. But he was there when, when the inspection teams came in and said let me see the records for this area. He said everybody knew that that was a very bad area where the Vietcong were really entrenched. And you didn't go in there without lots of people surrounding. Since then, recently I saw a man on television who was there. He was flying helicopter support and saw this massacre and began to rescue the Vietnamese and get them out of the way. And he talked at great length about what was done to those people, and it was horrendous, and after that how nobody ever gave him any cover, hoping he would get killed rather than go out to tell the story. And I think he had just died. That was the reason they had this story on. But that was Vietnam the second time-- Story_ID: 629751 Speaker 1: Now we were talking when we broke just about the assignment, the massacre at-- Speaker 2: My Lai [Vietnam]. Speaker 1: --in My Lai. What I want to understand, are you saying that Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was assigned to the unit? Speaker 2: He was assigned to the Americal Division [23rd Infantry Division], which, from whence the soldiers came that did the massacre at My Lai. Speaker 1: Okay, but it was before he got there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was before he got there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: He was not-- Speaker 1: Now, did he talk about-- Speaker 2: --in the country at the time. Speaker 1: --his second tour of duty over at Vietnam? Speaker 2: Colin does not-- Speaker 1: The world was aware of things. Speaker 2: Oh yes, the world was very much aware by then. Colin Powell never talks about war experiences, never. He does not see war movies. He does not talk about it. When he wrote his book ['My American Journey,' Colin L. Powell and Joseph E. Persico], he would give me chapters to read. And I was so excited 'cause these were things I didn't know. And I remember taking the manuscript down to him and saying, "Quick, give me the next chapter." He said, "What, you were there." I said, "Yes, but I didn't know what you were thinking. This says what you were thinking." He never, ever discussed his experiences there. Occasionally, something would come out, like the day they found the man--that was in the first tour--where he told this, guys he had to have evidence of a kill, and they brought the man's ears back, a Vietcong. But, other than that, unh-uh, he has never--briefly talked about the day the helicopter went down that he was in, but, only briefly. He doesn't dwell on those. I don't think he talks about it to anybody. As I say, he definitely does not see movies about Vietnam [Vietnam War] or read books about Vietnam. Speaker 1: And no talk about fear? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Never? Speaker 2: Never talk about fear. Undoubtedly, there must have been times when he was afraid, but he has never said he was. Story_ID: 629752 Speaker 1: He went, the second tour [to Vietnam], was that a year, too, or was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a year, too. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, you're back in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: I went back to Birmingham. Speaker 1: So how was that? Speaker 2: It was different. Speaker 1: You have two-- Speaker 2: I have two children [HistoryMaker Michael Powell and Linda Powell] now, and my sister [Barbara Johnson Greene] had two children. She was divorced by then, and we shared a house, and so the four children were there and me and my sister. Communication was a little bit better, but I remember only one phone call in the year that he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was away. And it was done via radio where you say something, and then you say, "Over." And then you wait, and the other person says something and says, "Over." It's a very stilted conversation. But the thing that was different with the second tour was that the men, they went on R and R the first tour, rest and relaxation, but they went in country, or to Thailand was usually where they went or to Hong Kong. When he was there the second time, you could go to Hawaii, and then your family could come. And he was not in country more than a month when he wrote and said, "Please plan to come to Hawaii and plan to bring the children." And so, we went to meet him in Hawaii. I think it was January. He'd gone over in September, August or September. But before he went you had to have those conversations that people have: if you die, where do you want to be buried? And for years, there was a letter in his desk that was addressed to me that said in case of death. I've always wondered what it said. I've never known. It's not there now, but it was left there for me to read if he did not come back. So the second time I was with my sister. It was harder to be on your own 'cause you were parenting children by then, but it was not a bad time. It was not a bad time. I met--when he came home--I met him in Atlanta [Georgia]. It was the day the man [Neil Armstrong] walked on the moon because he was sound to sleep, and I was punching him, saying, "Wake up; you've got to see this; you've got to see this." But of course, he's exhausted. It's one thing that was always there whenever, sure, is whenever any man comes home from a danger zone, he can finally sleep and don't have to sleep with one ear open. He came back, and we immediately came here [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 629753 Speaker 1: Now was his [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] rank still major at that point? Speaker 2: He was still a major at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was when we came to Washington [D.C.] the first time, 1969. Speaker 1: And Gettys [Major General Charles M. Gettys] is still his, his, is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gettys was still his-- Speaker 1: --sort of mentor. Speaker 2: --godfather, he was. He came here to go to graduate school [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Now that's what I was interested in: why getting an M.B.A.? Why was that? Speaker 2: That was kind of the graduate degree people got because managing people in the [U.S.] military is like managing a business. And as a commander, you are managing a very big business. Men and, and material and you got a whole lot of stuff to, to balance, transportation, housing, everything. You are the mayor, if you will, of a city. In the case of his next command, when he was a three-star general, it was bigger than that. He was, he was the commander of a corps that had three divisions in it. And you are responsible for managing this whole episode. So a business degree was the one that many people pursued, unless they planned to leave the military and go do something else, then it was the (unclear)--computers were first coming into use because his thesis was on computer language. Don't ask me to explain it 'cause I can't. I don't know what that was all about, but that was what it was about. Speaker 1: So when he went to school, was he still working? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) He was given two years to go to graduate school. He went to school at night. I don't know why. But all of his classes were at night, maybe 'cause that's when other people came. He was at home during the day, and he was studying. It was wonderful having him home (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's a good time because-- Speaker 2: It was a very good time. Speaker 1: --because you're together. Speaker 2: We were together. We had our third child [Annemarie Powell Lyons]. Story_ID: 629754 Speaker 1: And how old were the kids at this point? Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Michael entered first grade, and Linda [Linda Powell] was four when we went there [Washington, D.C.]. Michael was going into first grade. And Annemarie [Annemarie Powell Lyons] was born the next year. She didn't know what to think 'cause all of her life he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was at home. When he finally went to work, that poor baby wandered around the house. She did not know--she didn't ask, but she couldn't figure out where he was. And the first night he came home from work he got such a greeting. She was at the top of the stairs. She let out a shriek and went flying into his arms. Michael and Linda might not have reacted that way, but when she did they decided they would too. So he had a great welcome home that night. As I--he--she is the only baby he was around for. Of course, Michael was born when he was away. When Linda was born, he was again in a school. And the day I went into labor he was having exams, so he was not there. I think I might have seen him that--I did see him that evening. When Linda was born I had pneumonia. Speaker 1: You had pneumonia when she was born (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. She--all of my children except Annemarie were early. And so she was not due. In fact, I had just seen the doctor that day because I was having difficulty breathing and the cold and everything, but they can't give you anything. And I realized in the night that I was in labor and went, and dropped me off and went on to school. And so that, I remember that night he was there because he wheeled me down to x-ray, and that was when they determined that I had pneumonia. I didn't see Linda until she was five days old. My mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] came down to take care of Michael. So Annemarie, he was at home the whole time. Although, the day she was born he was having finals, so she wasn't there then. I don't think, I don't think I saw him that night. He was, he was having finals. But it gave me a great deal of freedom 'cause I'd go off and leave him with that baby. (Laughter) I remember coming home one day and he's standing at the foot of the step with this baby in his arm and said, "I can't get a thing done." I said, "I know, you know; you know what it's like." But he would prop her up in the infant seat beside him, and they were strong companions all through the first year of her life. Story_ID: 629755 Speaker 1: At this point, has he met George Price [Brigadier General George B. Price]? Speaker 2: He met George Price I think in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he did, the first time, because when we were living in Phenix City, Alabama, that's the first time I met George Price. They came through on their way somewhere. And he and Georgianna [Georgianna H. Price] and the kids came to our house in Phenix City. And then, of course, they kept in touch all along. When George was going to Germany, I guess at some point in his career, we were living in Dale City [Virginia]. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was either still in graduate sch-, maybe he was out of graduate school [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] by then now. But I remember George calling up in the middle of the night saying, "I want you to go to Germany with me," and Colin saying, "No, I'm not going to Germany right now." But George was going to take up command and wanted Colin to go with him. He's such a character. Speaker 1: He is a character. Speaker 2: He's such a character (laughter). Speaker 1: He's a character. Speaker 2: He's the-- Speaker 1: I had dinner with him once (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He has the biggest-- Speaker 1: --and I was like-- Speaker 2: --mouth in the world. Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: When George Price walks into a room there's a crowd. Speaker 1: I couldn't believe it. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: The whole--I felt like I was what, everyone was in the [U.S.] military, and he was giving-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --directions. Speaker 2: Giving directions. And he was so funny talking about going to Leontyne's [Leontyne Price] debut at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York] in his dress blues, and folks thought he was a doorman (laughter) and asking him to get a car. Story_ID: 629756 Speaker 1: You're here, and he's finished school [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what is the next assignment? Speaker 2: He was sent to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. I don't remember who he work-, he worked for General--who? General--I don't remember--General Palmer [General Bruce Palmer, Jr.] maybe. And I don't remember what the organization was, but there were a lot of people who became generals out of that office. In fact, most of them did. Many of them, all of them made at least three stars, and, and if not all of them making four. But it was a very high-powered group, and he was there for-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: He came home one day and said, "The [U.S.] Army asked me to do something you're really gonna like." I said, "What's that?" They wanted him to apply for a White House fellowship. Speaker 1: And what year is this? Speaker 2: In 1970, 1970, the year Anne [Annemarie Powell Lyons] was born--no, '72 [1972] maybe. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause he received his M.B.A. in 1971. Speaker 2: Right, '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was '72 [1972]. And so, once again, he left the Army, and this was the beginnings of his Washington [D.C.] journey. Story_ID: 629757 Speaker 1: So the White House Fellows program, he left to combat. Speaker 2: You leave the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People who come to the program, all the ones except the [U.S.] military, are paid by the department they're assigned to, I think. But the military is still paid by the military, so you don't get any raises, and you don't get any perks. But that, too, was an amazing experience because that's the first time you begin to be exposed to Washington [D.C.] life, and the political scene, and to be, you're on the fringes, but there while things are happening. And he was at OMB [Office of Management and Budget], working directly under Fred Malek, but Cap Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger] was the head of OMB, and Frank Carlucci was his deputy. That's the first time he met them, who became his godfathers for the rest of his life. At OMB, I don't remember what his job was, but it really was quite impressive. It was in, his office, one that was in the old executive office building, great big office, and it's a beautiful building. A lot of historical things happened. Then I think the first Russian came to town. And for the first time, the Russian flag was being displayed on Pennsylvania Avenue from the balcony of the Old EOB [Old Executive Office Building; Eisenhower Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.], and this is really interesting. Story_ID: 629758 Speaker 1: It was the year of Watergate, so, in essence, you were there. Every day somebody else gets fired, and every day you're wondering what's gonna happen next. That was the year I went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for the very first time. The, Mrs. Nixon [Pat Nixon] had a tea that the White House Fellows' wives were invited to. There were some other people there, but I don't know who they were. And I was so taken by Mrs. Nixon. I thought what courage this has to take. She didn't have a receiving line with someone telling her who people were. She stood in front of the--not in front of the fireplace. The fireplace is here. She stood against this back wall in the State Dining Room and shook hands with every woman who came through there. And I thought, how can you come downstairs and do this? You must want to be upstairs hiding your head. But to come down here and stand by yourself and do this social duty with the proverbial stiff upper lip, my empathy was always for her. And I don't think anybody--I don't think much was made about what this stress was doing to this lady. Story_ID: 629759 Speaker 1: Mrs. Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], let me ask you, were you political at this point? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Not at all. Speaker 2: I'm not political now. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you raised either Republican-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: No? No, no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't even know what they voted. They voted, but I don't know what party they voted. This wasn't-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: --talked about. Now, when Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was in, in Vietnam the second time, I did work against George Wallace. He was running for governor again. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And my children were in a progressive school that, that whites were involved, privileged whites, and so they were surely Democrats. They were certainly not Republicans. But I remember working and calling the phones to get people to go out and vote against George Wallace. That is the only time I have ever worked in any political realm at all. I think of myself as an Independent. The person I vote for is determined by who I think is going to do the best thing. It's not party-oriented at all. I think when we first got married my husband was a Democrat. I don't know when he became a Republican, probably during the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration because he was appalled at the laxness in the White House. He was in and out. And he kept saying, "This is, this is not good; this is the capital of the United States." So maybe that's when it was. I don't know. He'll have to tell you that. Speaker 1: Okay. So let me as-, but in your growing up, your parents [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Charles Johnson]? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: No discussion? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were not-- Speaker 2: --discussion. Politics then was all black and white, so I'm not sure what determined-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or when they started voting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not sure they always did. Story_ID: 629760 Speaker 1: Back to the White House Fellows program, so, are you then engaging yourself in a different way? Are you seeing-- Speaker 2: No, I was still a mother with my children. And we lived very far away. We lived in Dale City [Virginia], which is forty miles down the road. So what, you weren't in town and part of things. I would come in to things that they had for wives. They did have a program for wives because in years past they hadn't. And so wives--men came to town. Their wives were just there on the periphery and very unhappy. And so they, they then selected somebody to run the program for wives. And they were very interesting things that you did: meetings with people; going to hear people speak; luncheons where people were speaking to talk about the government. I can remember going to--Walter Washington was the mayor then. And his wife [Bennetta Bullock Washington], I don't know what her job was, but she met with the White House Fellows' wives. We never got invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.]. White House Fellows don't, they're not in that level to be invited to-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --social things. But-- Speaker 1: But you went to the one thing-- Speaker 2: Oh, I went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with Mrs. Nixon [Pat Nixon]-- Speaker 2: Oh, with Mrs. Nixon. That's all the wives were invited there, and we were given very stern warnings before: you are not to talk with the press; remember, you are a source close to the president. All of us were scared to death. We saw anybody that looked like a reporter, we really ran the other way so that no--I don't think they were gonna ask us anything. We didn't know anything, but it was just the idea--gave us a sense of importance, that you were a source close to the president. But we, we weren't privy to anything. And so, most of your social stuff was done, much, much of it was done with the men. In the evenings there would be dinners with cabinet heads and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 629761 Speaker 1: There were trips. Well, the only trip that I went on, that the wives went on, we went to the first night launch at Cape Kennedy [Cape Kennedy Air Force Station; Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida], and that was quite an experience, and then back to Atlanta [Georgia] where we had a meeting with Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] who was getting ready to run for president. That time I remember the wives were in the meeting too and the fellows asking questions about revenue sharing and that kind of thing. And I'm just feeling good sitting there with the governor of Georgia. We were there I guess a day before we came back. The White House Fellows take a foreign trip every year. And they actually did two. They went to the Soviet Union [Russia], and they took the trip across the Soviet Union, across Siberia, on the Trans-Siberia Railroad [Trans-Siberian Railway]. And it was very ticklish to have the [U.S.] military members in there. There were four--there were five military men in the class. And so the Russians were little concerned about this, and they, they had their people on the train with them all the time. They were constantly watched. The director of the program at that time was an [U.S.] Army officer who was such a character. His name is Bernie Loeffke [Major General Bernard Loeffke]. He's Colombian by birth but a West Point [United State Military Academy, West Point, New York] graduate who speaks at least six, if not eight, eight languages, great physical fitness nut, jumping out of airplanes, that kind of thing. But he would see an opportunity, he (laughter)--they tell the story about being in Germany. And I think it was the German chancellor who was in a restaurant, in a corner, in the dark with somebody he probably shouldn't have been with. But Bernie goes right over to introduce himself and say, (laughter) "Won't you please come and say hello to the White House Fellows?" But it was a time of firsts, them going into East Berlin [Germany] and whether they could--they couldn't go in in uniform; they couldn't wear the uniforms when they went in. It, there were a lot of firsts on that trip. And then that was when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had opened the doors to China, and so the White House Fellows were the first group to go into China. They went in that August for a trip into China. Story_ID: 629762 Speaker 1: Now the program [White House Fellows] was one or two years? Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: It's one year. That was a lot packed in one year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a lot packed into one year, a lot. Speaker 1: So now, he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] went back into the service after that? Speaker 2: You go back into the service. And what did he do? He went to Korea. He went to Korea for a year-- Speaker 1: But this is-- Speaker 2: --for eighteen months. Speaker 1: --but then Korea [Korean War] is sort of over at that point then. Speaker 2: The war was over. Speaker 1: Yeah, the war is over, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You didn't travel with them? Speaker 2: No, it was not an-- Speaker 1: So where are you-- Speaker 2: --accompanied tour. Speaker 1: --so where are you at then? Speaker 2: I was in our house. We owned a house in, in Woodbridge [Virginia] by then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was--families go when they're assigned to Seoul [South Korea]. But, as usual, he was assigned to a unit up near the border, and it's just the men. His house was a Quonset hut, and he had a great time. He had the most fun he'd ever had. I was very worried about him because this was a period in the [U.S.] military where there was a lot of black militancy-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and a lot of racial tension. In fact, Frank [ph.] told me the other day that he had met some colonel who said, "Yeah, I used to feel really sorry for the general. Whenever there was a race riot they'd send him to straighten it out." And yeah 'cause he was the only black officer up there, so he was responsible for keeping the peace up in that part of the world, but he had a wonderful time. And his commander had asked him to extend, and he said, "I can't do that." I said, "Extend. I'll go back with you and take the kids." He said, "There's nowhere for them to go to school." I said, "That's all right. They'll have a great education. I'll go." But then he decided he wouldn't do that, but he really enjoyed his, his assignment there. Speaker 1: Now why did he enjoy it so much? Speaker 2: I don't know. Maybe it was an all-male environment with a lot of camaraderie without the danger. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they had a great time. There are many, many stories. But they--I used to read the letters and think these are grown men, but it's the thing that they do to let off steam after being out with the troops and so forth and dealing with a few--there weren't many--tense events with the North Koreans on the other side. Story_ID: 629763 Speaker 1: Now how are you gaining your support though? You know, like, you're still raising your kids basically by yourself. Speaker 2: You do it with your neighbors. And my neighbors on both side of me were [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Okay, they were, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was the first time we'd lived in civilian community, but many of the people were military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were a lot of civilians, but most of 'em, many of them, were military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were near Quantico [Virginia], so that was where I went to do my shopping and use the hospital and so forth. But no, army wives are tough ladies. They take the situation and go with it. I won't tell you that it wasn't lonely and, and times when you were sorry, bu-, and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said to me, "I know you would really like to go home [Birmingham, Alabama], but we can't take the kids to those schools down there." And that was true; I wouldn't have wanted them to go there and go to school. Schools up here were far (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Better. Speaker 2: --superior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's where we were. Story_ID: 629764 Speaker 1: So what schools were they in? Were they--you s- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Prince William County [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: The community that we bought a house in was brand new. Speaker 1: Prince William's not Prince George's [Prince George's County, Maryland], Prince William. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, Prince George's is Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Prince William is just south of Fairfax [Fairfax County, Virginia]. The housing community was brand new. The school was brand new. It was a big booming time in the--well, the housing market out here always seems to be booming, but it was very a fast-growing market out there. The schools were immediately too crowded. Because I don't know why developers and the school board can't agree, but they never have enough. So my children ended up going to school year-round, and that was instituted the year Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was in Korea. To make more space, they had a program called 45/15, so that at all times there were three groups of kids in school and one group out. They would go to school forty-five days, and they were off fifteen, and this meant they had four vacations a year. When that group was out, this left room for another group to come in. Teachers had the option of a twelve-month contract or a nine-month contract, so that they could come on with the kids and go off, or they could teach straight through. How much money they got depended on what they did. I'm a great advocate of year-round school. There is absolutely no reason children need to be out of school for three months. That schedule started when folks had to work in the fields. There is no reason for children to be out of school for three months. When they were in school year-round, there was never any, any time when you had to review. The teachers could move into the next grade's work while they had them here. And so they were off fifteen. They hadn't lost it. They, then the next grade could pick up and move right on. There was never a need to review or to backtrack. You could just keep the flow of instruction going. Parents fussed and said oh, they won't have any sports, blah, blah, blah. But the county rearranged its sports schedule so that there were the same things available for them when they were on vacation as there would have been when they were out all summer. Parents complained about it being too hot. They air conditioned the schools. We can't go on vacation. Who goes on vacation for three months? And the good part about it that I remember, and as I say, it was when Colin was in Korea, 'cause when he came home it was in September, and we could go to Florida, and it was off-season rates. We went to Disney World [Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida], and it was not the crowd, and it didn't cost as much. And we had fifteen days of vacation when their father had just come home and they could bond before they went back to school. So it was a good-- Speaker 1: That was very early in terms of year-round though. Speaker 2: It was. They might have been the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's-- Speaker 2: --pioneers. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause they're still talking about that in a lot of places. Speaker 2: They don't do it anymore in Prince William. People campaigned against it until they did away with it. They still are overcrowded. My grandson [Jeffrey Powell] is in high school, Michael's [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] oldest son. And until this year, he rode almost an hour in the morning to school. They would have to leave at 6:30 to get to the school, which was far away from them. There were no, there was no high school out there in the area. All of these houses had just been built. Where they live is where the old Lorton Prison [Lorton Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia] was. And so it was torn down, and immediately the communities sprang up. The elementary school that they went to was already there, built when the first group of houses were built. But for high school, they were going to Hayfield [Hayfield Secondary School, Alexandria, Virginia], which is the worst high school in Fairfax County. Story_ID: 629765 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer. If you can state your name and spell it for us and today's date. Speaker 2: I'm Alma Johnson Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], A-L-M-A, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, P-O-W-E-L-L. Today is February 3rd, nine--2006. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is our continuation interview. Story_ID: 629766 Speaker 1: And yesterday when we sort of, you know, stopped the interview, we were talking, you were coming back to Washington, D.C (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, and this was going to be--we were getting ready to start the beginning of what was gonna be Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]--I don't--should I call it career professional? No, that's the wrong-- Speaker 2: Well, his progression into the political arena-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --if you will. Yes, he was still in the [U.S.] Army, but more a part of the political establishment. Speaker 1: Okay. And you call that career political? Is that how you refer to it? Speaker 2: I'm just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --casting about for a term. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Many [U.S.] military officers follow the same path because many of the government agencies have military people in them for one reason or another. And they all have had some kind of introduction to it. They've been detailed to maybe--well, now, I'm sure there are many people who have, are assigned to the [U.S.] Department of Homeland Security. But there have been people in Commerce [U.S. Department of Commerce]. Transportation [U.S. Department of Transportation] really runs the [U.S.] Coast Guard. The Coast Guard does not belong to the military except in times of war, and so they're in government agencies. Colin had had the experience first of being a White House Fellow that introduced him to the system. And then because of that introduction, there were times when he was brought back. When we were at Fort Campbell [Kentucky], for example, and the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration came in, he was called back to Washington for an interview, first with Zbigniew Brzezinski at the, at the NSC [National Security Council]. He really didn't want to come back to Washington. He wanted to, he, his first love is being with the troops and on a post, and he really, really did not want to go. And he was intervide-, viewed by him. And came back to Fort Campbell hoping he was going to stay there. And then the Army sent him back to the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], where it ultimately meant we were coming back. And he was the military assistant to the special assistant to the secretary of defense, a lot of layers. I'm not sure there is a special assistant right now. But each person has their own thing; that was a lawyer named John, John Kester, and Colin was his military assistant. Speaker 1: Now what year was that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was 1977. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Story_ID: 629767 Speaker 1: Now can I ask a question about your role in all of this and, and were you--because Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] talked yesterday about the fact that there was always entertainment. You know, he talked about, about moving, you know, in and out. And he had, was really quite, you know, the smells of different homes; he associated different smells with different homes. And, but he also--you know, I'm just wondering because you talked a little bit about, you know, making sure that everything was together, and you talked about the moves. You didn't talk about as much your role and you know, as a, as his companion in entertaining and the responsibilities that that brought. And I'm just wondering, you know, what, was there a discussion around that? What were you--were you feeling any heat in that regard? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it--something that was, came easy? Speaker 2: It is, it is what comes naturally. When you're in the [U.S.] military situation you, of course, play host to all of the people who work for you. For example, when we first got to Fort Campbell [Kentucky], a week later we had all of his [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] staff at the house for a happy hour. And this is, you have a casual gathering so that you can get to know each other in a social setting, and then you can work together easier. It makes those who are below you feel comfortable with you, and especially when you involve the family and the children, and all of them came. And you feed them, and you have drinks, and you talk, and you get to know each other. And at a hail and farewell--I heard Michael talk about all of the, the rituals; there are many--at a hail and farewell, it's to welcome the new ones and to say farewell to the old ones. And they're usually things exchanged, maybe letters or plaques or, there's always a gift room the unit to, for you to take with you on your way. I can't tell you how many bowls I've got in there engraved from such and such a unit or--we still do very formal things in the military. Not everywhere, but some place you still do calling cards. And so calling card trays are a gift. Speaker 1: Call (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Calling card trays. Speaker 1: What are calling-- Speaker 2: A silver tray that sits by the front door. And as you leave, you leave your card. This is a remnant from years and years back in, in society. You go to call, you leave your card. And there, even the number of cards that are left, there is something that dictates that. Speaker 1: And what is that? Speaker 2: I don't think I remember. But you leave the number depending on the number of adults in the house, then the wife--but, we have books that tell you that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --full of military etiquette and protocol. So that is part of it. Story_ID: 629768 Speaker 1: The other thing, as a commander's wife, you're the mother. All of the soldiers that are in your husband's unit are in his care. He is responsible for them, and you are the mother; you are responsible for them, too, and for the health and well-being and, and state of mind of their families. And so there is a lot of reaching out to them and being unofficially the caretaker. Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you this, is there a history? Do you know the history of, of a spouse's involvement in this role? I mean, obviously, you are saying there was training. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It always has been. Speaker 2: --how (unclear)--it's always been. Speaker 1: It's always been-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --if you go back and read stories. I'm reading Cokie Roberts' 'Founding Mothers' ['Founding Mothers: The Women Who Raised Our Nation']. And in the chapter it's talking about the early days of the Revolutionary War. George Washington's wife [Martha Washington] was there at camp and many of the other wives, too, and fulfilling the same role of providing support for the men and for the families, and knitting and sewing; and all of this, it's always been. If you go back and read of the Roman wars. They called the camp followers, but they were along to do just that. It's gotten, of course, different as, as time goes on, but it is, it is a unit that works together for the good of the whole. With the advent of women's lib [women's liberation] and young women being much more independent and not expected to be homemakers and, and perfect entertainers and so forth, the senor wives were faced with the problem of helping the women come togeth-, of making them want to be. I can tell you that when I was a new wife and going to a [U.S.] military post, I really didn't have much patience for going to a tea or a coffee. I would much rather have been at home doing something constructive. But to dress up and go to tea or coffee in the morning, seemed to me such a waste of time. But by the time my husband [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was a commander, I understood it. And by then we had a number of young, many young wives who were going out to work, and there were new women. And so our social activities went from being daytime things to evening things because they worked. But I said to them: "I know that you think this is a waste of your time, and you really chafe against the protocols of this. But, first of all, you must understand the business that our husbands are in. They could leave tomorrow, and we don't know when they're coming back, and some of them won't come back. And so because of this, we have to know each other so that when the situation presents itself we have each other to lean on and to help." And so when you look at it in that, that frame, then you know the importance of these social things. Story_ID: 629769 Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of entertaining goes on in the [U.S.] military. Someone asked me recently I--not recently but since I've been retired. We were having something again for people that worked for Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. She said, "Oh, so you had it catered?" I said, "No." "Wait, well, you got the dishes and things from the caterer?" I said, "No, they all belong to me." "They do?" And I said, "Yeah." In the military you didn't have any money to hire dishes and glasses and a caterer. You learned to do that, and you have capable help that can do that. Frank [ph.] can put on any kind of party. I don't have to hire a caterer. The other young man that came can do anything. They are both now retired, and they do catering all over everywhere. One of our former military aides works as the, at the White House [Washington, D.C.] now as the president's military--takes care of the president's clothes, but Sam [ph.], when he was a military aide--he's in the [U.S.] Navy down at, in Norfolk [at Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia]. His general, or admiral, sent him to the school [Starkey International Institute, Denver, Colorado] that's in Colorado that trains high price butlers, who are then hired by wealthy people in New York. And they make, some of 'em, as much as 100 [100,000 dollars] and 150,000 [dollars] a year but trained in the niceties of running a household, and planning, and, and managing, and being able to do the things that are required of your employer. In the military, well, you don't, you're not--most of the time you're on your own with that, so you learn it very early. You always have the tablecloths, and the silver, and the china, and the crystal. And there's protocol for all of that too. I won't go into that, but you have to learn all of that. If you have a tea, for example, and coffee is at one end of the table, and tea is at the other end, coffee outranks tea, so that the senior lady is the one who play--pours coffee. And the next senior one is the one who pours tea. And it's, it's just a protocol. In their modern, casual society we would say oh, come on. But it's the thing that bind. It's those little things that bind you together, and it is those bonds that are necessary to have to have a war, to have to have a cohesive army that works together. All of that is important. Story_ID: 629770 Speaker 1: The [U.S.] military as a whole did not pay much attention to wives early on. It kind of came along. They didn't provide much for you. I joke that their, their philosophy was if the [U.S.] Army wanted you to have a wife, they would have issued you one. But even as late as when Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and I got married, an officer wanted to get married, he had to get permission to be married. And that rule doesn't exist anymore but was for the protection of very young soldiers. Colin, for example, when he was in Korea, had young soldiers who would go out on the night after payday, get drunk, meet a Korean girl, and come in and say, "I'm getting married." Well, that's not going to work. And so you, as the commander, have the authority to stop this from happening. So all of this is built into the structure of the military, and entertaining is just a part of it. It is a way of building bonds. The same thing is true in any facet of society. I say in Washington [D.C.], there is no party that is social; they're all business. They're done for a particular reason, to bring a particular group of people together. Maybe somewhere there are parties just 'cause folks wanna have fun but not often. So, that gets built in. I don't do much entertaining now 'cause I don't have to. When Colin was at the state department [U.S. Department of State] we did it there. But for example, I haven't taken it up, but when he was chairman of America's Promise [America Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.], every year we had the whole staff here at the house to thank them for what they did and for a Christmas party. I'm gonna have to give myself up to do that, but I haven't. They've had one, but it wasn't me hosting it. So, that, that becomes part of the, the routine. The children know it, and are comfortable with it, and know how to do it when it's their turn. Speaker 2: Let me ask you--that was very, actually from a historical standpoint, very helpful. Now, but I--and from, you know, just sort of an inside workings of the, on the military. How--when you said you entertained a lot, what is a lot? I mean, like, if you were on post, then, I mean and, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe once a month at your house. There could be instances where you co-host with somebody else. There--at least once a month in your house, if it was just the monthly hail and farewell. Speaker 2: And these, these traditions over the coffee and the tea tradition, that caught my interest. Were these at teas that you were having or dinners with the, the women's (unclear)-- Speaker 1: They were usually teas for one reason or another. It was maybe you had a visitor to come into the post, maybe the senior wife of somebody else, you know, of a, of a senior--say, the chief of staff of the Army is coming to your post, the men take care of him, and then you senior wives take care of the wife of the chief if she is traveling with him, and usually she did. The chiefs' wives traveled with them. Even today with Iraq they go with them to Iraq. Story_ID: 629771 Speaker 1: Now were you and he talking about his path? And is this something-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: We never discussed his path or, or any ambitions--what I'd really like to do, no. It's just happened, and you went along. I--he didn't tell me, but when he went to the National War College [Washington, D.C.], which is-- Speaker 1: Now what year did he go to the National War College? Speaker 2: After the White House Fellows year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After Korea. He was promoted to full colonel during that year. And I think it must have been '74 [1974] or seventy-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was '75 [1975] because it was the year before he went to-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Fort Campbell [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Right, I think it says 1976. Speaker 2: No, '76 [1976] was when we left (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh. Speaker 2: --and went to Fort Campbell-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I know that's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where we saw the celebrations for 1976. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we went to the National War College--have you ever--you've never seen there? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: This is down in Southeast Washington [Washington, D.C.] on a point across the boundary channel from Hains Point [Washington, D.C.] and from the airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.]. It's a little spit of land that runs out. There's a beautiful building that sits at the end of it with a big dome which houses the National War College. National War College has been, has been joined--there used to be the National War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces [Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy, National Defense University, Washington, D.C.], which dealt with engineers and things. But they've been merged, and so there's another modern building there that houses that. But still there's a magnificent building done by an Italian that sits there and a big parade field straight up the center that is also a golf course. And then there are thirteen beautiful southern mansion type houses there that are occupied by general officers, very senior general officers. The commandant of the school lives there. The commandant of the armor and material--well, I don't need to go into that, but all of 'em are particular commanders. And the houses are assigned for the job, not necessarily the rank. But his--did his mother [Maud McCoy Powell] come then? Yes, I think his mother came to visit. And she said, "You know, when you all first came to Washington [D.C.] and he was taking me sightseeing, he brought me down here and he said, 'I'm gonna go to this school someday,'" because it is the most prestigious of the war colleges. There's the Army War College [United States Army War College] at Carlisle [Pennsylvania], the [U.S.] Air Force one [Air War College] in Montgomery [Alabama], and on and on. But the National War College trains not only [U.S.] military officers, and they are all services, but it's also diplomats, career civil service people. They don't have any foreigners in that course. But then you are learning and addressing the issues of the world. These are the issues that you will face as a leader in coming days in the world. This is the situation of the world, and there are seminars and so forth. They go on a foreign trip every year. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] slipped off and did not go because he just traveled as a, as a White House Fellow. He didn't have the same thing that they did. He didn't need to go traipsing around to look at countries and studying what they did. So he had been selected for command at Fort Campbell, so he went off to take command. College didn't know it then. They, they found it out later. But it is that, that was just another steppingstone along there. Story_ID: 629772 Speaker 1: So when you returned from Fort Campbell [Kentucky], that's when he went with the director-- Speaker 2: He was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) he went with the department of-- Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Department of Defense. He was the [U.S.] military assistant to the special assistant to the secretary of defense. And that was where he caught the attention of other people. When he talked--when he became--he was selected for promotion to general. He was--way he found out about it, he was sitting in his office, and Charles Duncan [Charles Duncan, Jr.], who was then the deputy secretary of defense, came by, going into John Kester's office, and said, "Colonel Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], come in the office." And he said he went in, and Charles looked at him and said, "How are you, general?" And that was when he knew he had been selected. First he had to kind of fight to stay in the [U.S.] Army, because then he became Charles Duncan's military assistant. Speaker 1: Now why did he have to fight to stay in the military? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you that, because they wanted him to come into government. Charles Duncan was the deputy secretary of defense. And that was the year Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] went to the mountaintop and came back and reorganized everything. And he made Charles Duncan the secretary of energy. And Charles took Colin with him to the energy department [U.S. Department of Energy] as his chief of staff. And he wanted him to resign his commission and stay there as chief of staff. And Colin kept saying, "No, I have to go back to the Army." And so he came back to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] again as the military assistant to the deputy secretary of defense. Speaker 1: So he, he declined going as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay he-- Speaker 2: He went over there and helped him form the staff-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and put together the staff and got them running, and then he went back. Story_ID: 629773 Speaker 1: Now why did he feel so strongly about that? Speaker 2: That's where he wanted to be. He never wanted to be anything else but a soldier (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: You go to [U.S.] Department of Energy's chief of staff, yeah, that's fine, but what happens when the administration's over? Speaker 1: After--that's right. Speaker 2: The [U.S.] Army was his life. That's where he always intended to be. So, by this time, everybody knows who is. The administration changed, and Frank Carlucci came on. And he was--well, we went away again. And the military assistant to the secretary of defense, who was then Caspar Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger], let us know that Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was the one who was being considered for that. And I thought no, that's not gonna happen, but yeah, it did. And we'd only been where we were not quite a year, but then there we were coming back to Washington [D.C.]. And then we were in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] that time for three and a half years serving as Caspar Weinberger's secretary of defense. This was a, this was the opening up of the world to me, because it's not done today, but at that time, when the secretary of defense traveled, if his wife traveled, so did I and all of the other wives of the men who were in, in the party. The (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, give an example of that. It seems-- Speaker 2: Well, the first-- Speaker 1: --like a traveling caravan. Speaker 2: It was a traveling caravan. The first trip I went on was literally around the world. We went from here to China, that we left California and flew to Hawaii, and from Hawaii to Guam, to Japan, to China, to Hong Kong, to Rome [Italy], where we had an audience with the pope [Saint Pope John Paul II], and then home. We, we flew from California, and we came back in to Washington, so you had circumvented [sic. circumnavigated] the world. And all along there our diplomatic me--a lot of business is done socially. And the wives go if there is a need for representational whatever. But, so that you go to formal dinners, and there are the principals from that government, and from your government, and their wives, and your wives. I, I smile about it and think it's all kind of like a fairy tale or reading stories about the traveling court and the ladies in waiting and the, the lady. Story_ID: 629774 Speaker 1: I was a lady in waiting. She, Mrs. Weinberger [Jane D. Weinberger] gets mad about that 'cause that's the way Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] put it in his book ['My American Journey,' Colin L. Powell and Joseph E. Persico]: Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] was Jane Weinberger's lady in waiting. And she was so mad about that, but I was. I saw to it that what she needed done was done, all behind her back; she didn't know it. I would say, "No, Mrs. Weinberger doesn't like that," and she didn't. So she never was faced with situations that were uncomfortable to her. She was not a lady who was in good health, so we would go out on ladies programs. Ladies programs are (laughter) the bane of all of our existence. It's where they're taking you around and showing you all the things of this town and the historical things and blah, blah, blah. Sometimes they're good; sometimes they're really silly; and you--sometimes you have to put up with some ladies that you really wish I didn't have to be with you, but this is a diplomatic thing. She was not in good health, so I would know when she was tiring, and I would say, "We have to leave now." This kept her from having to be--to say, "I don't want to go anymore." But it was always very relaxing for her to know that I was not going to let her get too tired. She, Mrs. Weinberger suffers from osteoporosis, and that was the beginnings of it so that she was in great pain a lot. But I could look and tell, and I would simply say, "Well, we have to leave now." And people took it. I was the wife of the military assistant who says what the secretary [Caspar W. Weinberger] is gonna do or don't do, so they would listen to me. We formed a very close friendship, and we've had some amazing, amazing experiences. I have been to most countries in the world, often not longer than a day and a half, but I can tell you I have been there. And you get an insight. But, we were a traveling party. Speaker 2: But, but this is--so there's training for this, obviously. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: There was no protocol training? Speaker 1: Unh-uh, you have to learn that on your own. Story_ID: 629775 Speaker 1: Now, what about the children? Are they, were-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). They're in no part of that. Speaker 1: They're no-, so how long (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you're leaving your children at home. Speaker 1: So how long was this trip? Speaker 2: Thirteen days. The only one I had left at home then was Annemarie [Annemarie Powell Lyons]. Anne, of all of my children, was the one that suffered the most upheaval. Things were very, very steady up until she came along, and by then, she was the only one at home. That trip was difficult. One of my neighbors was taking care of her, but she was really uncomfortable. She didn't really know them. They had a daughter, but they were not really friends, so that was unhappy for her. It finally worked out because one of her best friends in high school, who is to this day, her mother was with the state department [U.S. Department of State] and had to travel, so we would swap off. And Anne and Mandy [ph.] were like sisters. They felt very comfortable with each other. So if they're at each other's house, neither one of 'em had to be entertaining the other one. They were at home. They could go off and do what they wanted to do. Feel like washing your hair, you haven't got to wait and see what she wanted. It's just being at home. So that took care of the problem with traveling. And we traveled a lot during our years with the secretary of defense [Caspar W. Weinberger]. Story_ID: 629776 Speaker 1: And so this was the way you met other leaders around the world, and they came to know you. When we left the secretary of defense's [Caspar W. Weinberger] office, and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was always so anxious to go-- Speaker 2: He was, he, he-- Speaker 1: He wanted to go back the [U.S.] Army (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back to the Army. Speaker 1: He had missed being a battalion--no, he was a battalion commander in Korea. He missed having-- Speaker 2: The camaraderie. Speaker 1: He had a brigade. He had a ba-, everybody wants to, to lead. He had a--the progressions are you're a lieutenant, you got a platoon. You're captain, you got a company. When you're major, you're staff officer. When you're a lieutenant colonel, you lead a--what's a lieutenant colonel--slips my mind--but a colonel has a brigade which is made up of several different units, whatever the lieutenant colonel commands, that I can't think of this moment. And then the general is the next step who commands all of these. And everybody looks forward to being selected for command. So he missed being a division commander, what you do with two stars. He wanted so badly to do that. The chief of staff of the Army at the time so, told him, you know, may be too late for that, but you need to stay here 'cause this is where we need you. He was looking out for the interest of the Army. So finally, when--captain hadn't stepped down yet, but they finally agreed to let him go back to the Army, and he got his fourth star. Speaker 2: He got his fourth star. Did he go from-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): We're going to change here. Speaker 2: Okay, sorry. Speaker 1: No, he got his third star-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: I take that back. Story_ID: 629777 Speaker 1: --Who know any black officer who was afraid to exercise power. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They certainly--we have, we have a group that meets every year-- Speaker 2: You have a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) called the fall gathering. And all the black former generals, admirals come together for a dinner for the fall gathering. They come from all over everywhere. It's a wonderful reunion. And it also is a mentoring for the younger ones who are coming along. I remember the first fall gathering, walking in and being amazed at how many blacks there are now in all the [U.S.] military when it used to be five or six of us who would get together and have a dinner. But I think at that first one there were maybe twenty-six. And now, the numbers are going down now, and we discussed this at a dinner we had recently with--I think all those people at that dinner had made general on the same list as Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], that one-star--no, this, this particular small dinner we had. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They, a group of five or six of them get together once a month. They call themselves the lunch bunch. And when once a year, there's a tradition in the [U.S.] Army called a dining out, and that's when it's a formal occasion where you have your wives. And it has a lot of ceremony attached to it, too. So they jokingly do a dining out once a year where they had their wives, and they give us flowers. And it's just a casual evening where you're talking and telling old war stories. But the topic of conversation that night was that the numbers are going down. There is only, there is a young man now who has been selected for his fourth star, and he may be the only one right now. And he has not pinned it on yet because one, you gotta wait for another general to move. You've gotta wait for one to retire before you can step up because the number is prescribed in law about how many there are. So there's not a four-star slot for him right now, even though he has been selected for promotion. So until whoever he's supposed to replace goes somewhere else, he can't pin it on. So many places now--these, these officers--there's another black organization called The ROCKS [The ROCKS, Inc., Forestville, Maryland], made up of-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, I've heard of The ROCKS. Speaker 1: And The ROCKS mentor young people in college and bring them along and try to get people--and help them advance in the military. But ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] is diminishing. Something that I was not aware--one of the men told us that night--at some schools there are young people who are also in the Reserves [U.S. Army Reserve], and they can be ROTC members because then if they finish ROTC then they can become an officer if they might be a sergeant in the Reserves. But right now with the war in Iraq [Iraq War], they can be pulled out because they're also a member of the Reserves. So not many mothers want their children to join ROTC. And so the ranks are smaller. There are many more opportunities for young black men today. For most of the men of Colin's generation that was the only path that you had to ascend to a place where you had power. It is not as crucial now, a career path for young men. So, don't know what that-- Speaker 2: Means. Speaker 1: --means for the future of blacks in the [U.S.] military. It is fine that we have advanced to the point where it's just a give that they're going to be and they're going--some services are very slow. I don't know if the [U.S.] Marine Corps even has one right now. But if they do, you can count 'em on one hand. The [U.S.] Navy is also very slow to promote. There are very few black admirals. So, you, you are, even though it's a complete integrated institution, you still have to work within the institution. So that's the story of that. Story_ID: 629778 Speaker 1: You're saying he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was Caspar Weinberger's [Caspar W. Weinberger]-- Speaker 2: Military assistant. Speaker 1: --military assistant for three years, right? Was it three and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three and a half, yeah. Speaker 1: Three and a half years. Now, this was from what year to what year? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Isn't it-- Speaker 2: This is after-- Speaker 1: It was, it's '82 [1982] to '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: It's after--that, that's probably right. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982] to '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, now what was, what, what did he learn and what did you learn in those three and half years? Speaker 2: Oh, he learned all about the politics of the building and to know--you have to know the building and the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and how it works, and what fits in here, and what service rivalries there are here. It's, it's very complicated. It's all about that management. It's all about, it's like a, a big corporation, but you have to learn all of the ins and outs of that. He was very powerful because he controlled the access to the secretary. So that, that was a very crucial position. Speaker 1: How did he--did he talk at all about--now that, that is unsoldierly-like, sort of. I mean, not that there are not politics in the [U.S.] military, but did he talk about the, you know, having to weigh and balance politics versus administrative-- Speaker 2: You know, you don't-- Speaker 1: --duties? Speaker 2: --you don't kind of talk about that. It, you just do it. It's just day to day. Nobody talks about it. Speaker 1: But that was very good training-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --ground for what he would end up-- Speaker 2: Very definitely. Speaker 1: --doing. Speaker 2: Very, very definitely. Speaker 1: Ah, that's, okay. Speaker 2: This, again, makes him somebody that knows how to do this, knows how it works. And so then he went to Germany to V Corps [Fifth Corps]. Story_ID: 629779 Speaker 1: Can you tell me though, what were the issues facing the country at that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my God. Speaker 1: --between '82 [1982]-- Speaker 2: Oh, we went through-- Speaker 1: --eighty-six [1986]? Let's-- Speaker 2: --so much. Speaker 1: We had, didn't we have the-- Speaker 2: It was their-- Speaker 1: --the first-- Speaker 2: --Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair]. Speaker 1: I was gonna say the Iran-Contra. Speaker 2: No, that, that, that was second administration [President Ronald Wilson Reagan administration]. Speaker 1: No, it was-- Speaker 2: It was when the Iranians took the hostages. Speaker 1: Hostages, right, 'cause that was Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Speaker 2: He [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] when we tried to rescue the hostages. You must remember that as a military assistant, the information comes to you first. So for many years the bad news of the world came to my bedroom first. In the middle of the night the operation center would call to tell you what happened. And then it's your responsibility to tell your superior, and he in turn tells the president. So, the bad news of the world came to my bedroom. I can remember when Indira Gandhi was killed. I can remember when Gaddafi [Muammar Gaddafi] invaded Chad. You forget, we go from crisis to crisis, and we forget about the ones that went on when they tried to rescue the hostages and the planes crashed in the desert. I can remember him getting out of bed cursing and saying this was a terrible idea, and not well-conceived, and now you have to deal with this. But he had to be the one to go and tell it and then work with them on how we deal with this. It was a great relief to be gone from this, because you have to remember that when we traveled, all the telephones were in my room because he is the conduit to the secretary. Every night after you'd been to a big diplomatic banquet, when you go back to the hotel, you're not going to bed then because it's daytime in Washington [D.C.], and you have to get on the phones and talk, do the business. Phone's in my bedroom. And so the meetings after that to discuss what this minister said and what this means, that was always in my bedroom, which was next door to the secretary's. I remember in Paris [France] looking at this room and thinking what is a dinky little room. There's not even an easy chair in here. And it suddenly dawned on me, this is the maid's room, because there's a door that opens into the secretary's suite, and that's where you are because he has access; he must have that access into there. Story_ID: 629780 Speaker 1: Let me see, some of the other crises. There was a crisis a minute. Speaker 2: Well, the hostage crisis was really-- Speaker 1: The hostage crisis was the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was in the deputy secretary's [Charles Duncan, Jr.] office then. Caspar Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger] was the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's right, okay, okay. Speaker 1: We had a war in Grenada. Speaker 2: Right, the war in Grenada. Speaker 1: We had the Falklands [Falklands War]. We started, they started then laying the groundwork for the intervention in Panama because it wasn't in the papers then, but Manuel Noriega was doing some bad things. And they knew that eventually there was going to be a confrontation. So that kind of thing was always there. It's kind of tense to live with that all the time. And so it was a great relief to go away to a [U.S.] military post. Even though there is this vast corps to take care of, it was easy, and you were back among, where you belonged. You were back with a comfort zone. It, it involved many, many more responsibilities for me, because in addition to being the mother for every division in, in this corps and having to travel all around Germany to do the lady things, I had to belong to every club in Frankfurt [Germany], and there are many German-American clubs of one kind or another and, or an international club that brings together all the people from other countries who are in the city. It was always that so that you had a, a give and take all the time between different countries and then again between your different divisions over here. And it, it was a very big job, one where you got fat because I said, I used to say I graze across Frankfurt every day because everything that we do involves food. And the German ladies do not count calories. Their favorite thing to do is to have tea about 3:30, 4:00. This can go on to 9:00 at night, because they've had their bil-, big meal. That was at noon. And there are at least four kinds of cake. You start off with the tea and the cake, and you as the guest-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You as the guest, you as the guest must eat each one. After the cake there's some more tea, and then we have sandwiches and a little more chit-chat here and there. And then you go to some teacakes, and then you're back to the big cream-filled things. And this goes on and on. And we kept trying to explain to them, we have to be at home in the evening because that's when our husbands come home, and that's when we have our big meal. But it was always a matter of having to explain that as you went along. I was so, well, I was upset. We were only there six months. That's the period when I said I started all of my moves. We had gone to Germany. Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair] came up. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, you were in Germany only six months? Speaker 1: Six months, as commander of V Corps [Fifth Corps]. We were Germany. Iran-Contra had happened (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's--wait a minute. When he became commander of V, V Corps, that's when he got his fourth star? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's when he got the fourth star. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 629781 Speaker 1: Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair] happened. The White House was a mess. NSC [National Security Council] was a mess 'cause they had done this. And John Poin-, well, first, Bud McFarlane [Robert McFarlane] was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when you-- Speaker 1: --fired, and then-- Speaker 2: --when you refer-- Speaker 1: --John Poindexter. Speaker 2: --when you refer to NSC, you're talking about the National Security Council. Speaker 1: National Security Council. Bud McFarlane was fired, then John Poindexter, and they made Frank Carlucci the national security advisor. Frank Carlucci calls our house and said, "You gotta come back and help me straighten out this mess." And Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said, "I can't, I can't. I'm, I'm, I'm, I have my corps [V Corps (Fifth Corps)]. I'm here." He said, "Unh-uh, I can't do this without you. This is a mess, and you've got to come back and help me straighten it out." Speaker 2: But tell me, how--John Carlucci, had he had-- Speaker 1: Frank. Speaker 2: Frank, I'm sorry, Frank. Had he had a relationship with Colin before that at that point? Speaker 1: He met him first at the office of OMB [Office of Management and Budget] when he was a White House Fellow. Speaker 2: That's right, okay. Speaker 1: Cap Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger] was also the director of OMB. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In, in Washington [D.C.] you're never at a, you're always in the same thing. So Colin said, "I can't just say to the [U.S.] Army I'm going to the White House." The next night the telephone rang in my kitchen, and it was Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. And he says, "I'm asking you to come back." Well, are you going to say to the president of the United States (laughter): "Mr. President, I really like my soldiers; I really like riding around in hel-, helicopter; I really love it that my two divisions just won the Boeselager competition," which is with German forces and tanks and races and all of that? No, you can't do that. And so, he was off and gone--went running off by himself, mes-, left me and Linda [Linda Powell] and Anne [Annemarie Powell Lyons] there. And we're supposed to pack up the house and so forth. I decided, I'm not doing this. I called his aide and said, "Would you book me on a plane? You call the movers, and you handle this." And I walked out of the house and left everything there and got on a plane and came home. It works; they packed it all up, and it came. Lost a few things, but that's all right. You lose a few things every time you move anyway. And from then on I never packed a house. The worst thing in the world is the day the packers come-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --because the minute they walk in the door you have totally lost control. They are all over your house and in your stuff. And they will pack the garbage if you have not gotten rid of it. They will pack ashtrays with cigarette butts in them if you aren't there to whisk 'em away and wash 'em. So I never dealt with that again. Story_ID: 629782 Speaker 1: I ha-, came back to Washington [D.C.]. We--the only house that was available at the time was at Fort McNair [Fort Lesley J. McNair, Washington, D.C.] over there, those beautiful houses. We moved in, but we knew we were not going to stay there because Annemarie [Annemarie Powell Lyons] was still in high school. And we wanted her to go back to the high school that she had left, which was in Arlington [Virginia]. They said she could come back as long as we were moving back to Arlington. So we were there while we waited for a house to become available at Fort Myer [Virginia]. So we were in that house six months, and then we moved to Fort Myer and he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was Frank Carlucci's deputy [in the U.S. Department of Defense]. And then one night he came home. Ah, you know, by this time, when you tell me you're moving. You're going to another job. Yeah, okay, so what else is new? I've been doing this now for almost thirty years. I can't remember what I was doing. I was at the kitchen sink I think. He said, "Cap [Caspar W. Weinberger] is going to retire." I said, "Yeah, so what?" I knew he going 'cause Jane [Jane D. Weinberger] was sick. He said, "And Frank is going to become the secretary of defense, and I'm going to be the national security advisor." I said, "What?" Now that's just the way it was. Speaker 2: Wait, you're saying that this happened all in a matter of mon- (simultaneous)---- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Day--months, yes. Speaker 2: Months because-- Speaker 1: Maybe, maybe a matter--he came back in January. This happened about May. No, it was after that 'cause we moved into the house at Fort Myer, so maybe six months later. It was six months later 'cause we were at, at Fort McNair--Myer; we moved from McNair to Myer. And so, he became the national security advisor. And John Negroponte, who was head of national intelligence, was his deputy, and so began another exciting time. Story_ID: 629783 Speaker 1: It was the days before we had as much security as we have now, so it was such a thrill to drive up to the White House [Washington, D.C.] gates and they opened up for me, and I've got a parking space right there. And I can just walk in this door right, 'round here and, and go on upstairs to his [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] office [as national security advisor]. This was, you can't believe it. How did I come to be here? The thing though to remember always is that when you're in positions like that is this is lovely, but it's not going to be for always. And you know that, and you enjoy it while it's there. And you don't get any overblown ideas about your importance in, in being there. Speaker 2: Now, but what prepared you for that? I mean, I understand--I mean, you make it seem all so easy. And there's not been any tra-, I keep thinking that there are like this training sessions that people go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are no training sessions. Speaker 2: And this is--and I keep asking you, and you keep-- Speaker 1: It's all on the job. Speaker 2: Right, and you keep saying no, there is no training. Speaker 1: There is no training. There is no training. It's just what you do. Speaker 2: But, I mean, but, but the access, well, you had already been give-, give, getting access to confidential information. But-- Speaker 1: I had no access to confidential-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --information, I never had. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. But, what I'm saying is that-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) on bystander. Speaker 2: Right, but I'm saying that he had to go through clearances and-- Speaker 1: Well, he'd already had-- Speaker 2: --security checks. Speaker 1: --his clearances. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He, he had had a top secret clearance-- Speaker 2: Way back. Speaker 1: --since he was a White House Fellow. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Maybe not the highest level, but certainly the clearance-- Speaker 2: That was the beginning. Speaker 1: --process had been made. Oh, I remember clearly when the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or whoever does the checks was doing the neighborhood. This is when we were in Dale City [Virginia]. And they're going from door to door asking people. I watched them out front. And about the time they got to my next door neighbors, Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] went flying out of the house chasing Linda [Linda Powell] with a stick or something. I don't know, but it looked very dire, and I thought oh no (laughter). Speaker 2: We're gonna fail. Speaker 1: Oh no (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Kids are gonna sabotage our effort. Speaker 1: But, yes, that's part of the process, with them going around asking people about you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it, I'm sure it goes on all the time, even, even up to the time he was secretary-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because that's the way you have to know about people and, and keep--sometimes it isn't as effective as you see when you read about people in the paper, but there is a process. Story_ID: 629784 Speaker 1: Annemarie [Annemarie Powell Lyons] is what age at this point? You said she's in her senior year. Speaker 2: No, no, she wasn't even a senior (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Senior, okay. Speaker 2: Let's see-- Speaker 1: I thought she was. You said she (unclear)-- Speaker 2: She was a junior [in high school]. Speaker 1: She's in her junior year, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--yeah, it was her junior year. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is this causing any, you know, any--wait, and Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was where at this point? Speaker 2: Michael, by this time, had gone to the [U.S.] Army-- Speaker 1: He-- Speaker 2: --because he was in the Army when we were in Germany. He was in Germany at the same time. Speaker 1: The same time. Speaker 2: Um-hm, he was in a different, different corps. Speaker 1: Yes, that's right. He explained that, V [V Corps (Fifth Corps)] and VII [Seventh Corps]. Speaker 2: VII, he was VII Corps. Speaker 1: In the VII Corps, okay. So, his acc-, tell me what, where you were when his accident happened. Speaker 2: We were back here. Speaker 1: Oh, you--okay, I think he did mention that, okay. So you came over imme-, now was his, his father, was he then--he wasn't, he-- Speaker 2: He was the national security advisor then. Speaker 1: He was the national security advisor at the time of his accident (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. And we flew out right away to Germany, wherever the hospital [98th General Hospital, Nuremberg, Germany] was. I've forgotten. And Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] stayed there two days, and he flew, and then I was there-- Speaker 1: That was hard, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Michael shouldn't be alive. The first night they gave him eighteen units of blood. That's more than you've got in your body. The biggest problem with an injury to your pelvis that way is a loss of blood. There was a former cabinet secretary that died that way. He, his horse threw him, and he fell on him. And the pelvis had broken, and he, he died with bleeding. No, Michael was very grievously injured. When you first saw him he was swollen to three times his size. His whole body was swollen with fluid. He's in great spirits 'cause he was on morphine. But, for me, I had to be there every day to see him. As long as I could see him, then it was okay. I, I never had any, you know, moment of falling apart or, or grieving over it. It was: okay, this is what I've got to do. And I would sit in his room. I remember the nurses the first day saying, "What's she doing in there?" They said, "Oh, she's doing a crossword puzzle." "Well, as long as that's all she wants to do." I wasn't there to nurse him. All I wanted to do was see him. And this tube coming out that was drawing fluids out of his body, I was waiting until it wasn't bloody because that mean that was over. But that didn't stop for a long time. But to know that he was there and breathing and being taken care of. He came back early. They'd said they were going to send him back as soon as he was stabilized, and he was not stabilized. But one day there was a big accident, training accident. And people were killed, and there were people who were hurt a lot worse than Michael. There was one boy who had all of the fingers bro-, blown off of one hand and two off the others and half of a leg. And so the hospital geared up, bringing in these casualties. It was, it was a very hectic time. And the nurses came in and said to me, "He's okay. Don't worry if we're not in here right now. He's okay, and we'll check back, but we've got to deal with this right now." And I couldn't just sit there. I went out and said, "How can I help?" And I manned the hospital desk. While they were running around taking care of patients, I manned the desk and answered the phones and, and put people in touch with people because he was all right. He's in there in the bed, and he's okay. They need help over here. And so I helped that way until the emergency was over. Story_ID: 629785 Speaker 1: And the next day they came in to say, "We're leaving today; we gotta go right now as soon as we get the hospital plane. He's not stabilized yet, but we gotta get these other guys out of here. They've got to go where they've got better care." And so you scrambled around and got all of your stuff. And it was interesting: the hospital commander was shaking his head and saying to me, "You know, this is very revealing. If we have a big confrontation, we're not gonna be able to deal with it, because this has taxed us with just these, these few very serious injuries. We've gotta do better and, and get things (unclear)." So anyway we came back to Washington [D.C.] on a hospital plane, which is quite a, it's an experience, too. It's a big cargo plane that is empty on the inside. And there's a rack that goes down the middle, and stretchers are hung on it on both sides. And then all of their equipment, the monitoring equipment and the IVs and so forth, that's all hooked up to this apparatus. And the patients are there, and there were, there's a regular staff of the hospital plane, which I don't remember now. But from the hospital itself came the doctors and nurses who were tending these individual patients. They travel with them until they could turn them over to Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], you know, to be there working on them, monitor them, administering what--most of it was having to keep them comfortable, and stable, and the morphine flowing, just to be sure that their vital signs were, were stable because they were all so grievously injured. And there were only three passenger seats, and they kind of sit there in the middle before you get to the cockpit, cold as it can be. It is not heated, or not a lot of heat. You're very cold in that plane. So, we came back and Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was at Walter Reed for the better part of a year. And I went every single day because that was my security, as long as I could see him. I could not do anything for him, but what I was doing was for me as much as for him. So I was there every day, all day, just sitting in my chair, reading, sewing, whatever, each day walking in hoping to see improvement and a sign of progress. And there were, there were times when it was very discouraging. I was there the doctor told him that his [U.S.] Army career was over, which crushed him, and me, too. And so you dealt with that. And I--Michael said, "I want my dad, I want my dad." And I went to the phone and called Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and said, "Get over here." And so he ca-, but he way--he said to the doctor: "Why did you have to say it like that?" He said, "He had to face it sooner or later. And it's the best way for me to say that, best way to do it is say it's the way it is." But that was difficult. Story_ID: 629786 Speaker 1: I didn't realize how, how close he came to dying. One of the lieutenants that had been with him in Germany came home on leave and came to see him. When he was in the jeep, there was another lieutenant and a sergeant who was driving who had lost control of the jeep. The other lieutenant was thrown out, too, but he only broke his nose. Michael's [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] injuries came because as they were thrown out of the jeep, as the jeep turned over, it hit him and bounced off onto the other side. The others didn't have that. They just were thrown out onto the pavement. But the lieutenant who was in the jeep with him had told the story that they took them to the German hospital. Fortunately, he spoke German. His mother was German. And he heard the doctors talking. And they said about Michael: "There's nothing we can do for this one." And he hopped off the table where he was and said, "No, no, no, you can't do that; you can't do that. Call the Americans; call the Americans." And that was what saved his life, 'cause the Germans had given him up. So, it's very fortunate. But you know, when the doctors first told me how long it would be for Michael to recover, my first thought was, what on earth am I gonna do with this boy? Because he was the most impatient person in the world. Everything had to happen right now or he was pissed. I thought oh, Lord, how are we going to live with him? It happened for a reason. Michael learned an awful lot from that experience, and it made him who he is now. He would not be the person he is today, if it had not been for that accident. He learned patience; he learned humility; he learned how fleeting life is and what's really, really important. Story_ID: 629787 Speaker 1: The weekend after he was married, which was the happiest thing because it was such a celebration of life. Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] met Jane [Jane Knott Powell] his first day at college [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia]. They were very much in love with each other. Her parents did not approve because he was black, and they broke up. And he talked to me back and forth about it. And he called me one day and said, "Ah, we broke up." And I said, "Well, I'm sorry, but that's probably for the best." He said, "Yeah, it's okay," and then he said, "No, it's not." So, they were not boyfriend and girlfriend, but they were always each other's best friend. They dated together. Even when Michael came home on leave--that's a whole 'nother story. It doesn't need to be in here. But anyway, they would double-date with her with somebody. They were best friends. And when we first heard of the accident, I said to Linda [Linda Powell], "Call Jane." And so Jane came to the hospital [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] that first night he was there. Of course, when she saw him, she fainted dead away, 'cause that's Jane; she faints. But, she, too, was there all the time, all the time. She never left his side. So when they got married it was a celebration of life. Michael had to learn how to walk again. He was on crutches. He was on a cane, but he was determined that he was gonna walk down that aisle with nothing, and he did. It was truly a celebration. It was a celebration of life. Story_ID: 629788 Speaker 1: A week later, he was the keynote s-, and by then he had a job. He was working at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] on the Japanese desk with Rich Armitage [Richard Armitage] as an action officer. He was selected to be the keynote speaker for the month that honors Americans with disabilities and for the Pentagon's program around that. It was the most moving story you have ever heard. None of us had ever heard him talk about what he went through. But he started the speech by saying, "It's very fitting that we are here in this building today where wars are planned and executed, because what I'm going to tell you is a war story." And then he talked about riding high, being a young lieutenant, that he'd just gotten promoted, and his future ahead of him, and then the accident, and being in the hospital. And he said, "For a while it was fine. I had all this attention. Everybody was coming to see me. They brought me food. They brought me flowers. They brought me gifts." He said, "And then the morphine went away, and then my friends kind of stop coming. They didn't come as often. And I realized that they were going on with their lives, and here I am in this bed," he said. And by that time he could walk. He said, "I struggled out of bed, and I looked at myself in the mirror. And I was gaunt. My hair was dried out from the anesthesia. I looked awful. And I said to myself, you are in a war, and you're losing it, and I decided I wasn't gonna lose." He said, "And it took me from my bed, to a wheelchair, to the crutches, to this cane." And he held it up, and then he very dramatically dropped it, which he said, "I don't need any more." All of us were in tears. We had never heard this expressed. So we--he became a very strong individual. And so then you've heard all the other things that he went on to do, but each time having to rebuild his life and knowing where I go from here. So that was one of the other things thrown in there. Speaker 2: It's a miracle story, that at a time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It is a miracle story. Story_ID: 629789 Speaker 1: So Annemarie [Annemarie Powell Lyons] is in her senior year [of high school], right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at that point? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you, you're balancing that off. Now, what are the issues facing your husband now as national security advisor under Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]? That is Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair], right? Speaker 2: That's Iran-Contra, yep. Speaker 1: Which is huge. Speaker 2: Which is huge. This was the years when we started, they started perestroika. Speaker 1: Say again? Speaker 2: Perestroika, Gorbachev [Mikhail Gorbachev]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right (cough)-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --excuse me. Speaker 2: --Gorbachev and Raisa [Raisa Gorbachev] are coming to the United States and all the little, there are a little undercurrents and a lot of little, there was a lot that went on under the surface but on the, on the front, making this a very successful visit. And in doing so, it's not just the talks that you have. You've got to do this other part for the television cameras. Television is now part of everything that you do. And so all of this have to be shaped for how it is seen by the public. There has always been disagreement between defense [U.S. Department of Defense] and state [U.S. Department of State], and the national security person's job is to mediate those disputes. And they were there when he was secretary. They were there before, and they're there now. And it's up to the--it's, it's just the nature of the beast of the two institutions. Story_ID: 629790 Speaker 1: How did President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] use his national security advisor versus, you know, his other secre- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --listened very carefully to what his-- Speaker 1: He did? Speaker 2: He did. Everybody doesn't. Speaker 1: 'Cause their, you know, their roles can switch-- Speaker 2: They switch around. Speaker 1: You know, they begin--'cause you have the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, 'cause see-- Speaker 1: --you have the secretary, this-- Speaker 2: --there was both. Speaker 1: Right. Wasn't Kissinger [Henry Kissinger]-- Speaker 2: Kissinger was national security advisor and secretary of state, um-hm. Speaker 1: He [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had him in both positions? Speaker 2: He did both things. Speaker 1: Officially? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but it's, it can be a conflict between the secretary of state, the, the department, the secretary--I mean the depart-- Speaker 2: Of defense [U.S. Department of Defense]. Speaker 1: Defense and-- Speaker 2: And the national-- Speaker 1: --the national security advisor. Speaker 2: --security advisor because he will have an opinion and advice to offer to the president that may differ from either one of these. Speaker 1: Could I ask you though officially what are--okay, secretary of state is diplomatic relations, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. The defense is really the [U.S.] military? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And the national security advisor, when did that come into being as a position at-- Speaker 2: I don't know. It was not there during World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: It wasn't? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: So it's a newer-- Speaker 2: It's a newer position. And I just don't know when that would have been. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because there was no chairman of the Joint Chiefs [Joint Chiefs of Staff]. There was no organization of the military like that until after World War II. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And until Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] became the chairman, it wasn't one position. It kind of rotated around among the chiefs. They would take turns being the one who was the principal advisor to the secretary of defense. And then [U.S.] Congress did the Goldwater-Nichols Act [Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986] that made the chairman the primary advisor to the secretary of defense, secretary of state, and president. And the chiefs formed a council under him. Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: But that had not been true until Colin became chairman. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: It immediately gave (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So is--explain that structure again. You're saying that-- Speaker 2: Before the Goldwater-Nichols Act, which I can't quote 'cause I don't know of all of that except-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that I know that was the thing that made this a reality, there was a panel of chiefs-- Speaker 1: Advisors. Speaker 2: --of staff of all the services, the [U.S.] Army, [U.S.] Air Force, [U.S.] Navy, Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. [U.S.] Coast Guard sat in there, although they didn't have any impact. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they would take turns. It would rotate from service to service, who was the one that's going to be the presiding chairman, if you will-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and be the one who goes to the secretary to make the report. They would decide among themselves what was going to be. But that person who was, who was, whose turn it was would be the one who would go to make, to advise the secretary of defense and to advise the president on military matters. But I don't know what the year was, but it, Colin was the first chairman under the Goldwater-Nichols Act. So that made him the senior military officer. Story_ID: 629791 Speaker 1: So how did his role [national security advisor] shape? You said that, you know, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] listened-- Speaker 2: He listened. Speaker 1: --to him. Speaker 2: He was, he was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --he was a man who listened. He surrounded himself with very knowledgeable people. Everybody gives Ronald Reagan a bad rap: he's dumb; he, you know. First of all, he looked smiling and, and distant because Ronald Reagan had a very serious hearing loss. And so when he was in great crowds of people he really couldn't hear what they were saying. He had a hearing aid, but hearing aids only magnify. And when you're in a group of people, they had become very distracting. He had the controls in his pocket, and he'd turn it off. But his biggest problem with the type--I understood it as an audiologist that with the type of hearing loss that he had, there were situations where he really could not hear. And so he depended heavily on the people that he had appointed as his advisors. And they did not decide everything. He had very strong opinions and ideas about what he wanted. But he also knew how to work with people, to delegate and let people do what it was they were supposed to do. I must admit, when Ronald Reagan was running for president I was appalled. How can you have an actor? What is the rest of the world going to think of us? But he was truly the president, he truly was, no matter what else you think about him. Speaker 1: Well, they said he had smart people around him. Speaker 2: He had very smart people around him. Story_ID: 629792 Speaker 1: Who was secretary of state? Speaker 2: George Shultz [George P. Shultz]. Speaker 1: George Shultz. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Caspar Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger] was-- Speaker 1: And Ca-- Speaker 2: --the secretary of defense. Speaker 1: --fense, okay. So, already--so let me--so already Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] has a good relationship with Caspar Weinberger. How does the Shultz-- Speaker 2: It was magnificent. I will always admire George Shultz for the way he accepted Colin and brought him into things and made him a part of it. It was very gracious. He didn't have to, but he certainly did. And he became a very good friend. But I, it always amazed me how he reached out and made him a part of this. And they have great respect for each other. And it became a very solid friendship. We traveled together to, first time I went to the Soviet Union [Russia] in the days before the summit [Moscow Summit] to lay the groundwork for the summit. It was very exciting to be in the middle of all these preparations that are monumental and are going to affect life from now on. So you were in the Soviet Union with the preparations for the summit. And Colin, Colin and George were in meetings sometimes until three o'clock in the morning. And I'm not gonna tell you I waited up. But Obie Shultz [Helena "Obie" O'Brien Shultz] used to wait up for George because she said, "That's why I'm here. They work hard, and when he comes home, he needs to be able to relax and talk about it." And so she was always there waiting. Story_ID: 629793 Speaker 1: It was an exciting time. I was--it, it was still a time when you knew that you were watched. And the Soviets were very secretive, and they picked what you were going to be--to see. It was when the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's so hard to think--I'm sorry--you know, of time like that, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --because-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it's all, like, falling apart right now. Speaker 1: Well, I was there when it fell apart. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You knew that there were listening devices around. We stayed in the U.S. embassy, which did not have a staff at the time. The people from the embassy had to be doing the housekeeping work in the, in the residence because we'd had a dispute with the Soviets about spying. And we kicked all of their folks out because they were spies. So the, the [U.S.] Foreign Service people were doing the work in the house that, that Russian servants would have been doing. It was when we had just built the new embassy, and it was riddled with bugs, and so we could not occupy it. I remember going to the embassy to make a phone call to the United States, and people would be amazed at how you have a secure thing to keep people from listening. You had a room within a room inside of a tent. And again, in the embassy itself, the workers, our own Foreign Service workers, were having to clean the toilets, and sweep the halls, and empty the trash, and so to protect them. There were the stories of Russians trying--if they could get to the door of the embassy, that meant they were on American soil, and they could seek asylum. But the Russian guards were out there close at the gate to move up, and they would grab people and beat them, and throw them away to keep them from getting to the embassy itself. It was another time. I was not along for the summit [Moscow Summitt] itself. That was, that was not--I was not needed for representational purposes, so I wasn't there. I watched with great on admiration at all of it on television and knowing how momentous this is. Ever since the World War II [WWII], these have been our enemies. These are the people we were guarding against in Germany. These were--we had one funny thing when he was--what was he doing? It was when he'd come back from V Corps [Fifth Corps]. I guess he was national security advisor, and there was a meeting prob-, you know, preliminaries talks and so forth. And we had a dinner one night, and there were their people, and there were the [U.S.] military people, and there was the general that had been Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] opposite in Germany. He was on the other side of the Fulda Gap. The [U.S.] Army's V Corps is right there to keep the Russians from coming through the Fulda Gap, and he was the commander on the other side. It was amazing what they knew about each other. When they met, he said to Colin: "How is such and such a thing?" Colin said, "Fine. How is your leg doing now?" They knew these things about each other. Colin used to keep his picture on the desk in his office. And when congressmen and the people would come, he said, "See this person? That's who's on the other side of the Gap. That's who I am defending against. If some, a movement comes, this is the man that I am fighting against." And so they knew everything about each other. But here they were now, meeting in a social situation and were no longer enemies. It was, interesting is not an adequate word, but it was quite a feeling to be just there, just there. Story_ID: 629794 Speaker 1: For those who, you know, I think for Americans in general that it happened, you know, it caught people off guard. It happened--it was like the breaking down that just sort of--now, what period of time, how much time-- Speaker 2: It's when the falling of the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany] and all that happened. Speaker 1: How (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That happened in the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration. Speaker 1: That happened in the Bush, okay. Speaker 2: And by then Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff]. Speaker 1: But, but the whole relationships of, you know, the, starting to have the discussions with Gorbachev [Mikhail Gorbachev], those, all that was part of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]-- Speaker 2: That was all part of Reagan. Speaker 1: All part of Reagan. Speaker 2: And the, the, the peace treaty [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty] was signed-- Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: --with Gorbachev and Reagan. And the most magnificent speech Ronald Reagan ever gave was following that in London [England] to, at Guildhall. Somewhere there must be a tape of it. It's the most magnificent speech I have ever heard in my life, that summed up all of this and then what this means for the world and what it--I think there were students--what this means to you and how it will change your--of course we never know our lives changed. Things crop up that you never knew, that you never expected. But I remember doing--no, I guess it was after the Berlin Wall fell. I said to Larry Eagleburger [Lawrence Eagleburger] at a dinner--I kept looking around and reading and looking at other parts of the world, and I said, "Where does our next challenge come from?" I said, "Is it from fundamentalist Islam?" He said, "That's the next one." Speaker 1: Now why did you know or think that? Speaker 2: Because I was reading and looking to see what was going on in other countries. I had traveled to many of these, and you knew the unrest that there was. In Pakistan we were supporting the freedom fighters against the Russians. I have sat in a tent in front of those freedom fighters. I would be willing to bet you that some of them became Al-Qaeda. This was such a chilling experience. We flew from Pakistan to Peshawar [Pakistan], where the refugee camps are for the people from Afghanistan belonging to those refugee camps. And as we were flying o-, this is mountainous terrain like you cannot imagine. And the American ambassador's wife said to me: "We have left the area that is controlled by the government. Now we're now in the tribal areas. The government has no control over what happens here." Just the week before there'd been a stoning. A man stoned his wife. And I told you before about the bride stealings and so forth. And so it is not ruled by one law. It is the tribal leaders who are the authority. And then they, when they are in conflict with each other, this is a problem. That's, that's part of what happened in Afghanistan after we got rid of the Taliban. You have tribal leaders vying for who is in control here now, who's the biggest tiger in the jungle. I don't know that we in the United States understand that very well. We don't know that mentality. And that's part of our problem in the Middle East. But I could see the begin-, I knew they wasn't gonna be contained. And already we had had little terrorist incidents around that people would say oh, wonder why that happened. But they were all part of a whole. It was a part of a thing that was building up. Usually those were not a, addressed at us, but they were still done by Islamic fundamentalists. And so it was, it was a thing that was bound to come. Story_ID: 629795 Speaker 1: He was national security advisor for four years, right? So four years, nineteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, about three years. Speaker 1: Three years? Speaker 2: 'Cause the first year he was in Germany [with the V Corps (Fifth Corps)]. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989] to-- Speaker 2: Or the first six months he was in Germany. Speaker 1: Germany, okay. Speaker 2: So yeah, almost four years. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, how many trips are you making during that time? Speaker 2: During that time, wives did not go along on representational (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was traveling with the president. I was never alone. Speaker 1: You were never, okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My life was back on post. And-- Speaker 1: While he was-- Speaker 2: --doesn't really-- Speaker 1: --national security-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, we lived on post 'cause he was still in the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I keep thinking--okay. Speaker 2: He is still in the military. Speaker 1: He's national security. He's, he's still in the military. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a three-star, he was-- Speaker 1: No, no, four. Speaker 2: No, he, no-- Speaker 1: He was-- Speaker 2: --he was-- Speaker 1: He was four when he became that, remember-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's nine, no-- Speaker 2: I said four. Speaker 1: Yeah, but this is 19--, I have 1989 to 1993, national se-, joint--well-- Speaker 2: No, he was a three-star. He got promoted to four when we went Ger-, to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: To Atlanta. Speaker 2: A corps commander is a three, is a three-star. Speaker 1: You mean national security advisor-- Speaker 2: He was a three-star. Speaker 1: But wait a minute. As a national security advisor you're a three-star? Speaker 2: Well, national security advisor doesn't have any rank (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's what I was gonna-- Speaker 2: He has no rank. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was his rank in the military. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now when did he--oh, yeah, I know when he got the fourth star and who did it. I remember that now. He was three stars, national security advising position's like that. If you gave 'em a military rank they were four-star. Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], as chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], had the, the rank of a four-star. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It, it was such a thing. And that's, those are the privileges you are-- Speaker 1: That go along-- Speaker 2: --accorded-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --when you go places. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: We were there through the end of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Now can you talk about that experience? I mean, this was president to, and you alluded to some of it--I mean, he had very strong supporters, I mean, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We had Reaganomics. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You know, we had Reagan advocates (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: We had Reagan bashers. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You know, he was, he, he was viewed as the prosperity king, you know. Speaker 2: He was who he was. He was so lionized when he died, but I think just 'cause we have to do that. I'm not gonna say it was all-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --merited. I don't know. He was a good president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was charismatic figure. He was an actor. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: And in fact, Lou Cannon, who, who was doing several books about him, one of his books is called 'Ronald Reagan: The Role of a Lifetime' ['President Reagan: The Role of a Lifetime,' Lou Cannon]. And he truly was an actor, but you all are when you're in public life. When Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and I used to travel as, when he was chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff], it, it was awfully very wearing and tiring to go from one place to another. And when you get there, there are all those folks at the foot of the steps waiting for you with the flowers and so forth. And you gotta pull yourself and walk down the thing smiling. And we'd stand in the door and say, "Show time," and down you go (laughter). But that, everybody has to do that. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You don't always feel like it, but you gotta do it. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And that's what it is. So, that helped him a lot with his charisma and to catch the imagination of people. Story_ID: 629796 Speaker 1: He [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had such great humor, and, and a lot of it was self-deprecating humor. Nancy [Nancy Reagan] provided the, the glamour. And people were very critical of her. But you know what, we're the United States of America, and people expect a lot of us. And you ought to give them something to respect, and that's what she did. People fussed about her buying the china. Taxpayers didn't pay for it. The reason Nancy bought china was not 'cause she wanted new china but because all the china in the, in the White House [Washington, D.C.] was now mismatched. There were pieces broken in sets, and it was hard to put together enough to have for the numbers of people that you have as a state dinner. She didn't pay through the taxpayers, but she still crit-, she got criticized for everything. She got criticized for her clothes. But we criticize people. I am amazed that they have found nothing to criticize Laura Bush for. They have not found one thing. And she, she's the consummate first lady. She's amazing. But they, we love to have somebody to bash. I don't know what that is, what kind of part of our human nature that is, but we do. And the higher they are, the more we like to bash 'em. We put people on a pedestal, and then we, then the rest of the time pulling 'em down. But she survived all of that very well. It takes a strong person, and she was surely one. She protected him like a mother bear with her cub, and she would fight anybody that she knew was against him. He was an old man. Think of the fact that while he was in office he had cancer; he was shot; something else happened to him. I don't remember what, and yet he came through smiling, and his hair was not gray yet. And people thought, oh, he dyed his hair. I don't think he did. I don't think he did, but because she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did. (Unclear). Speaker 1: --took care of him. Story_ID: 629797 Speaker 1: Now can you just quickly on camera talk about the enlisted aide and that history going back? Speaker 2: I am sure that ever since there were armies, those who were in command had an assistant who is a soldier but is there to take care of your needs so that you do not have to, your attention doesn't have to be diverted. They go to battle with you. Well, that's the officer aide. They have two aides. They have an enlisted aide and an officer aide now. They officer aide is the person who's right beside you. He is, you're a chief of staff sort of. He manages all the people that work for you and keeps the calendar and has to work very closely with the secretary. But it is very prestigious to be an officer aide to a general officer. Most of them go on and make general themselves. In fact, two of ours who were aides when they were majors were generals and are now retired, which shows you how long that's been. In fact, we got a letter the other day from another one who did not make general 'cause he didn't want to. He wanted to be an academic, and he went to teach at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]. And so he's, he was never promoted again, but that was he, what he wanted to do. And so, but he's retiring now. So always the, the general had somebody to take care of him, take care of his boots, take, be sure that he had everything he needed. And so in the [U.S.] military they have a branch of the service there are enlisted aides. It's, it's, it's a branch within each service. A, a person can apply to go into the enlisted aide program. There used to be a training school for them. And when we got to be very democratic, we decided that that was not a nice thing to do, which is hard because then the wife has to train 'em. But there used to be a school that trained them. They do take courses in food preparation and nutrition and that kind of thing at the Quartermaster School [U.S. Army Quartermaster School] down in Fort Lee, New Jersey--Fort Lee, Virginia. So they do have classes in that. And they will go, many of them work in the mess halls. Some of 'em come out of the mess halls in food preparation and then go into being an enlisted aide. If you're lucky you've got somebody who's been an aide before. If you're not, you'll get one who's net-, well, the first aide I had, I had never had an aide, and he'd never been an aide. And so that was not a good situation. He had the easiest job in the world 'cause I could not stand to have him around. And he was gone from my house by two o'clock every day, which let him have another job. But I, I, I was not accustomed to having somebody in my house with me. And he's not doing anything for me. He's supposed to cook, but he didn't know how to cook. They sort of know how to clean, but they don't really 'cause not a maid. But then, yet, they're still responsible for maintaining the quarters. Many people, and I did, too, had a cleaning lady come in, too, until you get so many. When I had four, there's no room for anybody else in the house. And a two-star [general] has one; a three-star has two. And I was very lucky with--we had two when he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was a four-star--no--yeah, when we went to Atlanta [Georgia] he had the fourth star, but we only had two aides there. It's only in the chairman's house and the chief's house is that you have four because the social responsibilities are so much greater. There is a lot, a lot of entertaining that goes there. Story_ID: 629798 Speaker 1: In this, this period in Atlanta [Georgia], I mean, you don't, I mean, you get there and you're gone. I mean, it's, do you see, what did you do--I mean c- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, by this time I'm used to this. We go to Atlanta, and I'm just settling back into being in a nice routine of being on a [U.S.] military post. It's very different now because you don't have soldiers. And there were twelve generals that lived on the same street, and those were our--none of 'em working for the other. This was a tenant post. Each one of them had a command of something else around the area. They didn't work for Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] except the fact that he was the commander of all forces [U.S. Armed Forces] in the United States. This required a lot of traveling around the country, and I went with him then. Speaker 1: In the six-month period? Speaker 2: Um-hm. He went out when there was a change of command. A new general is taking over a place, you were at the change of command. Colin did the promoting and the, the transfer of power from one to the other, and so you went to those all over the country. And, you know, the ladies entertained you, and you have a little luncheon, and you get back on the plane and you go somewhere else. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was comfortable. Speaker 1: Why was that based out of Atlanta? You would think this-- Speaker 2: The headquarter-, that's where the headquarters are built. Now most folks in Atlanta don't even know Fort McPherson [East Point, Georgia] is over there. It has been there since the Civil War. And it was where they had land to put that command when it was formed. I don't know when it was formed, but there's a big headquarters there. The house that I lived in, again, that was the most fun part about being a senior military wife, 'cause you lived in such wonderful old houses. I love old houses. And I think I appreciated them more in the military because it gave you a feeling of stability. This is something grounded that's been here, and I'm a part of this. And so it was, again, a wonderful old house. It was, the style was Queen Anne, Victorian sort of, had a tower on the front. And I don't remember all of it, but Colin was showing somebody through one day and saying, "Now in the old days with generals and quarters like this, they were built this way because the general must have a place for reflection and a place to do this and a place to do that, and so all of this is built in." It doesn't happen today, but that's what it was in the olden days--had a wonderful wraparound porch. It was just southern living at its best. And it faced a big parade field. And you didn't have many parades, but when you had one it was a sight to behold. There's nothing like a military parade. That is, it is so exciting to see all the troops passing review and just really neat. Story_ID: 629799 Speaker 1: Although I must tell you I saw one that really scared me. We were at Fort Campbell [Kentucky]. And we used to have--we don't have it now because with the end of the Cold War, our troops are not so much in Europe and in Germany, but there used to be an exercise every year called Reforger, where it was a practice to see how quickly you could mobilize forces on the United States soil and get them to Germany and disburse in the areas where they need to be. And it was a test that went on every year. And it involved hundreds of thousands of people and equipment and so forth. And before they would go off, there's a great parade to see them off. And every unit on the post is marching in review before the commanding general. But that day I looked and I thought, oh my. One of the reviewing officers was a German. And their insignia still have that that you used to see in the Nazi days. And it was a little sobering to see this man standing there in his German uniform reviewing our troops. I thought, oh okay. It turns out it was even worse than that. Of course, people let bygones be bygones. It's just business. He had been a prisoner of war during World War II [WWII] of the Americans. And yet, here we are now, partners in repelling the Russians. So that was a little sobering. Speaker 2: And that was at Fort, Fort-- Speaker 1: That was at Fort Carson [Colorado]. Speaker 2: Okay, Fort-- Speaker 1: But anywhere in the United States the same thing would happen because everybody was going to Reforger. Poor Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] never got to go. He was always the one left behind to manage the post and who was left behind. But when the men deployed like that, the women also had to spring into action and, and make what you call a chain of con-, concern, so that any problems that would come up while the men were gone, there as a way to handle it and, and somebody to go to. Story_ID: 629800 Speaker 1: So, that was that. But Fort McPherson [East Point, Georgia] didn't last very long. Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought it was wonderful that we were there, and I was ready to settle in. About six months later we were up here for an army conference. I was thrilled because I'd never been a part of something before where you'd go to these conferences where all of your counterparts are. And of course, we all knew each other. It's a sisterhood. And we're thoroughly enjoying this and enjoying the ladies' program and each other. And as we came, we were coming back to Washington [D.C.] to get our airplane, and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said, "I gotta go to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. Cheney [Dick Cheney] wants to see me. And, don't know what this is about, but he came out and said he was proposing me to be chairman of the Joint Chiefs [Joint Chiefs of Staff]." And so it happened, and that meant okay, we're moving again. By this time I'd learned not to put down roots. Again, I did not pack up anything. We had our farewell parade on the parade field. We walked off, got in the car, and went and got on our airplane, and came to Washington. And those that left behind packed it up and sent it. But you know what my thought was? I have moved all of these times in this three-year period. They can't make me move anymore. There's a not, there is not another job. Speaker 2: So where were you, where were you, where were you living then when you came back? Speaker 1: When you came back, there's a house for the chairman-- Speaker 2: Okay, oh. Speaker 1: --which is at Fort Myer [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It is, it's not a great house as houses go, because for so long there was never a chairman. And when they did appoint, when they did start the position of chairman, whoever the chairman was, his service had to provide a house for him. So the story is that I don't remember who the chairman was now, but he was the chief of staff, and he was appointed chairman. And he was prepared to stay in the chief of staff's house, which is at Fort Myer, too. All the chiefs lived there. And President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president then. And it was causing a little problem. Where is the new chief of staff of the [U.S.] Army gonna live if the chairman's living in his house? Story_ID: 629801 Speaker 1: So the story is that President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] said, "Go out and find a house and let's just nail this down now and make it the chairman's [chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] house." So he was out for a walk. Fort Myer [Virginia], that particular street, has the most commanding view in all of Washington [D.C.]. From that space, you look out and you see all of Washington at your feet, every single monument, the, the river [Potomac River] in the distance, the Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson Memorial, Washington, D.C.], the Lincoln [Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C.], the memorial, all that you can see. So he was walking down the street, and he stopped to look at the view. And he turned around to see what was behind him and said, "Okay, I'll take that house." Now that house at that time was not a single-family house; it was a two-family house. They did a very hurried job of making it into a one-family house. It is, it is not a great living house. It's a great entertaining house. Speaker 2: It's a great entertaining house? Speaker 1: Well, that's what it was built for. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The living room stretches all the way across of what had once been the front porches for the two houses. And it's a very long living room with a sun porch on the end. And I don't know how they created that dining room. The dining room is huge. It seats sixty people. And there is a big, long table in the center that will seat twenty-four. When you have the sixty, you take that out and round, round tables come there--huge kitchen. It's just kind of institutional, a little room at the back that maybe you can sit in. It had bookshelves and so forth. But in all of this house there were--let's see, one, two--there were four bedrooms. There were nine bathrooms--no good spaces. And when we came to it, it hadn't had anything done to it for a long time. (Laughter) Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] walked through it and came, and he said, "Um-hm, you got your work cut out for you," to make it an attractive place. They don't provide any furniture for you. You use your own. By the time Colin retired I had six couches 'cause as you go along with houses, you have to buy furniture to fill up the spaces. The [U.S.] military used to have furniture, and it just kind of went away over the years. The chief's house--the chairman's house doesn't have it 'cause it doesn't have a history. The chief's house is fully furnished and has antiques and things and remnants of past chiefs and so forth and that are passed down. The [U.S.] Air Force has a magnificent house 'cause the Air Force always does. I don't know how or why, but they can spend more money than the other services do, and they do. And their house next door was quite nice. It was the nicest house up there. The most spectacular one in Washington is where the [U.S.] Marine Corps commandant lives, and it's over in Southeast [Washington, D.C.], but it is historical. It is the only residence in Washington that was not burned by the British. The Marines had one commandant for thirty years or more. He considered it his house. In fact, they had a little problem when he died (laughter) 'cause he was passing it on to his children. No, this is a military house. It is very beautiful. It is filled with antiques. It is professionally decorated because there is a foundation that takes care of it. And behind it stretches a beautiful parade field, and every night in the summertime there's a parade on that field that is the best show in all of Washington. So, they all, they differ, but there wasn't any such thing for the chairman's house. But having said that, it became home. My grandson had been born just before we went to Atlanta [Georgia], so it was the joy of being back and, and him playing around in there. Story_ID: 629802 Speaker 1: The chairman years were not uneventful. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] for four years. We had a war for Christmas. Speaker 2: Was it, was it the Persian (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We forgot about 'em. The Persian Gulf War-- Speaker 2: Persian Gulf War-- Speaker 1: --came at that time, but that wasn't the first one. Speaker 2: What was-- Speaker 1: The first thing that happened the day Colin became chairman was when Panama started. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we had that little dust up and having to manage that war. Then there was something else between that and the Gulf War. But every year at Christmastime, Colin was not at home. He was off overseeing something that was starting somewhere else. Speaker 2: I think I read something, and maybe this is from an interview you had done. But that you would--he spent time, nights out than in, right? Speaker 1: Well, that was during the Gulf War. Speaker 2: It was during the Gulf War. Speaker 1: During the Gulf War, the first two or three days I watched television constantly. And I realized you can't do this, for the sake of your nerves. You cannot sit here watching this being afraid of what's gonna happen, this, this tension that you have. The way I dealt with it the first day or two, day or two, I sat on the floor and I rolled pennies, putting them into wrappers. That, that kind of little tedious thing is what helps you through tense things. I just rolled all the money in, into the, the wrappers. So about the third day I called the, the vice chairman's [David E. Jeremiah] wife. And I said, "Connie [Connie Jeremiah], I can't stay in here. We gotta go." So we would start going out during the day and go out to lunch. And I learned not to watch television until three o'clock because if they were gonna shoot a scud at Israel, that's about the time that it happened. And if they did, it meant Colin wasn't coming home. The biggest problem you had was trying to keeping a, a war from erupting in Israel. And I don't know if you remember, but in the days leading up to the war when we were still trying to talk to Saddam Hussein, Jim Bakker saying: "Will you attack Israel?" And they said, "Yes we will." And so every day you lived in fear of the scuds being sent. And Israel was on height of alert. People had gas masks and, and knew to be running and so forth because that was part of the war. So, I watched television at three o'clock to see if there was a scud. If there wasn't, Colin was gonna come home. There wouldn't be one after that 'cause it was too late and too dark for it to be accurate. If it was, I knew he wouldn't be home that night. He'd be sleeping at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Now when you say scud-- Speaker 1: It's a missile. Speaker 2: It's a mi-, okay. I thought you were referring to-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that's a missile. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Don't you remember--what was his name? Speaker 2: The--well, I remember (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the, the TV anchorman who was called a scud stud, what was his name? You don't see him very much now, but-- Speaker 2: Do you know? Speaker 1: --he was anchorman, and he would be there every night looking scared as the scuds went over. And he'd say, "Oh, another one just went off. There it is." I've forgotten his name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Is that the CNN guy, Arnett? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Peter Arnett? Speaker 1: No, not Peter Arnett. He was not the scud stud. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Oh. Speaker 2: This guy was a really good looking guy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Arthur Kent--that was his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Arthur Kent. And every night he was on there and looking at the scuds going over. So it was a, that was a very tense time. I remember saying to Brenda Schwarzkopf when I realized that we really were going to war, I couldn't believe we were going to do this. I thought we'd all learned our lesson in Vietnam and that this was never gonna happen again. And Colin was calling Norm [General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr.] telling him he was going to be put in charge of it. And he said, "Here, I wanna talk to Brenda." And I said, "Oh, Brenda, we didn't think we were ever gonna have to do this again. And now we gotta do this again." It was scary 'cause by now you're the ones who's in charge, and you gotta take care of everybody. But again, all the wonderful support systems kicked in. There were wives. I didn't do it because, you know, I don't know how I can explain that to you without it sounding elitist. Being commander's wife is a very lonely kind of thing. Story_ID: 629803 Speaker 1: I was just thinking about that as you were talking earlier because I was thinking that, you know, you're assum-, assuming that lots of people are around you. And then, you know, when I heard you talk about the pennies and thing, you know, because you assume that, you know, he's notoriety, and, and there's--and so, that there are lots of people that come-- Speaker 2: You cannot be a part of it. If you are the leader you have to be one step ahead. You cannot be down with everybody else because then you're not the leader anymore. It has to--people have to have the person to look up to. You go to see that this is moving well, and you encourage 'em and good luck, but you can't be there and be a part of that. That can't, you can't, in a military situation, generate that kind of familiarity, it has to be (gesture). And that's hard to explain. I remember when we were living in a civilian community in Burke [Virginia], new houses were built, and there was a new house across the street. And I, and I had not lived on post as a commander's wife, and I said, "I hope somebody moves in there I can talk to." Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said, "What are you gonna do when you go on post and you only got two other people to talk to?" Because you can't have people as your confidant. So that when you're on a [U.S.] military post, if you're the commander, then you have the other two generals' wives who are the only ones you can really talk to. And you can't really--you all form a little circle, but there still is a bit of separateness that has to exist. I know. Think of Laura Bush in the White House [Washington, D.C.]. I remember going to the White House when Betty Ford--that was the first time I had this particular situation. When at the National War College [Washington, D.C.], we invited Betty Ford to speak to the officers' wives' lunch. And she wrote back and said. "I can't come, but why don't you have your lunch and then come to my house afterwards?" Big thrill. We all went over to the White House. And I've got a picture of us somewhere all standing there. And she came down the steps. I thought she was so gracious, but that was when I realized you're never by yourself. Here are these Secret Service people walking behind you. And when you go back upstairs to your living quarters, there they are behind you, and there's somebody always outside your bedroom door. You are never alone, but you are all alone. Now Laura, Laura's very good. She, she keeps her, her close friends close to her, and, and they visit the White House often. And she does not stay a prisoner in the White House. She goes out and around Washington [D.C.] everywhere and not a whole lot is made of it, and that's just fine. She'll go out shopping with her girlfriends. She'll go to a, a restaurant. And the only way you'll know she's there is 'cause you'll see a few Secret Service people out front but not a big contingent. Speaker 1: Do you know why she--do you think it's because her, her, her focus has been libraries and children? You know, and she, really, I mean, has done important work with libraries. But do you--the only reason I know it 'cause from the archival community. But do you think that's why? Because you're right about, you know, the first lady is usually sort of under attack (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's her personality. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She is a perfect lady. She never pushes herself out in front. You know, she's not a Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. She's not a Nancy [Nancy Reagan], who'll go out in front and invite the (unclear). Laura never does that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she's also not the Stepford wife that's standing back there grinning fondly at her husband. She is a woman who is comfortable in her own skin. She's lived in this atmosphere for a long time. They were here when, when the parents [President George Herbert Walker Bush and Barbara Bush] were here, so she's in and out of that, it's very comfortable to her. And so she doesn't have to define herself. Story_ID: 629804 Speaker 1: When he was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, now, okay, this is under now--wait, I'm getting my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bush 41 [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. Speaker 1: Bush, Bu-- Speaker 2: Forty-one, forty-one, Bush the Elder. Speaker 1: Right, I was gonna say, when you-- Speaker 2: They call him fo-- Speaker 1: --said Bush-- Speaker 2: --they call him 41. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, 'cause I thought (unclear) (laughter) 'cause I'm like-- Speaker 2: No, they call him 41 as opposed to 43 [President George Walker Bush]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's the way they distinguish between them. I don't say 41. I say Bush the Elder. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, did he know or had, had he come across contact with Elder Bush? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: During-- Speaker 2: When he was national security advisor-- Speaker 1: Adviser. Speaker 2: --Elder Bush was the vice president-- Speaker 1: Presi-- Speaker 2: --and his office was right next door. If Elder Bush knew I was having a party, he'd say to Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], "Take the flowers out of my office; Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] needs 'em." He, they, they knew each other; yes, they knew each other and were comfortable with each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this position that he had as chairman of the Joint--explain that position versus the national--did you, you sort of explain that already? Is that the, the, the one that changes-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's the one that changed-- Speaker 1: Changes-- Speaker 2: --with the Goldwater-Nichols Act [Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986]. It does not change anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The chairman of the Joint Chiefs is the chairman. He is the principal advisor on military affairs to the secretary of state--of defense and the president. He's the one that advises them on what the [U.S.] military is capable of doing. He's the one that they give the directive to to say all right, send the troops to such and such a place. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: It is the chairman. And then the chairman goes and communicates that to the other chiefs. Speaker 1: Now, with that--okay. But he'd been national security advisor. Was it sort of would, would it usually have gone the other way, that he would have been chairman of the Joint, then national security advisor, then-- Speaker 2: Nah, no, there's no-- Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: --rhyme or reason to the way it goes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bud McFarlane [Robert McFarlane] had been national security advisor, and he'd been in the military, too. He wasn't in the military at the time he was, he was national security advisor. But he had been a military man, too. And many of the people like Bud McFarlane and John Poindexter, they had probably served on the staffs of other national security advisors. So that gave them that experience so that when it comes time to appoint somebody, here's this person who has this experience so let's make him that. Speaker 1: But when Col- when, I'm sorry--when your husband became a chairman, he, was, didn't he jump over fifteen other people with more senior rank? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So did that, that, did that, that ruffle some feath-- Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so you have to be mindful of that when you're dealing with those other people, that yes, he was advanced over a lot of people who were much more senior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There is no set way, but it was kind of generally thought that, again, in the, in the, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because this is the military. Speaker 2: --manner of the old way, that okay, the [U.S.] Navy had the chairmanship that time. So next time they're gonna give it to the--the [U.S.] Air Force thought it was their turn, and that was not to be. That was the first time it became apparent to all of 'em that there's no still--you were your--not still taking turns. It is the president's prerogative to appoint who he wants to as the chairman. And he us-, he has to get that advice from the secretary of defense 'cause he doesn't know him. It's the secretary of defense who will know the officers who are out there. Story_ID: 629805 Speaker 1: --Room in the very back where Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] used to hide during Watergate. This is such a measure of his mental state at the time. There's a tiny little room on the second floor in the very back that--then he was a very private man anyway. Poor Pat [Pat Nixon], I don't know what kind of life she had. But during Watergate that was where he would stay, in that little room. And I don't think he talked to anybody but Henry Kissinger. The Clintons [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton] redid it. I didn't like that style. They called in a decorator, and they had it redone in a particular period, which meant it was very dark. It might have been historically accurate, but it was not, not pleasant. I don't like Victori-, Victorian decorating anyway, but it was done as it was when Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] was there. And the room that had been the Treaty Room, which was right next door to this room, the Clintons turned into an office for the president. It had been other presidents' offices, but they changed it considerably with bookcases and so forth. But when the Bushes [President George Walker Bush and Laura Bush] came, all that was taken out, and it was put back the way it had been. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But to know all the things that went on in those rooms and in Blair House [Washington, D.C.] across the street because Blair House, though it belongs to the president, it kind of belongs to the secretary of state. It's where, it's get, it's the President's Guest House, and it's, it's quite something, too. But once again, I'd been there many times and to be able to walk through and feel very comfortable and said oh yeah, this is mine now. But we didn't, you know, not a big deal. Speaker 2: How many rooms are in the White House [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know. I've gotta a little (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean you have the-- Speaker 1: --thing back there-- Speaker 2: --you have the office side. Speaker 1: --that will tell you. The-- Speaker 2: And then you have the-- Speaker 1: Then you have the residence. Speaker 2: --residence. Speaker 1: The residence is really quite small. Speaker 2: It is? Speaker 1: Um-hm. That center building is really very small. I used to think in amazement about it as I went there many times over the years. I remember the very first time I was there that I related to you with Pat Nixon. I thought it was so big and so, you know, just--it's not. The rooms are very small. Dolley Madison used to hang her laundry in the room down on the end, where you now have, that's where you go after state dinners into that room for the entertainment. And that's where you see the president doing ceremonies like the Medal, Medal of Freedom [Presidential Medal of Freedom] and so forth. Then it's not very big either. And I often wonder, if you live there, do you go downstairs at night and wander all those rooms and look at them. And all the way down onto the--there's a very lower floor that it's not, it's--I don't know that it's on a regular tour, so I don't know how many people see those rooms. The diplomatic entrance is there. When a diplomat has arrived, then they always come in through that door. And there is an oval, more round room that has a mural wallpaper on it that's quite old that has all the scenes of Washington [D.C.] on it. It's a wallpaper mural that's in soft colors. And that circles the room, and it has antique furniture in there and all that with a, with a history. Next to it is a room that, with, with cases that are all built in that show every first lady's china. Then there's a room called a Vermeil Room. At one point, you know, it was quite that you had all of your silver was gold-plated. They don't do that now, but it's from days gone by and things that were acquired. So, I'm happy to have had that experience. Story_ID: 629806 Speaker 1: But each time you--I, I, would say--would you say that you're still impressed with the grandeur of the pla- of and the history-- Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: --given the history and the grandeur [of the White House, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I am, I am. But I had the same feeling at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], when you suddenly know your way all the way around. Pentagon is a very complicated building, it's rooms, it's in rooms within rooms within rooms, and you can get awfully lost. There is a system to it, if you know how to follow it. But I used to volunteer in an office down there which was on the very lowest level. And one day I had to go up on the very top level--I think the [U.S.] Air Force is up there--to deliver something or pick up something, and then going back around through this series of things back down to it. And I thought, I can't believe I know where I'm going. I know exactly how to get there. And if I don't get there that way, I know how to get there another way. The Pentagon, very few people know, was built very hurriedly at the end of World War II [WWII]. There wasn't, the, the war department [U.S. Department of War] was then in the Old Executive Office Building [Eisenhower Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.] next door to the White House [Washington, D.C.]. It housed the war department. The Pentagon was built towards the end of World War II, built, built very rapidly, unbelievable. I don't remember the exact amount of time but a matter of months for a building that size. And it was built to have office spaces for these people that needed offices. But it was also built to serve as a military hospital if necessary so that, until recently, the bathrooms were massive affairs with many, many sinks and stalls in them. And there is series of ramps all through the Pentagon so that they can use them for wheelchairs and, and stretchers and things. So you have to figure out when you're going if you're going by the ramp or if you're going by the steps, and where is there an escalator and that kind of thing. It's fascinating. I think, of the Pentagon, it's where I grew up. I can say truthfully, I grew up in this building. It, it has encompassed most of my adult life. And so it was a special pain when it was hit by the, the airplane. I don't need to go there. Speaker 1: When it was hit. I don't know. I thought, I always thought the Pentagon, there would be little planes that were--I had a totally different view (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. Speaker 1: --of that building. I didn't-- Speaker 2: No, well, they might have-- Speaker 1: --know that-- Speaker 2: --planes come out of there now. They've gotten so much security around-- Speaker 1: I was like-- Speaker 2: -there now. Speaker 1: I was, you know-- Speaker 2: You can barely see the building. And I said, you know what? We forget our threats. When I first started going to the Pentagon, there was no barrier to traveling right up to the rear entrance. There were no guard checks at the foot of the driveway; you just drove up. And if you're lucky and knew somebody, you could have a parking space on the rear entrance. And when Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was military assistant, I did. When I was going there to volunteer, there was another parking lot right at the foot of the hill, and you just came and went. You showed your I.D. when you went in the door, but it was only a military I.D. And then suddenly we had guard towers, and then you had those popup ramps. And I said, you know what? I can't even remember what the threat was. And I bet you we'd have to go back and look at records to know who it was that was threatening us then. I think it was the Libyans, but I'm not sure. So threats come and go. You forget about 'em, and we'll move on from this one, too. Story_ID: 629807 Speaker 1: Now so this right here, as the--so, so, he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] wasn't--or were you aware of an-, he--any dissatisfaction about him being appointed [chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] over-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: --so that didn't really have any impact? Speaker 2: No, he, he has the kind of personality who reaches out to those people that he knows have been slighted and make them his friends. And so he entertained them; he constantly have small dinners in an informal setting so that people are comfortable with you, and you get to know them, and that's what you do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you are--take--you know, remember how you said in Washington [D.C.] parties are all very strategic? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So you're understanding that? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from the very beginning (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before, okay. Now, what happens--and so we have the Persian Gulf War. What are the other things in this period? Because-- Speaker 2: You had the-- Speaker 1: You're right-- Speaker 2: --dissolution of the Soviet Union [Russia]. Speaker 1: Union, that's right. Speaker 2: We entertained our Soviet counterpart just before the Gulf War. This Russian general [Mikhail A. Moiseyev] was coming on a visit. It was so exciting to plan because we wanted to show them how we live. I was nervous about it, and I'm sure she was, too. When we met them at Andrews [Andrews Air Force Base; Joint Base Andrews, Maryland] and, and at the foot of the plane you got a big rabble ceremony with troops passing (unclear) then, too. And she kept saying, "I'm so excited, I'm so excited. I never thought I'd be in the United States, and I'm here." I don't remember what we did the first night, but we started out, we took them across the United States. We went from here first to New York [New York]. And we got off the big airplane and got on a helicopter and flew them down all around the city and between buildings and around so that they could see. And we landed this helicopter on the deck of the Intrepid [Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum Complex, New York, New York]. You know that museum down there? Our friend, Zach Fisher [Zachary Fisher], started that museum, and he was alive then. So our helicopter landed on the deck of the Intrepid. And there were school children from the international school, all races, outside with flowers for me and Mrs. Moiseyev [Galina Moiseyev] and singing to us. And suddenly they came and they would present us with the flowers, and we showed them the Intrepid. And then she wanted to go shopping, so we went to Macy's and, and back to our hotel. I don't remember where we were staying. But that night, Zach Fisher hosted a dinner in the Rainbow Room [New York, New York] with maybe Renee Fleming singing. I don't know. It was a magnificent dinner. And up there you could look out across the city, and she was just mesmerized. And, and her husband, oh, oh, we have to go back to that story. Story_ID: 629808 Speaker 1: We had met once before. We met in Vienna [Austria]. There was a coming together of all the chairmens of defense of the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] countries, the Warsaw Pact, and the Soviet Union [Russia]. And it was, that was a very historical thing. That was the first time all of these different defense groups had come together in one room. And it was all of the chairmen. And each one was giving their nation's policy on defense. I knew it was important, and I asked to go, and so I was there, and so, and to stand in the room and see the countries' names in front of 'em, people that we've always thought of as our enemies. And then there was a reception afterwards, and h-, she was not there. He [Mikhail A. Moiseyev] was saying to--we met him, and he was saying, "Ah, you know, you, you will like Galina [Galina Moiseyev]. She is just a country girl." It was, was very tense when we did meet. One night he and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] were having a dinner, and I was hosting a dinner for her. Condoleezza Rice was there because she was the Russian expert and spoke Russian. In fact, she was the one that told me what was said. I met her at the door and greeted her. And I talked about the event that morning. And then--you should never let this happen to your general's wife or anybody--I presented her with a gift, and she did not have one. And Condi told me later, going out the door, she said, "Oh, she was giving them hell. She said, 'Why are you isolating me? Why did she go to that this morning, and I didn't go? Why are you keeping me locked up? And why didn't I have something to give?'" It was, it was very tense. So this was the second time we were meeting. And as I said, we flew to New York [New York]; we did that. And the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But her staff had let her down, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, they didn't know. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Gift giving is a very important part of the diplomatic exchange, and there is a little ritual to it. And it's, it's fun. It's, it--I always loved 'cause I always thought about royal courts traveling. And you know, you read about the gifts that they're carrying and they exchange. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's the same thing, it still goes on. Story_ID: 629809 Speaker 1: So we flew from New York City [New York, New York] to Fort Drum, New York, which is a very big post with new housing. And we took her [Galina Moiseyev] to see how people live. We took her to an officer's house. We took her to an enlisted person's house. These are new houses. They are lovely decorations 'cause army wives know how to do that. And she was quiet. And when we went into the sergeant's house, she looked around and she said, "How many people live here? How many families live here?" I said, "One." Okay, she went from room to room, and she stopped on the stairs and she said to the wife--and we had a magnificent translator with us. Her name was Debbie Garrett [ph.], teaches up at the University of New Hampshire [Durham, New Hampshire], so that you never had, we never had to stop talking. I could talk to her in English, and Debbie would keep the com-, the translation going so that we never had to stop. And she said--there were four bedrooms, and each child had their own bedroom. And they were nicely decorated with little boy themes and so forth. And she said, "Does every child have a bedroom?" I said, "Yes." She said, "If you only had one child, would that child have a bedroom, a separate bedroom from the parents?" I said, "Yes." "Huh." We went on from there to the commissary. Well, this abundance of food, I, I felt very uncomfortable during this, because I knew what food places are in Russia. And to walk in to all of this abundance, there was just too much. You know, there are seven different kinds of bologna in that thing in there, all these kinds of ice cream, and there are piles and piles of fruits and vegetables. It's just mindboggling when you--and I'm thinking I'm seeing it through her eyes. And of course, everybody is walking along because [U.S.] military wives don't go shopping every week. You, you try to go to the commissary, some people only go once a month; some people go every two weeks, so they got more than one basket, and they're piled high. And she would say, "Is, are they shopping for someone else?" "No." And she looked at the milk department, the dairy, and she said, "How do you keep it fresh? You, you buy that ahead of time and you stock it?" "Yes." "How do you keep it fresh?" This commissary even had a bakery that baked its own ba-, own bread. On the plane, his assistant had said to me--I had done an article for a military magazine. And the husband of the woman who did the article asked for permission to take it to the Soviet Union [Russia], and they printed it in Red Star [Krasnaya Zvezda]. And so Moiseyev's [Mikhail A. Moiseyev] interpreter said to me, "We have read your article." I said, "Um-hm." He said, "It was very interesting because we, it gives us an idea of how military people live, how families live. But tell me, what does volunteer mean?" And so I went on trying to explain it, but then I could show her out front there are people having a bake sale here and then something else over here. I said, "They have baked these goods, and they're selling them to raise money for," a particular project, whatever it was at the time. "And then here, people are--you don't have enough people to do this, so the wives go in and volunteer and do this." It was in the hospital th-, no, it wasn't there; it was at the next post. Story_ID: 629810 Speaker 1: That [Fort Drum, New York] was an [U.S.] Army post. We flew from there to an [U.S.] Air Force place in Nebraska maybe. And we were in the hospital in the OB [obstetrics] wing with a mother who had just given birth and with this new baby. And I thought, look at us. We took turns holding this baby. This baby is gonna live in a world that is so different. Here I am from the United States. Here is our Russian enemy, and we are both welcoming this little new baby here. She was appalled that we were allowed in the hospital without hats and gloves and aprons and all of that, which I saw when we went to the Soviet Union [Russia]. "We, we can go in there?" "Yeah, we can go." "Dressed like this?" "Yes, dressed like this." Then we went on and we saw how enlisted soldiers live, and here were these wonderful dormitories. They had their own rooms, and they've decorated them nicely. And she would just look. We flew on down to San Diego [California] where we had a big thing, visiting all the different services. We were at Air Force, Army, [U.S.] Navy installations. He and Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had a potato peeling contest in the, in the mess hall, that kind of thing. They, they were just building friendship and laughing. The last night of the tour, they were entertaining us at the Soviet, the old Soviet embassy here. And we were sitting at the table talking, and we had steak. I said, "Galina [Galina Moiseyev], why are we eating steak? This is Russia. Why are we eating this?" And she said, "'Cause it's good, that's why we're eating it." And then we started exchanging recipes, which tickled me, too. I thought, hm, here are the leaders of the free world sitting up here exchanging recipes. Did you ever make so and so? Did you--and we both made the observation that, you know what? We're all the same. It doesn't change. Story_ID: 629811 Speaker 1: But two very poignant moments that night: remember, the Persian Gulf War was the first time that we did not face the Russians on the field. Any other war that we have been involved in it was with a surrogate of theirs. This was the first time that we were not facing off. And Moiseyev [Mikhail A. Moiseyev] said to me--he took my hand--he said, "Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell]," through his interpreter, he said, "I have watched Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] walking in the desert, and I know what it is he--." Well, along the way in the course of the things, we had had to have the reassurance that the Soviets would not come in on the side of the Iraqis. And they had given us that assurance on this trip: "No, we will not; we have no part in this." And he said, "I have watched him walk in, in the desert alone, and I know his feelings, and I know what is going through his mind. And I want you to know that I want nothing bad to happen. I want nothing bad to happen. I hope what is supposed to happen will happen." So I thanked him for that. Then, in the car on the way to the airport, we'd done our gift exchange and so forth. And the gifts you choose are kind of symbolic. Mine was a bowl from [President] George Washington's time in the, the--whatever's in there has a significance, and that was explained to her [Galina Moiseyev]. But in the car, in the dark, going to the airport, she said, "I never thought I would be here. I am not jealous of anything that I have seen. I'm just so mad. I am so mad because we have wasted fifty years. We thought what we was doing, what we were doing was the right way. We really believed it was the right way, but it's not, and now we have to start again." And that was when they changed the name [Leningrad] back to Saint Petersburg [Soviet Union; Saint Petersburg, Russia]. She said, "The names of places are being changed. Street signs have to be changed. It takes an awful lot of money. And I am fifty-four years old, and I'm not going to see the change." It was really very, very moving (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's pretty amazing. Story_ID: 629812 Speaker 1: Do I understand you to say that the concept of volunteerism was-- Speaker 2: Doesn't exist. Speaker 1: --for-- Speaker 2: The concept of volunteerism does not exist in most of the world. It is a uniquely American thing. It has begun to happen in other countries. But most places, they don't do that. The Austrian ambassador's wife said to me-- Speaker 1: But charity is not foreign. Speaker 2: Charity is not foreign. Speaker 1: But, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But volunteering-- Speaker 1: --volunteerism-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. The Austrian ambassador's wife, a few back, said to me--she was going home. She said, "I want to do something." She said, "I--tell me, what is it I can do--," I guess America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.] had been started by then. She said, "I need to know how I can be involved in something like this." I said, "Well, you simply look around and see something that needs to be done in your city and wherever, and get together a group of people and decide how to do that." She said, "Nobody will do that. Everybody thinks that the government is supposed to do it. They won't do that." Speaker 1: That's fa-, I don't think Americans understand that about their culture. Speaker 2: They don't. Speaker 1: I mean we take pride in volunteerism. Speaker 2: But we don't know that. Speaker 1: Right, right. I mean and we're trying to encourage it. People feel that, you know, but, and you know, it's positive. Story_ID: 629813 Speaker 1: Was this a more, this four years a more difficult period you think? No (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All periods have their challenges. No, it wasn't difficult. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, I don't think there's ever anything without challenge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the challenges were different from other challenges, but they were always there. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, but the war, the issues of the war, were Bush's, elder Bush's [President George Herbert Walker Bush] end, you know, ending. I mean it was just the, the Gulf [Gulf War] crisis. Speaker 2: The, the mission was to get the Iraqis out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out of-- Speaker 2: --of Kuwait. They had invaded a sovereign nation, and that you cannot do. And so that is why we went to war. Everybody says, well, why didn't you go to Baghdad [Iraq]? That was not what our mission was. We were simply to push them out of Kuwait. We were not supposed to go and conquer Iraq. It was just to keep them from invading their neighbors. Story_ID: 629814 Speaker 1: Cheney's [Dick Cheney] position under--was, he was-- Speaker 2: Secretary of defense. Speaker 1: --defense. (Cough) Excuse me. Okay, so, George Bush senior [President George Herbert Walker Bush] loses the election, and so what is-- Speaker 2: And you know, I think he did--I don't think he was well. I don't think he had the energy. He had had Graves' disease diagnosed. And I just don't think he had the energy that it took. And he really didn't think Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was a threat. Don't ever underestimate your opponent. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: So, yes, he was-- Speaker 1: And he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he was defeated. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] still remained chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff], and he was chairman under Bill Clinton until his retirement. Speaker 1: (Cough) Now, what was that experience? Because at this point, Colin also had--I mean he--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: You can say Colin. Speaker 1: Okay. His, he is, his popularity is there, and it's--and he could really, I mean people are saying he's going to be the, he's gonna be president. And he, doesn't matter if he runs as a Republican or a Democrat (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't care. Speaker 1: They didn't really care, and there was-- Speaker 2: That's 'cause we always love a hero. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He gave them somebody to look up to. Story_ID: 629815 Speaker 1: When was the date of the first World Trade [World Trade Center, New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, bombing. Speaker 1: --bombing? Speaker 2: That was-- Speaker 1: That was nineteen-- Speaker 2: That was while he was-- Speaker 1: --six [sic. 1993]? Speaker 2: That was while he was still chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff]. Speaker 1: Was it during--was it, was it Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] or was it-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was Bush [sic. President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Speaker 1: It was Bush? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was Bush 'cause I remember when it happened. But we really didn't take that seriously either. We didn't-- Speaker 1: Oh, we didn't take it--we just-- Speaker 2: The idea was inconceivable to us. Speaker 1: But do--at the time we knew the--did we know the cause? We knew-- Speaker 2: Yes, because there was somebody-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --in prison, and-- Speaker 1: That's right. That's right, we took-- Speaker 2: --they were trying to-- Speaker 1: --we took, we took people, and we--that's right. There was going to be--that's right, there was an investigation. In fact, some of that's just--okay. Speaker 2: And their idea was that that cleric [Sheikh Omar Abdel Rahman] in New York [New York] was just a crazy man and, you know, conceded they didn't even know what they were doing. Well, if that truck had been two feet further, it would have done what it was supposed to do, and we would have had to pay attention. But we also had the bombing of the Cole [USS Cole], which was a little scary, but what does that mean, done in the harbor [Aden] in Yemen? But-- Speaker 1: And then there was, there was also the bombing-- Speaker 2: The bombings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of Uga-- Speaker 2: --in Kenya-- Speaker 1: Kenya. I was gonna-- Speaker 2: --and in-- Speaker 1: I was gonna say Ugan-- Speaker 2: There were two places-- Speaker 1: Okay. It wasn't Uganda. Speaker 2: --right in a row. Speaker 1: It was--no, it was Kenya. Speaker 2: No, it was Kenya and-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)--was it (unclear) country (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. See how we forget? But there were two. And then you started to notice we also had--I don't know if Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had become secretary [secretary of state] by then. Yes, he was, when you had the bombing in Pakistan. Speaker 1: Right, that's different (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was secretary by then. That was different. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's different. Story_ID: 629816 Speaker 1: So this whole thing about him running for president, it was not something you supported, right? Speaker 2: Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] has never said he wanted to be president. That was always somebody else's idea. When Bush 41 [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was running, there was a push for him to be the vice presidential candidate-- Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: --'cause people admired the way he spoke. It's an interesting phenomenon. It occurred when Douglas MacArthur was general. He could have been made president by acclamation, the way the nation looked at him. It was unbelievable. There's a book written by William Manchester called 'American Caesar' ['American Caesar: Douglas MacArthur, 1880-1964']. You would be amazed at the power that this man had and the way people thought of him. People need somebody to look up to. A military man embodies a lot of things that do not exist in our culture as a whole. And so it is a natural kind of thing. Colin, being out there in the forefront, and because of his manner and because of his own strength, it gives people comfort. That's what any leader ought to do. And it was just a trait that he had that was exhibited to the American people. And of course, when his autobiography ['My American Journey,' Colin L. Powell and Joseph E. Persico] came out, it is a wonderful story. It's what we like to think that America is. It, it give us all validation. And it makes people feel good about themselves. Somebody said to me a day or two after there had been many successes in the Gulf War, one person said to me, "You know, this is really good for the [U.S.] military." I said, "Unh-uh, it's good for you. It gives America confidence in themselves again. We were defeated and embarrassed in Vietnam. This way we can say okay, we really are okay." So there is a lot that surrounds that kind of thing. Of course, it's very flattering, an oval-- Story_ID: 629817 Speaker 1: I know we've been talking during the break but just about his [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] decision, you know, at the time. You know, it went on--I mean that there was a call, really. Speaker 2: There was a call, and the call was loud, and clear, and growing, and rampant. And there does come a time when you stop and say: is this supposed to be me? But you have to weigh all of it. And it, I am sure that it was the most difficult decision for him, to know that people want you this much. And you start to think maybe I do have to do this. But then you have to stop and think very clearly about every single aspect of it. Do I have a vision for where the country is supposed to go? Do I have a program that I want to, to put out there to rally everybody around? All these things take very serious thought. And at that time, no, he didn't. And it is at a great cost to your privacy. You have no more; you no longer belong to yourself or to your family; you belong to the world. And the world has a way of intruding on you when you least expect it. As president of the United States you are the leader of the free world. That's a big, big responsibility, especially the shape that our world is in right now. It'll be okay. This is just evolution. It's, it's, it's us changing. Somebody has written a book ['The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference,' Malcolm Gladwell] about a tipping point. We're kind of in one right now, and it's--be interesting which way it goes. There are no guarantees. Nobody knows exactly what it is that tips it one way or the other. So it means you always walk a little more careful, and pay a little more attention, and use your imagination about what could possibly come, and decide what you can do about that. The world now is a very small place. 9/11 [September 11, 2001] showed us that we are not protected by the oceans around us. We've always felt very comfortable because we didn't have any enemies on our borders. We've never had enemies on our borders. And so we were comfortable. Everything else was very far away. Nothing's far away anymore. Every bit of information is known instantly, with the advent of technology. Not much can be secret. You can go on Google and see this house from a satellite. There's no hiding place down here. We've got to figure out how to live in that kind of world, and we don't know. Nobody knows. Story_ID: 629818 Speaker 1: After he [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] decided not to run [for president of the United States], then he still served in the same capacity, right? You said through (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the same capacity as what? Speaker 1: --through, through the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] adminis-, you said he was-- Speaker 2: He was still chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff]. That wasn't, that didn't have anything to do with the presidential run. That came-- Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: --after he had retired. He had retired when that, that came. That was two years after his retirement. Speaker 1: Wait a minute. I'm getting confused time-wise. Speaker 2: That was two years after his retirement-- Speaker 1: Okay, let's get-- Speaker 2: --when Bill Clinton was getting ready to run for his second term. Speaker 1: Second term. I'm sorry. Okay, forgetting the second term. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --forgot, that's right, okay. Speaker 2: He was secretary-- Speaker 1: And he had--was that, now, when he retired, he, that's when he formed America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: That was still several years later. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: America's Promise didn't come until 1997. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in 1997, there are a group of people who were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, wait, wait, now, trade--I'm sorry. So 19--let me see, wait. What--wait. But the call to action was at the same time that Bill Clint-, wait--was running for the first time, wasn't it? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: It was the second time-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was after all the furor about the presidency. Bill Clinton had been reelected when America's Promise-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --happened. Speaker 1: Right, okay, okay. Speaker 2: No, when he retired, we came home. We were happy in our house. He started writing his book ['My American Journey,' Colin L. Powell and Joseph E. Persico]. It took him two years to write the book. And then the book was released, and all the hoopla started and with his personal appearances around the country and so forth. That was when the groundswell began for him to run for president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And that's in the 1995, '97 [1997] period, you were saying, ninety-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1995, '96 [1996], whenever-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably in the '96 [1996] election. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we got over that, and he was on the speaking circuit and that's what he did. Speaker 1: And he was enjoying that? Speaker 2: He loves it. He went on the speaking circuit as soon as he retired. Before he retired, the speakers' bureau was coming to try to talk him into signing up with them. Speaker 1: Now can I ask a question about his decision to retire? Was that-- Speaker 2: It was time. Speaker 1: It was time. Speaker 2: His term was up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He served--no chairman has ever served more than two terms except-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in time of war. Speaker 1: And, and that's the ti- then there's no-- Speaker 2: There's no other job. Speaker 1: No other job. Speaker 2: There's nothing else for you to go into. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: That's the end. Speaker 1: So that's the pinnacle of-- Speaker 2: Of your [U.S.] military career. Speaker 1: --of the military, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. There's nowhere for you to go after that. That's why I said nobody can ever make me move again. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: There was not ever going to be another-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --military job. Speaker 1: Okay, I see. Speaker 2: If you are a four-star general and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can just stay a four-star general. Speaker 2: No, you can't. You have a term for the assignment that you are in. You're a four-star general for the rest of your life. But on active duty, say the commander of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], for example, was Wes Clark [Wesley Clark]. Bill Clinton decided to bring him out early and put Joe Ralston [Joseph W. Ralston] in. There was nowhere else for Wes Clark to go. The only job, other job would have been chairman. There was a chairman. He wasn't gonna make him chairman. That means you retire. That means, thank you very much, goodbye and good luck. And everybody knows that. And not many people aspire to be chairman. It is only the, the, the fast burners in the services that you think, oh yeah, this guy could be. And, and those names are put forward to the president by the services of who, who's out there. So, that's the way that works. Speaker 1: But, but his mother [Maud McCoy Powell] had been dead, right? And his fa- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His mother died-- Speaker 1: She didn't see-- Speaker 2: --shortly after-- Speaker 1: --the cha-- Speaker 2: No, she didn't see that. Speaker 1: She saw the-- Speaker 2: She saw the first star. Speaker 1: --gen-, first star. Speaker 2: And she died a couple of years after that. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: His father [Luther Powell] had already died. Story_ID: 629819 Speaker 1: He's doing the speakers' circuit, Ameri-, tell me about the start of America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. Can you start? Because-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're now co-ch- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the chairman now. Speaker 1: You're the chairman, okay. Speaker 2: I was not involved in the beginning. There are a group of people, and they still work with America's Promise, who have always had this idea of uniting the country in the, in the interest of our children. There are too many varied things going around and yet in this country a great opportunity where anybody can be anything. We've got too many children who fall through the cracks. And so, the idea is to mobilize the country around our children and their needs. And so many things have been started. The brainchi-, it was the brainchild of George Romney [George W. Romney], I think, many years ago. And it'd always been people who were interested in this. There were, there was Harris Wofford, who was instrumental in starting the Peace Corps. There was the Points of Light [Atlanta, Georgia] people, all of these who were like-minded. And he said, "We need to do this, and you need a figure for it to rally around." And they asked Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] if he would do it. Speaker 1: Now who asked Colin? Speaker 2: My vice chair at America's Promise now whose name is Gregg Petersmeyer [C. Gregg Petersmeyer]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were talking about how can we do this, and how do we start, and you need somebody that people look up to. And so they asked him if he would do this, and he--I was thrilled to death. That was what we both believe in, and what we've always done. Story_ID: 629820 Speaker 1: And so the idea was--the summit [President's Summit for America's Future, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was called by all the living presidents. Everybody was there and with Mrs. Reagan [Nancy Reagan] representing President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.]. All the presidents that were still living put forth this summit to say we have to come together for the good of our children. And Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was made the chairman of this movement. So he is considered the founding chairman [of America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. And then he began to mobilize it and be the person to go out. And you have to have somebody carrying the word and inspiring people to do this. And it was magnificent; the summit was the most magnificent thing I have ever seen, thousands and thousands and thousands of people. Colin, at the, at the opening thing in this big stadium in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] said, "It's good to be a general again. Look at all my troops. Let's get busy and go out." And that day in Philadelphia there were projects going on all over town. Colin and I worked cleaning a, a vacant lot (unclear). I have stories that I tell about that. Al Gore and Tipper [Tipper Gore] were over where KaBOOM! was building a playground. And they were working with the Pittsburgh Steelers and everybody physically doing the work. The whole of--I don't know what street is in Philadelphia was cleared of graffiti. You had things that scraped all of that off and everything. And it was an example of what you can do when people come together. It was so inspiring. Every aspect of it was really inspiring. And that's when newspapers--and I, I kept them because I used that for basis in my speech--started to talk about the, the tradition of volunteerism in, in the United States. A big part of speeches that I make is that Alec de Tocqueville [Alexis de Tocqueville], when he came to the United States to see what, who came from France to see what democracy is, and is this the future of the world? Is this how the world is going to be governed? Let's go see how this works. And he traveled across America. And there's one section in his book ['Democracy in America,' Alexis de Tocqueville] where he says the people in this country are very unique. They always help each other. If a neighbor's barn has burned, they get together and they rebuild it. If somebody has lost everything that they had, and they all come together to support and to provide money. And he went on and on with examples. And he said this is what makes America work. America is great because it is good. If it ever ceases to be good, it will cease to be great, which is a great line and a speech for telling people what you need to do. And there's another Frenchman now going around the country trying to do the same thing. We'll see what he writes. It's a kind of--let's go back--I've forgotten what his name--and I read about him in the paper the other day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 629821 Speaker 1: So now, America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.] is, it's a volun-, isn't it a vol-, is it-- Speaker 2: It's hard to explain (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) See, because I was-- Speaker 2: --what America's Promise is. Speaker 1: --I was, I, what I, what I'd heard was that it was like a volunteer, a volunteer organiza-, it was a combined effort but promoting volunteerism? Speaker 2: It promotes volunteerism 'cause a lot of stuff has to be done by people and not, not governments. Before America's Promise started, I had a speech to volunteers that said you know, they're always saying they do na-, they need to do this; they need to do that. There's no they; there's just us, and that's the idea behind it all. And you see it happening more and more. There was an article in the paper this morning about a group of businesses here in the, in this area [Washington, D.C.] that have banded together to provide funds for early education before kindergarten, early--because they're noticing that in their businesses people are coming in not prepared. So this is what--when it first started out, everybody was confused. It means volunteering and hey, how can I help? What can I do? That's, the idea is to bring together, bring collaborations together. For example, our board is made up--it is America's Promise - The Alliance for Youth. Alliance means we're all working together in different aspects. The idea is that hopefully we can, can stop duplicating things and combine efforts to make them more effective. Speaker 1: So that's why this network, when you were saying that, you know, I f-, we found over here that with infant mortality they do that well. And I can't remember what's it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Indianapolis [Indiana] had had gotten rid of their problem. Memphis [Tennessee] had a problem. So we come together in a conversation to see, all right, what were your best practices, and how does this work? So following, following the summit [President's Summit for America's Future, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] around the country there were communities of promise formed. People went back from the summit with the challenge to their communities, let's come together. The best one in the country is in Kansas City [Missouri]. It is unbelievable. Every organization in that city works together to see that all children have the five promises. And it comes under the heading of United Way [United Way Worldwide], which you have to have somebody that governs and, and brings the collaborations together. Until this year it was funded--you see, you gotta have money, too. It was funded by the Kauffman Foundation [Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, Kansas City, Missouri]. Their funding is starting to run out, and I think Hallmark [Hallmark Educational Foundation, Kansas City, Missouri] is going to take it up. But you have--that's the other thing you gotta get, somebody say all right, we will underwrite this. But in that city it is the most exciting thing to go. I love to go there to their summits. Story_ID: 629822 Speaker 1: Knoxville, Tennessee has equipment. There were people who went back inspired, and said okay. Idaho, the governor of Idaho has made it his business throughout the state to bring together organizations or the agencies in communities to do this. And he used the police and the teacher's association. And companies in a town, for example, will decide, all right, we adopt this school over here. And so they take responsibility for providing the physical things that the school system hasn't provided. And then their workers many times are given paid time off to mentor and volunteer. I can't call 'em off the top of my head now. I used to, but there are whole organizations that gave--well, Timberland [Timberland Boot Company] gives their employees the equivalent of two years off with pay, but it has to be done in volunteerism, and it has to be documented. And then they supply the youth group city year with its funding and uniforms and all of that. Then they take the kids and they mentor them and bring them into the organizations. This is job--this month is groundhog shadow day, which started with America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. And so agencies of the government, companies, reach out. They bring children in to shadow someone, to see what this job is all about. This is a way that you can make a living. This is what goes on here, and this is how it works. When Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was secretary [secretary of state], he and the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, used to exchange young people. Somebody came from United Kingdom [UK] to shadow Colin. And somebody, a student went from here to shadow Jack Straw. Colin would take them with him wherever he went, to the White House [Washington, D.C.], around to meetings. He would let them do the testimony when he had to testify on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], here you read this, showing them how government works, giving them an understanding, and so they have something to, to reach for. It has many far-reaching tentacles. The press doesn't tell you this. There are so many efforts going on around this country that are so inspiring. Speaker 2: So the five, the five ten (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The five promises. Speaker 2: What are they? Speaker 1: A caring adult in every child's life, a healthy start, safe places to learn and grow after school--why can't I think? Speaker 2: Is compassion considered-- Speaker 1: That's the last one. Speaker 2: Community values? No. Speaker 1: Giving back. Speaker 2: Giving back. Speaker 1: Giving back. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Heal-, healthy start, caring adult, safe places to learn and grow, marketable skill through effective education, and then an opportunity to give back. A caring adult in every child's life. They might have parents, but they still need somebody else. Story_ID: 629823 Speaker 1: I used to work with Best Friends [Best Friends Foundation, Washington, D.C.], which is Elayne Bennett's organization. One little girl's--every girl in Best Friends has a mentor on the staff at the school that she attends, somebody that she can go to with anything that she wants to talk about, who oversees her schoolwork, who helps expose her to other things; every girl has a mentor. So we did a promotional video, and there was this little girl who was always my favorite. She's a grown woman now. She graduated from college. But she said, "You know, it's nice to have your parents tell you what you do, but sometimes you need a second opinion." And this gives--you know, as yourself growing up, there were things that you couldn't talk to your mother about. But if you had somebody else you could go talk to that you felt close to, so that caring adult is very important. It's hard pro-, to provide it for boys. Elayne started a program called Best Men. She has an awful hard time getting mentors for those boys. It's kind of a macho thing. How do you tell boys that you shouldn't be going out there trying to have sex. It's a macho thing to go out there and do as much as you can. But you are trying to train them to have discipline, self-discipline, responsibility, building a character and a strength. You know, first you'd say Best Friends was all about preventing teen pregnancy. It's more than that. It's a character education development, giving them a sense of assuredness and providing opportunities for them in the--many girls and best friends go to college on scholarships from Best Friends. Bill Bennett [William Bennett], with the proceeds of his first book ['The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and Our Children,' William Bennett], started the scholarship fund. To date, sixteen years later, there may be forty girls who have gone through college on scholarships from Best Friends. Be-, the Best Friends program works primarily in middle school. High school's too late to start. When Elayne was getting ready to start this, she went around talking to students about what it was. And out here [McLean, Virginia] in this very privileged community she talked to high school girls and said, "Would you be interested in something like that?" And they said, "Yeah, but it's too late for us. You need to start younger." And so it starts, and it's a middle school. Girls in high school who want to continue, there's a Diamond Girls [Diamond Girl Leadership] program, and they meet on Saturday. And they have a young woman who's in charge of that. And it, it goes on and on and on. But that's the kind of thing. You have the same thing with Girls, Inc. [New York, New York]. You have the same thing, sororities do this kind of thing. They'll pick a group of girls. It doesn't have to be any organized thing, any organization coming from the top. But if we can in, you know, inspire you to think of a way that you can have this kind of impact. Story_ID: 629824 Speaker 1: So in cities where there are communities of promise, they might say, a city might say we're gonna do all five promises, or they might do only one. They might say we're gonna be sure that every child has a healthy start. Volunteerism? Yeah. Doctors and nurses give their time and their talents and so forth to provide, you know, inoculations programs that are not paid for. Somebody has to pay it. They pay for it themselves. But that's what has to be. There is not enough money in the government to take care of everybody in this country. Speaker 2: That's true. That's true. Speaker 1: So we have to take care of ourselves and-- Speaker 2: So it's this self-reliance. Speaker 1: It's self-reliance. Speaker 2: Self-reliance. Speaker 1: And along the way you teach the children that okay, this is what we will do for you, but then you have an obligation to give back. So there are many things around the country where children volunteer and are doing something in their community, encouraging you to say look around and see what you can do. Next month we have our meeting. We have a youth advisory board. There are kids all over the country that run programs on their own. Some of them are on college campuses; some of 'em are in high school. But they have a, a organization, and they talk frequently by a, they com-, communicate with emails and so forth. But then they come to Washington [D.C.] in March to America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.] to have a meeting and to meet with the staff and to, you know, go out and take the (unclear) and so forth. So you had communities of promise; you had schools of promise, where a school would say all right, this is what we're gonna do for our children. Then you have to reach out in the community and get adults to come in to do various things. And you had universities of promise, and we still do, where students at a university will say all right, we're gonna have this impact on this town that we work in. That's what America's Promise is. Story_ID: 629825 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, are, so are you enjoying being chair? Speaker 2: I love it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I came chair by accident. It is not anything I would have sought. I said, "I want to go on the board." And the reason I did was people that, it had faded; its profile had been lowered. And some, more than one person said to me: "What happened to that thing your husband [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] started?" I said, "It's still there. It's still working." So I went to America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.], and I said, "I want to help. We have to raise the profile again." You, you can never settle in and be, be content with what you started. It has to always be changing and evolving. It was seven years old then, and it was kind of well, what and communities had kind of stopped reporting as opposed to reporting on what they're doing. But, but it had dribbled off and corporations had kind of slacked off on what they do. And so you have to kind of go back and remind them. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And so I became co-chair because that helped us get our appropriation from [U.S.] Congress. It helped them say, oh yeah, they're still over there. Before it was, who, what? Harris Wofford was the chairman. He was ideal because he'd been one of the thinkers in the first place and involved in so many things with young people in this country. And then Harris wanted to go away and write a book, and that left me. I said, okay. So now we start and see how we get this reinvigorated. Speaker 1: Now what year did you take over as chairman? Speaker 2: Two years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, so 2004. Story_ID: 629826 Speaker 1: Now I was asking about the, him becoming secretary of state and how that--any of the--how--let's see, how that came about. Speaker 2: The president [President George Walker Bush] asked him, when he was putting together his cabinet. Dick Cheney already, was going to be vice president. And whoever the presidential staff is that sits around talking about who you ask, it was we will ask Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. And so he was invited to the ranch [Prairie Chapel Ranch, McLennan County, Texas] for a discussion and decided. And then he made another trip to the ranch after he was elected to, for him to say, to make the announcement that this is, he will be the secretary of state. That's how it came about. Speaker 1: And this was a, really, this was a, you know, a big deal. Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: It's the first, the first-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've stopped in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The fir-, first. Speaker 2: --of firsts. Speaker 1: Okay, because there had been other, lots of other-- Speaker 2: There had been too-- Speaker 1: --firsts. Speaker 2: --there had been too many firsts. And I don't really think of it that way. When you think about it, that puts another burden on you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, he is now secretary of state, and that's awesome to think about. But it wasn't a territory that was strange to me because I'd followed Obie Shultz [Helena "Obie" O'Brien Shultz] around. I know what, what goes on. That's the thing about everything that I have done. I have seen the people who went before me. The very first time Colin was gonna be a commander, and I had not lived on a [U.S.] military post, and I didn't know what I was supposed to do, and now you're going to be the senior lady, I, I expressed my concern at a social gathering where were, to a group of senior ladies. "Oh, you know, it's going so wonderful. Your husband's gonna come in." I said, "Yeah, but I don't know what I'm supposed to do." And one said to me, "You just be yourself." That's what you do. Story_ID: 629827 Speaker 1: You said Blair House [Washington, D.C.] came along with the--didn't you say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blair House kind of comes along with the-- Speaker 1: With the secretary of s-- Speaker 2: It, it, it is the President's Guest House. But the secretary of state has use of it. And so you can use this place to entertain because it's also a place that, that you bring diplomats into. And several times, I don't know who was supposed to do that. It wasn't me, but I was asked to welcome new diplomats who were just coming to the country. And they would be brought together at Blair House or in the courtyard, and I would welcome them to the United States. Speaker 1: Now, was there--okay, so you had been able to see Mrs. Shultz [Helena "Obie" O'Brien Shultz]. But now, the thing about this tenure is that 9/11 [September 11, 2001] came so soon after everything--I mean after the election (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well before the, before the administration [President George Walker Bush administration] really got started. Speaker 1: Started. Speaker 2: Suddenly you got this. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You know, it was kind of going along feeling its way. What are we going to do here? Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], of course, had some diplomatic chan-, challenges. I don't know what they were, but there's always a source of contention with some other country and small things that you worked to keep from becoming big things. And so there is the usual day-to-day stuff like that. And there's something every day. But 9/11 made a very big difference, and it changed-- Speaker 1: It changed everything. Speaker 2: --everything, everything. Speaker 1: Do you--oh, go-, because it was--okay, well, you can (unclear), it was the leap into--I mean it's very political at this point. Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: Not policy 'cause there's a policy part-- Speaker 2: There's a policy part (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) especially part of the secretary, being secretary of state. It's mainly viewed as policy and you know. The issue probably, there's an issue of roles, too, who is playing-- Speaker 2: Right, right-- Speaker 1: --who's playing-- Speaker 2: --there's always that, who, who-- Speaker 1: Who's-- Speaker 2: --does what, yep. Story_ID: 629828 Speaker 1: This appointment of secretary of state came out of a very hotly contested election that--I mean 'cause I, you know, where that whole went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court [Bush v. Gore, 2000]-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --you know, contest of who, you know, whether the ballots, ballots theft-- Speaker 2: The hanging chads. Speaker 1: The hanging chair [sic. hanging chad]-- Speaker 2: It was awful. Speaker 1: --the role of the Electoral College-- Speaker 2: It was terrible (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean all those things. Now, really, the appointment, I mean if we look at it, the appointment of the black community and the outrage, okay, the minority community outrage, from elderly, too. But there also been one of Jewish descent, you know, running for the first time. And so when we look at this, George Bush [President George Walker Bush], President Bush, gains a lot of credibility all of a sudden because he appoint-, I'm just-- Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: Okay, he, he, he has, you know-- Speaker 2: Smart politics. Speaker 1: --you know, Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], Colin Powell, and then he has Condoleezza Rice, you know, in a role-- Speaker 2: Actually, he has, he has more, a much more diverse cabinet than anybody has ever had, and nobody's ever paid attention to that. Speaker 1: No, people talk, now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, people-- Speaker 2: He has-- Speaker 1: --people--because that was a thing. People are like, well, that's window dressing. But people, at the same-- Speaker 2: No, it's not. Speaker 1: --time, there's never been this done before. So that helped, that helped mollif-, I mean mollify-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that helped-- Speaker 1: --I mean a very, very-- Speaker 2: --that helped ease that. Speaker 1: --a very, you know, because-- Speaker 2: That helped eased that. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. That's right. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 629829 Speaker 1: And then when 9/11 [September 11, 2001] came, they were glad Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was there. Speaker 2: Right. And, and so, tell me, at this point, your sort of view of the sequence of events, because there was--okay, now there--the story is still being unfolded and will be unfolded for years to come. You had already commented about, you know, that someone had told you that the next place, you know, would be the Middle East, you know, there, we had already had indications of that even--you know, there was the Gulf [Gulf War]. We had had already the Gulf (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We, we knew that. Speaker 2: --crisis and the issue about oil and, and then the belief that, you know, some of the Bushs are fascinated with oil anyway, you know. Speaker 1: Everybody's fascinated with oil. We couldn't live without it. Speaker 2: So, but, so what in this whole thing, because a lot of people said after 9/11 the whole world was our oyster. Speaker 1: No, it wasn't. We had the sympathy of the whole world. Speaker 2: I mean the sympathy of the world (unclear)-- Speaker 1: That didn't go on forever. It would be silly to expect it to. It was unrealistic to expect that to last. The world always will have issue with us as long as we're the number one. Nobody likes to be secondary. I can't tell you that events have not contributed to the world being angry with us, but it was never going to stay in sync. It would be nice to think that suddenly we had the whole world united by something. People don't unite that way. I used to think everything was going to be all right when the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany] came down. I smiled and said, okay, now, now we have peace, and we can move forward. It's not the way people are; that is not human nature. I realize now in my old age that there will always be a challenge coming from somewhere. It is unrealistic to expect people to work in harmony and not be mad with each other over one thing or another, and that's always going to be. Hopefully our wars--we, we have to keep our wars down so that they're not so, that they're not nuclear, 'cause that'll be the end of us all, and we know that. I, I watch the Iranian situation very carefully and this warning. They were going on. They're going to be reported to the United Nations [UN]. And I thought, why you think they care? They're still asserting themselves that we are independent, and you're not gonna tell us what to do. But they know that the world will end. Everybody knows what will happen. So we have to be very cautious and not react to things emotionally and with anger. And by golly, I'm the best, I'm the biggest, and I tell you what to do. Unh-uh, there's no more of that. We all got to try to, to move forward as cautiously as we can. Story_ID: 629830 Speaker 1: But at the time, you know, at 9/11 [September 11, 2001], the president [President George Walker Bush]--you, well, you were sort of--you weren't sure where he was. Cheney [Dick Cheney] was in hiding. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: No, I mean you laugh about this, no, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He is, no, he is always very careful to be out of the way because he is the next in line. Speaker 1: Okay, but I mean it was the first time-- Speaker 2: He doesn't like to come to things with the president, you know, if we're at the Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and both the vice pre-, he's very uneasy about that 'cause if a bomb came both of us would be gone. Speaker 1: I know, but, Mrs. Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell]-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --you're, you're in, you're in it more than we are. We're thinking where is our vice president? Because, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true. He-- Speaker 1: --and then-- Speaker 2: --he, he could-- Speaker 1: --we're worried about his health. Speaker 2: --have come forward to give the--yeah. Speaker 1: I mean it wasn't just-- Speaker 2: His--you needed somebody to come forth and say all right, I'm in control, like Al Haig [Alexander Haig] after Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]--Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] got shot. Poor Al, everybody said he was trying to take control, but somebody had to step out there and say it's all gonna be okay. But it, he was sort of being, trying to take over. Somebody had to step out that the American people recognized and had faith in. And that was what was missing on 9/11. There was not a trusted face to come out and reassure the people. That was a failing. Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] wasn't here. He was in Peru. So he couldn't be out there. President was off reading a story. I don't know where the vice president was. I don't, I don't know where the secretary of defense was. Speaker 1: This is my point. Speaker 2: I don't know where they were. So that was a failure of leadership, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that, and that allowed then--but the true leader in that became the mayor of New York [New York]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] because-- Speaker 2: That's why he is the hero that he is. Speaker 1: Right, because he kicked into action and politically helped him totally. Speaker 2: It did, indeed. He was on his way out-- Speaker 1: Out, totally-- Speaker 2: --as a failed, failed mayor. Speaker 1: --as a failed mayor with a horrible personal life. Speaker 2: Exact, exactly. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And it really--and so he--I don't know who they're chasing--he came forward and that, that's what is needed, somebody to step forward in a time of crisis and say have no fear; I'm here. Speaker 1: So do you think that sequence of events, did that create confusion you think in terms of where the balance of power was gonna lie between-- Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: --the, the sec-, the secretary of defense, national security advisor-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and the secretary-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --of state. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know from any certainty 'cause I've never been part of discussions or had any with my husband or anything else. But it truly is, has to be a time when they are not on the same message, and they each one have a different advice to the president. And it's who is pushing their message the hardest that's going to be heard. And there are all kinds of reasons for--you know, Condi [Condoleezza Rice] is certainly closer to the president than Colin. And Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld are very, very old working partners. So you have to take that, all of that into consideration. And it's a dynamic of how things work. Story_ID: 629831 Speaker 1: That really, 9/11 [September 11, 2001] really, when we think about it, almost covered every, you know, part of his [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] serving in the, in that position as secretary of state, right, because it went from--what's his name who we can't find, who is the--he keeps talking every so often-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --bin Laden [Osama bin Laden]-- Speaker 2: --bin Laden. You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to-- Speaker 2: --we think he's talking. I said you know what? It would be the greatest propaganda coup on the world. The man could have been dead a long time ago, but they would never tell us because it keeps the world afraid. Capture him, I don't know that we ever will. In, in the early days somebody said to me, "Are we gonna capture him?" I said, you know what? You can if you want to, but that's not gonna stop it. It is not one man. Story_ID: 629832 Speaker 1: Did you find yourself thrust into politics that you were not wanting to be thrust into had he run for president (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was never thrust into politics. Everybody knows that I'm a free agent, and I am not expected--wives are not expected to have the policy life. Many do, most do, I don't. And I've never had, and I never will. My job is to work with the people that you work with, be as supportive as you possibly can. I don't know anything that I don't support except the war [Iraq War] because I know, I know what that means. That doesn't mean I can say don't go do this. You have to do what you think is the right thing, but it doesn't mean I can embrace that. So no--yes, there's a certain tension about it, but it doesn't make you change the way you feel and what you believe. The period following 9/11 [September 11, 2001] was really crucial. It was--the cabinet wives all came to together in a way that I don't know that they ever have before because there was never the need for that before. Barbara Bush used to have all the cabinet wives together, and she would invite me as, as the wife of chairman [of the Joint Chiefs of Staff], probably the first time that ever happened, but just in formal gatherings where we knew each other and, and visit back and forth and, so that you all feel comfortable together. Nobody was on the agenda of the president's agenda or politics in anyway, except all of their husbands, of course, were of the party [Republican Party]. But that was never a part of it. It was a part of the same thing that I talk about with those army wives, having to come together. So, not long after 9/11, Kathy Card [Kathleene Card] called me. Her husband's [Andrew Card] a chief of staff, and she is a minister at this church [Trinity United Methodist Church, McLean, Virginia] right here, and I go to that church. And she said, "Some of the wives want to get together. They're just kind of feeling the need." I said, "Okay, I will help." So I became the voice of authority because I've been through this, and I know what it's like, and I know what you have to do to build this, this chain of concern, concern, and bonding together, and to answer their questions. I remember one wife saying, "Well, if our husbands are evacuated, will somebody come and get us?" I said, "No, you will be on your own. Nobody's gonna come and look for you when they evacuate the men." And so we developed our own chain of concern, a telephone tree to share information, a, a plan for where we would take the children if there was a need, and so that you would know what you're going to do if, if another crisis comes to here, and we are threatened. We had people come in and talk to us about security. We had a Jewish rabbi and then Islamic imam come in and talk about the two religions and their differences and their similarities. They happened to be very good friends, so it was a wonderful give and take there and helped you have an understanding of what it is that is making people angry. But it also was drawing us all closer together. Story_ID: 629833 Speaker 1: When they first went into Afghanistan, the day they started the bombing, I immediately came home and called everybody and said, "Are you okay? Are you having a problem with this? Is there anything you want to talk about?" That was a very--I was up in West Virginia, and it started and the word was circulating around. I was at the Berkeley Springs' [Berkeley Springs, West Virginia] Apple Butter Festival, which is a delightful slice of humanity in, in the mountains of West Virginia. And Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had said to me that's a good place for you to be today. And I knew it was going to happen. And so when the bombing started, the, the bells in the town started ringing. And the word went around that we started the war [Iraq War]. We started the war. And everybody was going in my, my daughter-in-law's [Jane Knott Powell] brother-in-law's office. He's a county commissioner there around the TV. And my youngest grandson [Bryan Powell] said, "What is it? Are we having a war?" And I said, "Yeah, a little one. We'll keep you posted on it." But I came home, and I called all those people who'd never had this experience before, just to chat, anything we need to talk about. And so we built this, this caring group. And one day after somebody had talked to us, one of the wives said, "Okay, I feel pretty good now. I want to go out and rivet something." I said, "I got something for you to do." And so I started taking all of them to Martha's Table [Washington, D.C.]. There were two husbands, Margaret Spellings' husband and, and [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes' husband [Dewey Hughes]. They took part in everything. We would all go en masse to Martha's Table to make food and so forth. Then when they formed the [USA] Freedom Corps, I thought wait a minute. Here we go creating another agency. I said, "Let's go talk to John Bridgeland and see what the Freedom Corps is all about." So we had a meeting with him while he talked about it, and we tried to see where we fit into all of this and so forth. And I cautioned him about reinventing the wheel. I said there's America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.], there's Points of Light [Atlanta, Georgia], there's Corporation for National Service [Corporation for National and Community Service, Washington, D.C.]. You have to try to incorporate all of that instead of creating a whole new thing. But every president has to create his own thing, and that was his. So we talked about that, and then George Tenet's wife [Stephanie Glakas-Tenet] is quite something. She'd just written a book ['Dare to Repair: A Do-it-Herself Guide to Fixing (Almost) Anything in the Home,' Julie Sussman and Stephanie Glakas-Tenet] for women on how to fix everything, a handyman kind of thing. And she was going around the country to Habitat for Humanity builds and talking about we're building a house here. I said, "We can do that." So I said, "We're gonna build a house." And I mentioned it to Debbie Dingell, who's head of the General Motors Foundation [Detroit, Michigan]. She said, "I'll pay for it." I said, "Okay." So we organized and we built a house, and it was a wonderful bonding experience. They don't have that now. You have to keep it going. You have to have a common purpose, and you have to have somebody there saying okay, let's all do this. It is not satisfying just to go to teas and just state dinners, and that doesn't bring you much satisfaction. So the other day, a new cabinet wife--I don't even know who she was; I did not know who she was--she said, "Oh, we were talking about you the other day. And we really need something to do." And I said, "You know what you can do? All of you can go take a Red Cross [American Red Cross] disaster preparedness course." In fact, I had thought about that for the other group. "So, if something happens in town, we all know what it is we have to do, and we're trained to go and do it." So I had a discussion about it the other day, and I said, "You can have it at America's Promise if you want to. But we need to get groups trained for the event of a disaster. And we can do it in a social atmosphere, but then it won't be like Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], with people calling up saying, 'What are we gonna do?'" Story_ID: 629834 Speaker 1: During the time that your husband [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was serving as secretary of state, was there a time that you were most concerned about him? Speaker 2: I was always concerned about him because this is a very stressful job. I looked at him one day and I thought, oh my God, his face is falling down. He needs a facelift. But it's, it is the stress of having the problems of the world on your shoulders. And so, yes, this was very, very difficult. The most difficult day there I think was the day he made the speech at the UN [United Nations], and I went to that speech. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: I knew that it was very crucial. And I needed to be there to hear it and to see the other delegates and see how they were reacting to it. And I really, really hoped that this was really true. But then I think that was the worst day that I had. Speaker 1: Because that's the day people are critical of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the day he is putting his credibility on the line-- Speaker 1: On the line. Speaker 2: --before the whole world. And the reason he is the one chosen to do it, because he is the one that the world believes. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: So that's just that. So, that was difficult, and it still is. It's a painful, painful thought. Speaker 1: Okay, because that's the, that's the thing that people are critical of him-- Speaker 2: Yes, I know. Speaker 1: --for. That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they say he should have quit. That would not-- Speaker 1: But he was a soldier. Speaker 2: He's a soldier. He is loyal. What purpose would it have served for him to walk away from the administration [President George Walker Bush administration]? That would have thrown the country and the world into turmoil, if he doesn't believe it. And it would not have been a positive thing. And you don't leave just because somebody doesn't believe with you. You have a job to do. And, and it's not believe with you. That had nothing to do with it. But this is not the time to say well, I was wrong, and I don't like this. You gave me this, so I'm not gonna play anymore. You can't do that. You cannot do that. The repercussions would have been too great. Story_ID: 629835 Speaker 1: That was the time and it was also the time when Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] was catching hell. I used to think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. I forgot. Speaker 1: --oh, my-- Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: --God. Speaker 2: I forgot about-- Speaker 1: When I pick up the newspaper and on the front page, there on one side is my son, and the other side is my husband and it's above the fold, that's a bad day. And (laughter) he probably caught all that 'cause he was Colin Powell's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] son. I said to Donald Graham one night at dinner, I said, "Do you know who the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] is now?" "Um, no." I said, "And I'll bet you don't know who it was before Michael either." "Um, no." I said, "Michael got more press as chairman of the FCC than anybody ever has. Why was that?" He said, "Well, it was a difficult time, and there were difficult issues." I said, "Those issues have always been there. And the decisions were made and put into place long before he ever got there." Don't know why he was the one that had to take the blame for all of it, but he was a high-profile target. And it might have been a way they could shoot at Colin, not at him, but let's get him. That's what Washington's [Washington, D.C.] all about, not, not just Washington; that's what human nature's about. And so you live with that. Speaker 2: So were you, were you a source of support for Jane [Jane Knott Powell] during that period? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah because--? Speaker 1: Yeah because she was involved in most of the (unclear) social situations. She's invited because her husband is, and we are caught--yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But that's different then, your husband being in a high-profile position on the seat, hot seat. Speaker 1: But we, we were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --supportive of each other, yes. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: And she's a strong woman. Story_ID: 629836 Speaker 1: So when it was time for the chan-, well, not for the change, the election [2004 presidential election] that happened. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It was time. Was there a discussion about what you, the two of you wanted your sort of life to be? Because this was a second--okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's another transition, and I think we're still trying to figure it out. There have been a lot of transitions in our lives. And I thought, okay, here we are at another one. Let's see what this one is like. But you can't discuss what the transition is. You have to wait and play the hand that's dealt, that you're dealt. You can't hold the cards a little bit more, cut the deck better than you did when it was in the hands of somebody else. But it's simply another transition in our lives. I don't fool myself that he is retired-retired. He is not a man who can be. And so, I don't know what develops in the future. Whatever presents itself we'll talk about and see what that opportunity is, but I don't know. But we are growing older, and there comes the time when you do just kind of step back. But he's not a man who plays golf or tennis. He don't wanna go on a cruise. (Laughter) When he was chairman and we were in Budapest [Hungary]--no, Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia]--and we happened to have a little extra time, so they were taking us on a tour of the town plaza, Colin [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] said, "Promise me one thing: when I retire, you will not go dragging me around all over the world." I said, "I promise you," 'cause he wouldn't be any fun. He doesn't like to go sightseeing. It's not important to him. All the countries we have been in, I'll bet you Colin Powell has seen nothing. He's seen pyramids, been to the Kremlin [Moscow Kremlin, Moscow, Russia], but places where they take you to see--ah, he's been to Ephesus [Turkey]. But no, when he goes, he's doing business. I'm the one that gets to see the wonders. But that doesn't bother him. That's not anything he ever wanted to do. He is happiest right down there where he is. Story_ID: 629837 Speaker 1: I want to know where you are though-- Speaker 2: Where am I? Speaker 1: --in, in your, yes, at this point in your life at-- Speaker 2: I am doing what I can for America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.]. I have said to them, you know, this is not my job for life. We have to talk about a time when somebody else takes this over. America's Promise is seen as a Powell ownership. To be effective, it has got to be a more, more--everybody has to own it. And I have suggested in our reorganization, which we really are still working on. We've got a research company working with it to see how you formulate this move forward. I said I would suggest that each organization that is represented on the board take a turn at being chair. That's fine. But having said that, you do have to have a face that people notice and respond to, and I know that. So I don't know how we work that out. Story_ID: 629838 Speaker 1: Now you also wrote two books ['America's Promise,' Alma Powell and 'My Little Wagon,' Alma Powell] back in 2003. Did you like doing that, or was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very easy, and it was great fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.] asked me if I would do it, and I said, "Write a book?" "Well, yeah, we need something to--you can sell 'em and generate revenue but to get the word out." And I thought okay. And they were going to select an agent. I said, "No, no, I will use my own agent." And I told Marvin [Marvin Josephson], who had been Colin's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] agent, what I wanted to do. And I went to New York [New York], and he called together several publishing companies that came in at different times, and I presented to them what my idea was. I want to write a children's book that will tell the children of America what it is we promise you. And I had part of the story in my head, and I told that. And HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] that ultimately published, it was so excited. They had brought a whole bunch of women to that meeting. They said, oh, and we can do this, and we can do this. And we had a price, and we were not going to accept anything--I thought it was kind of high, but Marvin said, "We're asking you for $600,000." They didn't blink. And so that was our, our whatever, retainer. What do you call it when you get a contract (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Anyway, and so that immediately was money for America's Promise. And he also stipulated Mrs. Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] will not travel, because I wasn't about to go all around the country flogging a book. So we had to work on how this was going to be presented. And I think we did it very effectively. I still go out. This fall, for example, CVS drugstores [CVS Pharmacy], which is a big partner of ours, you have no idea what good things they do. They, the schools in Cleveland [Ohio] are in receivership, and the state has taken 'em over. They work very hard in the schools, and so CVS said we gotta inspire the other businesses in the community step forward and see, and, and to take charge of this situation and turn it around. So they gave every school in the city a copies of my books. I went to two schools to read, and one of 'em, the first one, they created a contest among the children to write an essay about how I can contribute to America's Promise, with a prize and so forth. The other school was the only dual language school in the city of Spanish and English. And my books were done in Spanish, too, so they were presented there in Spanish. I was supposed to read, and I said, "I'm not gonna read. Let's let a Spanish-speaking person read." I talked to them first about what this means. And this book tells you what we promise you. I promise every one of you this is what we will do, but you have a responsibility to. So you talk about that first, and then they read the book. So occasionally, there are, are things like that. And at the luncheon I gave the speech about being involved. And there were cards on every table for people to make a pledge of what they were going to do in, in their city and for the schools. Story_ID: 629839 Speaker 1: Well we end our interviews always with some philosophical questions. And what is, you know, striking about the interviews that we've had is the--well, okay, your, your career, your, your life was so rooted in the black community and, and, and very strong on family values. And, you know, and at the same time, as I remember you saying to me yesterday, that you consider yourself an Independent, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I'm just--how do you make all that work in, in, in--I mean how is that all working together? And I wanna say this, you know, the black--even though President Bush [President George Walker Bush] was, you know, the nation saw that red, you know, and they were, and the black religious community came out in droves to help him get reelected or surprised, you know, a part of the populace (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It surprised black people that there would be black people who'd vote for him. Speaker 1: That's right; that's right. Speaker 2: People start to think instead of feel. And I think that's what we all have to develop. We can't have a visceral reaction to something. We can't say wholehearted oh, I hate Republicans or I hate religious fundamentalists. You can't judge people on a, in a group thing like that. We all have got to learn to look at things dispassionately, decide how we feel about that, and decide what it is we can support, and then go and support it without fear. That, that's hard to do in political circles. But I'm not in political circles. Speaker 1: And you've been able to maintain your independence with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 629840 Speaker 1: Do you have, like, hopes and concerns about the black community, and what are they? Speaker 2: I have a lot of concerns about the black community. Hopes are few because of my concerns. We are too divided. We have, we are too segmented on what--I'm not gonna do what that group wants. That's what's wrong, for example, with the D.C. school board [D.C. State Board of Education]. And that's why the school system in the district [Washington, D.C.] is disgraceful. For a school system in the nation's capital to be in that situation is just a disgrace. But it's because of individuals not protecting special interests, this special interest, that special interest, this war, that war. Until they can all come together with a common purpose and be able to put personal things aside and some political considerations aside and work on a set goal, it's not gonna ever be any better. I'm concerned because it has more impact in the black community. I'm concerned about the advent of charter schools. We say oh yeah, we're making better schools. You're also creating segregated schools and drawing into ourselves even more, again, with different agendas. This school is teaching this; this school is teaching that, and it, it just bothers me. I don't know if that's the answer. We say yes, we're giving mothers a choice, and we're giving children a better education. Well, does that mean we do away with our public school system altogether? What happens to those children who are left behind whose mothers don't know to go to a charter school or can't, don't have the get up and go to say something different for their child, and they just send 'em to school 'cause school is supposed to take care of 'em? What happens to those children? And what kind of grownups do they become? They are really gonna fall by the wayside. And the other children that you're protecting and giving a better education--education to, who become the leaders are gonna have a terrible problem to face with these who've been neglected and are now the adults that they have to govern. So we gotta find a better way. I do not think charter schools are the answer. And that's just my own uneducated opinion. I plan to go and talk to some pe-, and I know charter schools that are doing magnificent things. Story_ID: 629841 Speaker 1: There's one here in Washington [D.C.] that I'm so proud of and support wholeheartedly. It's the SEED School [SEED School of Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C.]. Do you know the SEED School? Speaker 2: I think I've heard of it. Speaker 1: SEED School is the only boarding charter school in the United States. It was started by two very young men who had this idea. They got a rich man here in Washington to bankroll it for them. They got a school building from the district, and they proceeded to build their charter school. It makes me smile just thinking about it, because in addition to giving these children a really good education, because they really have tough, dedicated teachers, they have removed them from the neighborhoods that influence them and, and cast a, that undo the good that is done in school and put them into a structured environment. You don't take 'em away from their parents. The school--the children are selected by lottery. There's no, there's no favoritism. They have lost some children because parents say, "You're becoming somebody I don't know. You're better than me," and they take their children out of school. But they spend all week at the school. They go home on weekends and come back on Sunday. But they live in very nice, well-organized dormitories with caring adults. They are taught the responsibility of their own clothing, this big laundry room upstairs. They're responsible for getting those clothes ready. And then on Sunday night there is an inspection, be sure you've got everything for this week. It, again, it's America's Promise [America's Promise Alliance, Washington, D.C.] in a nutshell. But what happens to the children all around there that don't go there? And how do these children go back into their own neighborhoods when they've become changed people? You know what else goes on in this school? The Greek ambassador's wife, it caught her imagination. She started a classics program. Those children learn the Greek classics. Every year a group of them go to Greece at the expense of the Greek government to continue their studies. It is so exciting. And to see them know these things and learn them is really exciting, but what's gonna happen when they go back? Story_ID: 629842 Speaker 1: This is my question and why I was asking about hopes and concerns, because I can't go back to the story of your [maternal] grandfather [George W. Bell], right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And when you look at the tra-, you know, that trajectory of, you know, of generations, and someone would say that there's been tremendous progress. But you know, the story, his story went back right of to Booker T., I mean (cough), excuse me, Booker T. Washington. I'm just wondering, have you seen progress, in your mind-- Speaker 2: I have seen progress. I have also seen us come to a point where we don't quite know where we're headed now. I think integration did us a disfavor. It brought us the opportunity to go into better situations, but we lost the cohesiveness of our community. You lost those people like my grandparents who went into communities to help young people in there go forth. It's like Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] not having the money that it needs now because once integration came, the foundation money fell away. All of the, the guilt money that white people poured into there and made it a wonderful school it all went away, because now you can go anywhere you want to. And the, the problem exists with most historically black colleges [HBCUs], and young people kind of need that. They go into, yeah, they can go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they can go to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and they can go to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], but--and that's why you have black student unions and kids sticking together, looking for that identity. But they don't have that community that used to exist. Teachers no longer have the respect that they used to have. A teacher in the black community was somebody really important. Right now it's kind of like you somebody that can't do nothing else. They don't pay any money. That was not what drove people before. I think it's a disgrace what teachers are paid. They're the most important people in our society. How do we get anybody if we don't have teachers? And why should they make a pittance, and a basketball player make millions? What does he contribute to society? Those are concerns that I have, and all those affect our black community. All of our children want to go out and be a star. They want to be a basketball player or a football player. When I was, I was reading the story ['America's Promise,' Alma Powell] at places, I would always go around the room and say to children, "What do you want to be when you grow up? What do you want to be when you grow up?" The little girls had more dreams than the little boys. They were gone be doctors and something else. They were gonna be two things. They had great imagination about what they wanted to be. Most of the boys wanted to be a basketball player, in black communities. Then I would ask them how do you get to be that. They don't need any great education to go be a basketball player. It doesn't require anything but skill, and you don't have to worry about books too much. We all know about the athletes who go to scholar-, college on scholarships and come out not knowing how to read. They know how to read when they went in. They don't know how when they come out. This is a disservice to our children. Everybody criticized Bill Cosby, but he had some words that were really true. It is our community not addressing these things. We never would have put up with the sloppiness that kids have now. At school it was tuck in your shirt, shine your shoes, stand up straight, pull up those pants. Nobody would've walked around--take that hat off your head. Boys did not walk around in the house with hats on their head. But now we identify with the hip-hop culture, and that's what they look at as what they should emulate. And it's just funny, ah-ha, look at him; he looks like Lil' Bow Wow [Bow Wow]. That, that's not progress. It is not progress. And what, how it all plays out, I don't know. We can continue to try to be role models for them, but it's hard to supplant that entertainment culture; it's really hard. And I'm sure Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] talked about the course in television and the images. This is what they look at. This is how they know what it is they want to aspire to be. And so that is a real problem. Story_ID: 629843 Speaker 1: Family for you has been--and your children, you know, one a lawyer [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], one a, a well-established stage actress [Linda Powell], and the other a film producer [Annemarie Powell Lyons]; two of them creative, following in your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All three of 'em are creative if you must think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It takes a little talent to be a lawyer (laughter). Speaker 1: That's true; that's true. Speaker 2: You have to be a little bit of an actor. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: No, they're creative. Family is very important, but we're seeing family structure change so much. And I think I'm too old to figure out what that is. The families that we talk about are in the minority rather in the majority. It's all right for a single woman to decide they're gonna have a child because they need to be fulfilled. That's gonna change our society completely, and we don't even know how. We have to wait and see. So I don't know what families will be in the future. They will not have the same structure. I kind of liken it to 'Brave New World' [Aldous Huxley] where everything has gone on, and there are still these people that (unclear) to tradition and live on the reservation. And they're all kind of, they're the oddity but the ones who still live as we do now and not in this great technical society over here where everything is about feeling good. I always laugh at all the medications we have because in 'Brave New World' every Friday everybody lined up to get their soma, their tranquilizer, to make 'em feel good. And that's what we're all about now, feeling good. And maybe that's just the, the way we will evolve. But I don't know what--I don't know that you can ever put the genie back in the bottle, so I don't know what the shape of the future is as far as families are concerned-- Story_ID: 629844 Speaker 1: I want to know what you would like your legacy to be. And then my second question is what would you like your family legacy to be? Speaker 2: I think my legacy, just to say that I tried to make a difference in somebody's life and that I helped them in their understanding or in some way, that I was able to better somebody's life, not the whole world, but have a little influence on just a few. What was the second part? Speaker 1: Family legacy. Speaker 2: I think the family legacy will be the same as our family legacy has always been, is the legacy of George [George W. Bell] and Elgetha Bell [Elgetha Brand Bell], of reaching out in to the community and taking your talents to help make the world a better place. And I think we're well on the way to doing that. Linda [Linda Powell] is an actress, but Linda does an awful lot of volunteer stuff in New York [New York]. She mon-, she mentors children at the Jewish community center, teaching children after school. She works with young people at the School of Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music Artrt and Performing Arts, New York, New York] on Saturday, kids who are looking for a career. When Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] struck and, and all the relief agencies were being setup, she could have taken over an answer. She called up and said, "How do I volunteer?" And they gave her a whole runaround: "Well, you have to call this number, and you've got to put your name on this list," and so forth. Linda just put her clothes on and walked down to where they were doing it and said I'm here for the training. And the guard didn't pay attention to her, didn't see if she was on the list. He said, "Oh yeah, that's down there in that room." She walked on in, and they said, "Well, you're not on the list, and you have--." She said, "That's all right, I'll watch." And she stayed in the room where they were giving the training. And finally she went into where people were answering telephones and just stood by a woman to see how she was doing it. And the lady said to her, "You, you look like you have this down pretty well. You want to take a call?" Linda said, "Sure." And she sat down and she took the call. And the lady said, "Oh, you know how to do this. Would you please take over? I've been here since twelve o'clock today." That's how she became a person answering phone calls. If she'd gone by the book, put your name--she said you know, you call a number and you get transferred to another. You just go. And she worked as long as that center was open. Then she transferred herself over to another organization that New York was running that had all the agencies involved there, and just went in and said, "I'm here to help. Where do I start?" That's what you have to do. And I'm glad that she got that sense of being responsible for giving to the community: what can I do? And that's what I'd like to help other young people get. Story_ID: 629845 Speaker 1: This is my maternal great-grandmother, born a slave and lived most of her adult life as a slave. Her name is Rosa, R-O-S-A, Brand, B-R-A-N-D, Holly, H-O-L-L-Y [Rosa Brand Holly]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandfather, father of my mother, who was born a slave and went to Berea College [Berea, Kentucky], graduating in 1892. Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: His name is George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Wesley, W-E-S-L-E-Y, Bell, B-E-L-L [George W. Bell]. Speaker 2: And he was the f-- Speaker 1: He was the, the father of my mother. This is my maternal grandmother [Elgetha Brand Bell], mother of Mildred Bell Johnson, my mother. She, too, she was born the year after slavery was abolished, grew up and went to Berea College, meeting my grandfather there and marrying in 1892 and moving to Middlesboro, Kentucky. Speaker 2: This is the home they lived in, in Middlesboro, Kentucky, where he became the principal of the first school for colored in Middlesboro. It was called the Colored School [Middlesboro Colored School; Lincoln School, Middlesboro, Kentucky]. And he became principal at that school in 1891. This is their home. And seated on the porch very small, the smallest child is my mother, Mildred Bell, and the other one is her older sister, Vivian [Vivian Fairchild Bell]. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my husband, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], C-O-L-I-N, P-O-W-E-L-L, with four of the living presidents. We were at the opening of the Reagan Library [Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, Simi Valley, California]. President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] also attended this event but had to leave early because of his wife's [Pat Nixon] illness. She died shortly after that. In this picture are: President George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], President Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], President Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and President Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.]. Speaker 2: And you went in the order that their, they appear? Speaker 1: That appear on the picture. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me. I am the child in that, standing, Alma Johnson Powell [HistoryMaker Alma Powell]. And the adults are my grand, my paternal grandparents, Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N [Ernest Robert Johnson] and his wife, Alma, A-L-M-A, Smith, S-M-I-T-H, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N [Alma Smith Johnson]. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents on their twenty-fifth anniversary. There is Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Bell, B-E-L-L, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, my father, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N [Robert Charles Johnson]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my maternal grandmother, a very young picture. We don't know what age. And she is Elgetha, E-L-G-E-T-H-A, Brand, B-A-R-A-N-D [sic.] Bell, B-E-L-L. Speaker 1: This is my mother, Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Bell, B-E-L-L, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Smith family. I don't know the names of the adults except grandma and grandpa. They were my great-grandparents on my father's side. The young woman in the upper left of the picture is my paternal grandmother, Alma, A-L-M-A, Ethel, T-H-E-L, Smith, S-M-I-T-H. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my paternal grandfather, Ernest Robert Johnson, made probably during World War II--no, World War I [WWI]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, about five years old. Speaker 1: Do you know where this was? Speaker 2: In Ohio somewhere. Speaker 1: In Ohio, right. Speaker 2: I don't know if it was Lorain [Ohio] or Elyria [Ohio]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father and his mother. She is Alma Ethel Smith Johnson, A-L-M-A, S-M-I-T-H, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. He is Robert Charles, about fourteen years old. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my paternal grandparents, Alma Smith Johnson, A-L-M-A, S-M-I-T-H, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, and her husband Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Alma Smith, taken when she was perhaps sixteen years, A-L-M-A, S-M-I-T-H. She is my paternal grandmother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This photograph is when Colin Powell, C-O-L-I-N, P-O-W-E-L-L, is sworn in as secretary of state. On the left is vice president, Dick Cheney, D-I-C-K, C-H-E-N-E-Y, President George Walker Bush, G-E-O-R-G-E, W-A-L-K-E-R, B-U-S-H, and me, A-L-M-A, P-O-W-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, and the date, do you remember? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The year though? Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000]. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Colin Powell on the left, C-O-L-I-N, P-O-W-E-L-L, Nancy Reagan, N-A-N-C-Y, R-E-A-G-A-N, Ronald Reagan, R-O-N-A-L-D, R-E-A-G-A-N, and Alma Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L. This is the Christmas party, whatever year he was national security advisor. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Colin Powell on the left, C-O-L-I-N. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): You don't have to respell all of those. Speaker 2: Okay--Barbara Bush, B-A-R-B- B-U-S-H, George Herbert Walker Bush and Alma Powell, probably 1991. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son, [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell, his wife, Jane Knott Powell, and his oldest son, Jeffrey Michael Powell [Jeffrey Powell]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): And the one to spell there is the Knott. Speaker 1: K-N- Jane Knott, K-N-O-T-T. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Great, thanks. Speaker 1: And Jeffrey is Jeffrey with a J-E-F-F-R-E-Y. Story_ID: 629846 Speaker 1: Picture of a group of [U.S.] military wives representing all of the services [U.S. Armed Forces]. This is the Joint Armed Forces Officers' Wives' Luncheon of 1993. Mrs. Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was the guest of honor. She is the seventh person on the left. I am the sixth person on the right in this photo wearing gold. Speaker 2: This picture was at the time President George Herbert Walker Bush was vice president and my husband, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], was the national security advisor. And this is a meeting in the office of the then vice president. On the left is Vice President George Bush with Colin seated in the center. I don't know who the other two people are. Speaker 1: This is a picture of our family at the wedding of my son, [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell. On the left is Annemarie Powell [Annemarie Powell Lyons], A-N-N-E-M-A-R-I-E, one word, Powell, Colin Powell, the bride, Jane, J-A-N-E, Ellen, E-L-E--L-E-N, Knott, K-O-N-T--K-N-O-T-T, Powell [Jane Knott Powell]. The groom is Michael Kevin Powell. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): You don't have to spell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): We know all those. Speaker 1: I'm standing next to him. And on the end is Linda Margaret Powell [Linda Powell] on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is the wedding of my younger daughter, Annemarie Powell. The groom is Aaron, A-A-R-O-N, Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Lyons, L-Y-O-N-S [Francis Lyons]. This is November the 3rd, three years ago--four years ago. Speaker 2: In this picture you see Colin Powell on the left, George H. W. Bush on the right, on the occasion when he was granted the Medal of Freedom [Presidential Medal of Freedom]. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the night of the opening of 'On Golden Pond' [Ernest Thompson] on Broadway. On the left is Linda Margaret Powell, who starred in the, in the play 'On Golden Pond' in the role of Chelsea [Chelsea Thayer Wayne]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a family portrait made at Thanksgiving in 2004. On the left are Michael Powell and Jane Powell. Seated on the couch on the left is Jeffrey Michael Powell [Jeffrey Powell], Colin Powell, [HistoryMaker] Alma Powell, Linda Powell. Behind them is Anne Powell on the far right, her husband Francis, and in front of them Bryan Richard Powell [Bryan Powell]. Speaker 2: This picture was made in 1981 on the occasion of the vision of the secretary of defense, Caspar Weinberger [Caspar W. Weinberger], who with Pope Paul [Saint Pope John Paul II]. We are in the Vatican [Vatican City] offices of Pope Paul. Caspar Weinberger is to the right of the pope. Jane Weinberger [Jane D. Weinberger] is to the left. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Colin Luther Powell. Oh, I think he must have been about eight years old. He still has on short pants, so he's probably about eight years old. Might have been made on the occasion of his Confirmation. No, that's too young. He wouldn't have been confirmed then. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a picture of the mother of Colin Luther Powell. Her name is Maud, M-A-U-D, Ariel, A-R-I-E-L, McKoy, M-C-K-O-Y, Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L [Maud McKoy Powell]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, Alma Vivian Johnson. I think I was three years old. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father, Robert Charles Johnson, made in Talladega, Alabama, when he was probably about fourteen years old. Speaker 1: This is Luther Theopolis Powell [Luther Powell]. That'll be a challenge to spell Theopolis, but L-U-T-H-E-R, T-H-E-O-P-O-L-I-S, Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L, father of Colin Powell. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Colin Luther Powell about four years old. Speaker 1: This is another picture of Alma Smith Johnson. I don't know when it was made. Speaker 2: And she's--? Speaker 1: She is my paternal grandmother. Speaker 2: This is her husband Ernest Robert Johnson, my grandfather, paternal. Speaker 1: This is me, Alma Vivian Johnson, in the year 1937. Speaker 2: This is my paternal grandmother, Alma Ethel Smith Johnson. This picture was made in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: This I picture is Alma Vivian Johnson. The year is 1957, and it was made the, my senior year at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of a book party given in the Boathouse [Loeb Boathouse] at Central Park [New York, New York] when my two books, my American, my, 'America's Promise' [Alma Powell] and 'My Little Wagon' [Alma Powell] were released. Copies of the books are seen on either side of the table. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, Robert Charles Johnson, when he was principal of Lincoln Elementary School [Birmingham, Alabama]. The picture was made in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Mildred Bell Johnson, the adult in the picture, reading to a group of children at the daycare center and nursery school that she found in 1942. So this picture is made in the '40s [1940s]. I can be seen peeping around to her left, hard to see. Speaker 1: It was the first. Speaker 2: It was the first licensed daycare center in the State of Alabama. Speaker 1: This a picture of, at, taken at my husband's retirement. On the left is my cousin, Lelia Smith, L-E-L-I-A, Smith, S-M-I-T-H, McBath, M-C-B-A-T-H [Lelia Smith McBath]. Standing next to her in the flowered dress is my sister, Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Greene, G-R-E-E-N-E [Barbara Johnson Greene]. I'm next in the picture, and to my left is my cousin, Margot, M-A-R-G-O-T, Hicks Suddth, S-U-D-D-T-H [Margot Hicks Suddth]. Speaker 2: This a picture of me, the adult in the picture, at The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts [Washington, D.C.] with a group of children from the center's education program. The year is probably 1995. Speaker 1: We have two images here. The two men on the left, in the left of the picture are my grandfather, Ernest Johnson, and my father, Robert Johnson. That picture was probably made in the '40s [1940s]. To the right of them, the little girls, little girl standing there with her hands full, it is me, Alma Vivian Johnson. And the baby in the high chair is my sister, Barbara Rose Johnson. Speaker 2: Now ages? Speaker 1: Ages, I was three years older than she is, so that is probably, she's less than a year old there. So, I'm probably three, and she's almost one. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandfather, the man in the back center of the picture, George Wesley Bell [George W. Bell], at the school [Middlesboro Colored School; Lincoln School] that he was principal of, the first colored school in Middlesboro, Kentucky, with the first group of students of that school. The year is 1891. Speaker 1: This is the marriage of Alma Vivian Johnson and Colin L. Powell. That picture is made at their wedding reception in my family home in Birmingham, Alabama. The year is 1962, August 25th. Speaker 2: August 25th, 1962. Speaker 1: This is a picture made at the retirement of my husband from the position of chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff and indeed his retirement from military service. We are saluting and, and honors presentation. There is a 21-gun salute going off, and it is traditional for each person to salute as the tribute is paid. Speaker 2: This schematic shows a family tree from the Bell side. At the top of the tree are George Wesley Bell and Elgetha Bell [Elgetha Brand Bell]. And then the, the schematic goes down from there showing the relationships. It shows the, all of their descendants. Speaker 1: Was that diffi- who did the work on this? Speaker 2: My aunt, sis- Vivian [Vivian Fairchild Bell] did it. And she was the one that finally was the repository of all of those memories. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she did like to talk so that you got a lot of stuff. She was such an organized person. When my father died, they were the only two left. He was her brother-in-law. And they had all lived together. The year Colin and I got married they built a house together, her sister and brother, neither of whom were married, and my mother and father. And then she and my father were the ones that left. And when my father died, there was only her. Speaker 1: Wait, she--you never told that story. You said-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): We're ready for this one whenever you are. Go ahead if you want. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Alma Vivian Johnson. The year is May, it is May 1957. I have just graduated from Fisk University. In the background is the Fisk University library. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Great. Speaker 1: No, the, the year we got married my parents built a new house because the freeway was coming through and taking the family house...