 Story_ID: 21834 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. And I don't have a mic on. My name is Larry Crowe. And I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Derrick Hartwell Pitts. That's D-as in David, E-R-R-I-C-K, Hartwell, H-A-R-T-W-E-L-L, Pitts, P-as in Peter-I-T-T-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 22, 1955, and I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is Chief Astronomer, planetary and programs director, senior scientist at the Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 25, 2012. Speaker 1: I think it's the 23rd. Speaker 2: Is it the 23rd? I'm ahead of things. Yes, today is May 23rd, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're on the fifth floor, in the fifth floor conference room at the Franklin Institute Science Museum. Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions, we always ask as a warm up, but they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: (pause) My favorite food, I think probably is lamb biryani. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is autumn. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, my number one ranking vacation destination right now is St. Lucia. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it depends on a lot of different things, but I think the favorite phrase or saying I would say I have is "Sure, why not?" Story_ID: 21835 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history now. And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll--well, I'll ask about them separately and put 'em together later. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: So we don't get them mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's full name was Shirley Mae Dupree Pitts. S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, M-A-E, capital D-U-capital-P-R-E-E, last name Pitts, capital P-I-T-T-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 7, 1916. Her place of birth was Sumter, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I think I can only trace my mother's side of the family back about three generations. My mother's side of the family lived in the South. They lived in Sumter, South Carolina. My mother was born as the only child of her mother, Eugenia Phoebe Dupree and her father, Hartwell Dupree. My mother came to Philadelphia when she was nine years old. So she lived the early portion of her life in Sumter, South Carolina. Her mother, Eugenia, was born to a woman who was-- first, who was a sister, born to a woman who had a sister who lived nearby. So it was my great grandmother on my mother's side who died young. My grandmother was taken in by her mother's sister, her aunt. She grew up with that family, and then when she was married, she came to Philadelphia with her daughter, my mother. Now, the reason why I structure it this way is because our closest relatives on my mother's side of the family, when they came up from Sumter, South Carolina, they moved to Trenton, New Jersey. So my grandmother and the matriarch of the side of the family, the first cousins in Trenton, New Jersey, were very much like sisters. They had grown up as sisters even though they were first cousins. They grew up as sisters. So I always knew that side of the family very closely, but beyond that generation, the next generation back, my great grandmother, and then beyond that great grandmother, great, great grandmother, I don't know at all. Story_ID: 21836 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, are there any stories that are passed down about life in Sumter, South Carolina. Now, that's a place I think that's replete with a lot of different stories from Reconstruction [Reconstruction Era of 1863-1877] and such, but there are any passed down in your family? Speaker 2: No, there are none. I don't know of many at all. I know that one of the men in my mother's [Shirley Mae DuPree] Pitts family did own a farm. And I've heard stories about a horse-drawn wagon that he had that my mother road in when she was very young. But I don't know much more than that. And actually have not been to Sumter myself. So I don't know very much more about that. My brother and I are currently trying to research some of that, but we don't have very much more than that right now. Speaker 1: Okay, there are no stories about what it was like down there that were passed on by anyone? Speaker 2: It's a very interesting thing. When I, as I was growing up, none of those stories were passed down to me. My brother might have had more stories. He's five years older than I am. He had visited some Sumter, South Carolina with my mother. But I never had that opportunity. So in my family, it's a very interesting thing that on my mother's side of the family, they never talked about much of that with the children. So either the children in my mother's side or in the first cousin's side of my mother's side of the family, we don't have much of that to share between us. It's as if, once they came North, they left all that behind is one way I might interpret it, although my grandmother, having grown up there with her first cousin as sisters, certainly had stories and knew plenty that they shared among them. And maybe they shared those with their first daughters or first sons, but none of that trickled down to us or to me. Speaker 1: Okay, it's not unusual. So, so did your mother talk about what her aspirations were growing up in [South] Carolina, the moving to Phila--did she talk about the transition or what her aspirations were going to high school? Speaker 2: She didn't talk about the transition or any of her aspirations of what she wanted to do. I know that when she came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a young girl, I know where they lived. They lived on Styles [sic, Stiles] Street, 16th and Styles [sic, Stiles] Street here in Philadelphia. And I did get to see that house when I was very young. However, my mother's father died, not long after she came to Philadelphia, when she was young. I think maybe my mother came to Philly when she was six and her father died three years later when she was nine. Her father came to Philadelphia first, looking for work and then brought the family after he found work. I know that he worked for Oliver Bair Funeral Home in Center City, Philadelphia. But I don't know much of what he did. And I actually found that out, my brother and I found that out, by searching records of our grandfather and found an obituary posting for him in a newspaper that gave us that much information. I know that when my mother went to school here, I know that she went to-- I believe she went to Masterman [Julia R. Masterman School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I know she went to Girl's High School [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I know that she began work almost immediately after leaving high school. Speaker 1: Okay, and what kind of work did she do? Speaker 2: Her work was primarily secretarial. I know that she started out as a secretary, working first for the Philadelphia Museum of Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. This is when the Philadelphia Museum of Art was using the Fairmont Park Building Memorial Hall as part of their holdings. She worked out of that building for a time. She didn't stay with that job very long. She took a job following this working for the Upholsterer's International Union of North America. The Upholsterer's International Union had its headquarters here in Philadelphia. And she worked as a bookkeeper for the Upholsterer's International Union. There is one thing that I remember that she told me, though, that she told us as we were growing up, and that is that she knew that she could be a domestic. She knew that that was something that she could do, but that's not really what she wanted to do. She did not wanna hold a job like that. So, she applied for essentially, and I believe actually, sort of fought to get a job as a clerical secretary for the Philadelphia Museum of Art. And then she moved on from there to become the book-- a bookkeeper at the Upholsterer's International Union. She held that job for 35 years. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so, I guess she--did she take the business courses in high school? Speaker 2: She took the business courses in high school, learned how to type, learned how to, you know, take shorthand, all those sorts of things and then used those skills to get a job. Story_ID: 21837 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me move on to your father's side. And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name was Cornelius Ruben Pitts, spelled, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-U-S, Ruben, capital R-U-B-E-N, Pitts, capital P-I-T-T-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is January 12, 1912. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his place of birth, Milledgeville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, M-I-L-L-E-D- Speaker 2: --G-E- Speaker 1: --V-I-L-L-E. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, Milledgeville, Georgia. Speaker 2: Not far out of Macon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not far from Atlanta. Speaker 1: So what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can they go and what are the stories on that side? Speaker 2: My father, my father was one of eight children. He had three brothers and four sisters. My grandfather, his father, named Oliver Pitts, was a sharecropper in Milledgeville [Georgia]. He was one of 12 children. His father, my great, great--my great grandfather, had married twice. With his first wife, he had 12 children. With his second wife, he had 12 children, one of which was my grandfather, Oliver. And then Oliver went on to have eight children, one of which was my father. Now, beyond my great grandfather, to the best of our knowledge, my great grandfather was born to, I believe a man that we called Grandpa Dave. And the story is that Grandpa Dave was of mixed heritage and one of several children born to what we surmise was the plantation owner whose name was Pitts. Speaker 1: Okay, so is there any, so did--okay, but you said your grandfather was a sharecropper, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he never, he didn't own his own land? Speaker 2: No, he did not own his own land. He was a sharecropper. My understanding from my father, though, is that--and from my father's brothers, my uncles, is that he was known throughout the county for how good a farmer he was. He understood better than most people how to grow things. So he always had, you know, great yield out of his crops, better than anybody else at any time. They, the people that owned the land always tried to get him to tell them how he was doing what he was doing so much better than everybody else was doing. And my understanding is that my grandfather was an extremely shrewd individual. I could see this. I knew him in his later years. But he was extraordinarily shrewd and would not let on with anyone about what his secrets were for how he did what he did. But, apparently, he was known throughout the county for the quality of his crops and the quality of his livestock and all those sorts of things. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's interesting. The reason why I asked that first question about the land ownership is because often, like some kind of relationship to the slave master is a ticket to get a piece of land-- Speaker 2: Sure, yeah. Speaker 1: --at least, but in this case, I don't know what happened, but it didn't pass down to your grandfather. Speaker 2: Well, we're, you know, we're currently, actively trying to figure that kind of stuff out now. In fact, if everything goes well, we'll go to a family reunion this weekend. Maybe we'll find out some more. Speaker 1: Okay, but it's interesting that he had his own ways of growing produce, but he wouldn't share it (laughter). Speaker 2: He was an incredibly strong-minded individual. He had his way in which everything would operate. And it was his way or the highway. And he was like that until his dying day which, he was about ninety-seven when he died. And he, it was his way or the highway. Speaker 1: Now, when did he pass? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], I would say, 1973. Speaker 1: So he was born about 1870? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Story_ID: 21838 Speaker 1: Okay, so his father, Grandpa Dave, I guess was born during the Civil, yeah, of course, was born just before the Civil War [American Civil War, 1861-1865]? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, interesting. Okay. So, so you knew him. You had a chance to know him? Speaker 2: I did. I had a really interesting experience with him when I first met him. I didn't meet my grandfather until I was in elementary school, upper--no, in junior high school. I didn't meet my grandfather until I was in junior high school. I came home from junior high school one day to find a tall man sitting on our porch. He was the tallest guy I had ever seen. He looked as if he were white, and he had a great shock of white hair. I had no idea who this person was, had never seen anybody like this person before. And, again, he was the tallest guy I'd ever seen because he was very tall. It turns out he was my grandfather, had come to visit my mother [Shirley Mae Dupree Pitts]. Now, the background of the story is that shortly after I was born--I'm the second of two children, shortly after I was born, my mother and father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] split, never divorced, never really stayed very far apart, but did not live together. And there was some animosity between them that softened over the years. But in the early history of my life, there was great animosity between my mother and father, not really, you know, anything violent, but just (laughter), something had gone on that my mother did not like. But I did find out what that was eventually. It wasn't as bad as it may seem, but I found out what was going on later on. And so they did not live together. My father visited with us, came to, came to see and support my mother--came to see us and support our mother every month, every two months and was like that throughout our life. We developed, my brother and I, developed a much stronger relationship as time went on. But in the early part of our lives, that was not a very strong relationship for us. But I come home from junior high school one afternoon to find this gentleman sitting on my porch. I had no idea who he was. But part of the reason for that is because they, my grandfather and his wife traveled a lot. They resettled around the country several times. So, part of the reason why I hadn't seen him until then. Speaker 1: Okay, now, where was he living? Was he still living in Georgia then? Speaker 2: Once he stopped farming, as he grew older in years, once he stopped farming, he moved from the family homestead out to Riverside, California where two of his sons and maybe two of his daughters were living, one of his daughters were living. And he and his wife spent about a decade there. They came back to [Milledgeville] Georgia, spent another decade and a half there, and then late in life as their health was failing, came to Philadelphia. Now, wait a minute. I've mixed something up here. Hold on. Let me get it straightened out. I'm sorry. I missed a step. They left the family homestead in Georgia, came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and lived for about a decade, then moved to Riverside, California, then went back to the homestead in Georgia, then came back to Philadelphia in their later years. They both died here in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Okay, so did they live with your father, do you think or? Speaker 2: No, they actually had a house in Elmwood [Pennsylvania], which is a section of Philadelphia that's down by what's now Philadelphia International Airport. They lived near the airport. And I remember my mother talking about going out to visit them in Elmwood. I had no idea where Elmwood is. I think I, I was taken to see them when they were here in Philadelphia when I was just a baby, but I don't remember ever having seen them, don't remember the trip out to that section of town. But my brother remembers that. He, again, he's five years older than I am. Speaker 1: Now, you were saying that there was a, did something happen memorable when you met your grandfather or it was just the fact that you met him for the first time? Speaker 2: That was a, that was a memorable thing. I had never seen him before. I had no idea what my grandfather looked like, no description, no picture, no anything, come home from--I, in some ways you would say, I didn't really expect that I had a grandfather. That's sort of the interesting thing about how my brother and I grew up. My brother and I grew up in a household of my mother, my grandmother. They took very good care of us. We had a great extended family through the church family that we were involved with. And I never really realized that (a), I didn't have a father. Yes, I saw the kids in the neighborhood had two-parent households, but, okay, that's fine. Not everybody did. And then I didn't really realize that I was supposed to have a grandfather that was supposed to be involved in my life, either on my mother's side or my father's side. So I had no idea. So I come home to find this guy sitting on my porch, don't know who he is; find out he's my grandfather. Wait. Which grandfather? Ah, your father's father. Ah, really? And then I began to learn lots more about the family, how many brothers and sisters there are, how extensive the family is, things like that. That begins to, begins to come out from this. You know, seeing him is like the tip of a very large iceberg in a way. So he's, these things begin to come out. So I'm shocked because I have no idea what to expect a grandfather's gonna look like. And here's who this is. And then the questions begin to come out. Well, who else is back there that I don't know about? So, and also there are the dynamics of the relationship between my mother and my grandfather. You know, what's the dynamic of this relationship? How does all this fit together sort of thing? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, challenging for a thirteen year old or a fourteen year old to trying and figure this stuff out. Speaker 1: Okay, so you say he was really tall. Well, you're about 6'2", I guess, right? Speaker 2: I'm six foot four [6'4"]. Speaker 1: Four, okay. Speaker 2: When I was in junior high school, I was probably, you know, just under six foot [6'], certainly under six foot. And here was a guy, he was nearly seven foot [7'] tall. Speaker 1: Really, okay. Speaker 2: I'd never seen anybody that tall before. There was one other person I had seen that tall, Leon Sullivan, Rev. Leon Sullivan, who was the pastor of the church we went to. He was the tallest guy first, I'd ever seen until I saw my grandfather. Story_ID: 21839 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, let's see. Now, your father, what is his story? What did he tell you about his, about growing up and what he was trying to do? Speaker 2: My father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] told us most of his life story through two avenues: His work occupations, his military service, how he met my family. The earliest I can remember from him telling me is that when he was in his mid to late teens, he and one of his brothers left home in Milledgeville [Georgia] to go work on Alligator Alley in Florida, the road that connects the East side of Southern Florida to the West side of Southern Florida. When he was in his teens, he went to work on that. This was a chance for him to get away from home, a chance for him to make some money. After that experience, he entered the military. He went into the army in World War II [1939-1945]. Speaker 1: Did he serve in the army or the-- Speaker 2: He did serve in the army. He left with the rank of Staff Sergeant. He was a radio technician in the army. He served at Selfridge Field in Detroit [Michigan], just outside of Detroit or in Michigan, I should say. He tells the story that he was shipped out to board a ship to head to Europe. But on the train from Detroit, there was no heat in the car, and the weather was really terrible. And he contracted some sort of respiratory ailment, which I believe probably was pneumonia [lung infection]. He was taken off the train and taken to Walter Reed Army Hospital [Washington, D.C.] where he told us, he was there for a year recuperating. Now, the interesting thing about my father (laughter) is that he could tell a fanciful story every now and then. And the one story that he told us is that (laughter)--I know it's not true. But he said, you know, they would reach through is nose and pull stuff out of his lungs. And he said he, they pulled one lung out through his nose. I think what they were doing is that they were draining his lung through a tube that went through is nose. That's what I think the real story was. If I'm not mistaken, when he died, he had both lungs. But that's how he described it. So he got out of the service, after having, you know, gone through this medical experience, hooked up with one of his brothers, his brother, Joe. He and his brother, Joe, were very, very close brothers. His brother, Joe, had a job at Newport News [Virginia], in the military at Newport News. And he brought, he told my father about this, and my father went to Newport News to get a job there. The interesting aspect that now sort of covers the story about them and my father included in this, is that my father had some training in electronics before he went into the service actually. My father and his three brothers and one of his sisters all took a correspondence course in electronics, a mail-order correspondence course. They put some money together. One of them sent in for it. They all studied it. So one of my aunts had been a registered electrician. All of my father's brothers were all involved in electricity of some sort or another, either in electronic communication or in electrical systems, all those sorts of things. So, what this does now is, from Newport News, my father finds out that there is a--my uncle finds out that there's a job inspecting radio equipment somewhere else, in Virginia or in Tennessee, I think it was. So they both, my Uncle Joe, goes to apply for the job. He applies for the job, finds out that there's something else available that he can bring his brother. His brother comes there, and they both now are inspecting radio equipment for the army. So they now have these jobs in electronics. They stay there a couple of years and I know I have some things out of order. But I'll try to see if I can get it straight somehow. Speaker 1: Hold on one second. We have to pause for a 30-minute break and then we'll pick it back up. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 21840 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the time framing around these job shifts is kind of on the short side. And the reason why is because my father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] had actually met my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] before he left army service. Now, I know that this is the case because one of my uncles on my mother's side knew my father before my mother and father were married. Here's what the uncle tells me. The uncle had told us this story many times. While he was in the service, he met this guy from Georgia. His name was Pitts, Connie Pitts. And he and Connie were good friends. One day my uncle, whose name was Varian, said to Pitts, "What are you doing this weekend? We're gonna go to such and such a place. Do you wanna come along with us?" And Pitts said, no, no, I can't come. I'm going to visit my girlfriend in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And Varian says, in Philadelphia? Oh, I have a cousin in Philadelphia. What's your girlfriend's name? Shirley Dupree. Shirley Dupree? That's my cousin [excitedly]. And that's how my father and my uncle met. But that took place while they were both still in the service [United States Navy]. So the time after the service, I know, of these first employment positions is fairly compressed. So following this stint that my father and brother did, inspecting radios for the army, they left that job and came to an open position in Philadelphia at the Philco factory [Philadelphia Storage Battery Company]. The Philco factory used to be on West Sehickgan (ph.) Avenue, just above Roberts Avenue in a fairly, what was then, industrial section of the city. So they take a job there as technicians, assembling radios and televisions. My father knew enough about electronics from this job and from his previous experience that shortly after he and my mother were married, when they lived on Stiles Street in the same house where my mother grew up, my father built a television and put it in the window of the home so that people coming up and down the street could watch TV. Now, they were married in 1947. So its three years before my brother was born, eight years before I was born. Speaker 1: Now, let's, let me go back to this story about building the TV to put in the window. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This seems kind, well, it seems strange today that somebody would do that because people usually don't want anybody up on their porch looking in their house, you know. But in those days, I mean it just, it kind--it implies a lot of things (laughter) at a glance that you just, you know-- Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: I'm trying to sort 'em all out here. Speaker 2: Well, this is a street that doesn't have porches. They have stoops. So they have three or four steps up to the front door, row houses on both sides of the street. It's a fairly small street. So there's a very strong sense of community in this street. Everybody knows everybody else. You know, everybody knows who's on the street. And people have lived there for a long time, so there's a very strong relationship there. So when this guy comes along and builds a television, he puts it in the window so people can see it. Nobody on the street has television. You know, here's a predominantly black neighborhood, not, not poor, but not wealthy either. So at this time, nobody has televisions because they aren't really readily, that easily available unless you have money. But my father, my father actually is quite the electrical technician. My understanding from him is that when he was in the army, he built a pocket radio. They didn't have pocket radios then. But he built a pocket radio, and he used it for communication on the airfield at Selfridge [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Harrison Township, Michigan] to talk back and forth to the aircraft as they were coming in and going out. At that time, the radios that they had were big, clunky and any portable radio device they had, they had to put on a jeep to carry it out to the, you know, to the runways if they were gonna do communications. But my father built a pocket radio that he used, that worked well. And my father was an unusual guy in that while his character would present itself as being a farmer from Georgia, he was a technical wiz. He could build anything. He could fix anything. He could understand any electronic device, no matter how complicated it was, and this was the root of his life's work after he left the Philco factory. So, this is how he comes to Philadelphia, through the Philco factory. This is how he meets and marries my mother. When he comes to Philadelphia, he's looking for a place to live in 1947. He finds a place to live over at 16th and Butler Street, not far from where we eventually, where I grew up. And he met a woman named Jackson, Mr. and Mrs. Jackson. They had a house. They were taking boarders. They took in this guy. His name was Pitts. My grandmother and Mr. and Mrs. Jackson had been close friends for a very, very long time. So when my grandmother and her daughter, my mother, would come to visit Mr. and Mrs. Jackson, here was this guy, Pitts. That's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay, but this is actually happening before '47 [1947] though? Speaker 2: This is happening before '47 [1947]. It's probably '45 [1945], '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: Okay, so then they renew like their relationship or continue it. Speaker 2: They continue the relationship, get married, I think in '47 [1947]; first child comes along in 1950. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's your brother? Speaker 2: That's my brother. Story_ID: 21841 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, your father, he worked for Philco for seventeen years you said? Speaker 2: No, he [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] worked for Philco [Philadelphia Storage Battery Company] for a fairly short time. I think he only worked for Philco for about three or four years. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm getting it mixed up with your mother. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what did he do after he left Philco? Speaker 2: He took a job then with the United States Navy. The Naval Air Development Center in Johnsville, Pennsylvania, had an opening available, apparently, for a radar technician in the early 1950s. He took that job and worked there for 35 years as a radar technician. His job was to fix radar sets. And so what would happen, as I understand it, is that if a radar set that's typically used in an aircraft had failed for some reason, it'd be brought to his bench and his job was to troubleshoot it, figure out what the problem was and fix it. If there were new radar sets that had been developed and put into testing, if they didn't work for whatever reason, it would be brought to his bench and his job was to troubleshoot and fix it, which apparently, he did very, very well. So as far as I know, he traveled extensively with the Navy because, you know, it was, it wasn't, it was quite frequent that I understood that he was on a trip someplace with the Navy. They had put a radar set in a plane, and they were out flying someplace testing it. So he would be in any one of a number of places. He could be in Spain, he could be in Portugal, he could be in Hawaii. He could be in Florida, he could be in the Caribbean someplace where they're testing radar sets. There's some rumor that he might have even traveled to Southeast Asia in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] testing radar sets that were put into use over there, you know, pre-Viet Nam War. But I have no real documentation of that because he did not talk in any great detail about his work at all. Story_ID: 21842 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, when you consider your parents' personalities and their mannerisms and talents, their dispositions or looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts]. My disposition is my father's. My technical ability is my father's. My way of thinking is my father's. But my compassion and--I was gonna say, my compassion and sort of kindness, if you will, come from my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts]. But that's almost stereotypical. That's not really right because my father was also very compassionate. He was a very soft guy in many ways. And I know I get a lot from my mother, some of my physical attributes are my mother's. But I most closely identify with my father, even though I, of course, grew up with my mother. But I've learned over the years that I'm much more like him. Speaker 1: Now, you have an interesting photo of your father as a little boy between two mules, looking at the mules heads and down the line, and he's behind them-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with the reins. So he was raised on the farm in the farm atmosphere, but I take he didn't like it very much. Speaker 2: No, I believe he [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] did. I believe he did because he never gave up farming. He never gave up farming until he was (laughter), until he became incapacitated, he always kept some place where he was growing tomatoes. When he lived in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area and worked at the Naval Air Development Center [Warminster, Pennsylvania], he did not live with us. He had a separate house that he lived in, in Bucks County [Pennsylvania]. And he had a large enough piece of property there--he actually lived with a friend of his that had a large enough piece of property. This was a guy that he worked with at the Naval Air Development Center. And they, you know, sort of had this, had this house together, lived in this house. And what my father did was, he farmed the land and had crops every summer. And I don't mean he had a little vegetable garden. No, this guy had a full-blown tractor with attachments that he was using to plow, cultivate, do all the farm work that needed to be done. And he did that as long as he possibly could. I don't think that ever left him. I think part of the reason why he left though was his, why he left farming and left Georgia was because there were other adventurous things to do. His brother, Joe, would entice him to come do other things. He had this talent, this technical talent that he couldn't express doing all these other sorts of things. And I think he also wanted to get out from under sort of like the oppressive environment that he lived in, under his father. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have any hint, I mean how do you know it was an oppressive environment in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, if you listen to the stories from the siblings, you find out that that was certainly the case. And I certainly saw what he could be like. His father was a demanding task master in a sense. He ruled the house. He did not, he wasn't, he just--it's not that he was there and he had an opinion. It was his opinion, and everything ran according to what he said would be done. And this was for everybody, all the children, his wife. They were all supposed to do as he instructed because "he" knew what was best, and nobody knew better than he did. And he knew it. And his, you talk about an ego as big as all outdoors, well, that's what his ego was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So there're a lot of stories, you know, among the family about, you know, how that was. Story_ID: 21843 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have a note. Did you grow up in Nice Town? Speaker 2: I did, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I did. Yeah, that's sort of like a suburb. Was it near Germantown [Pennsylvania] or something? Speaker 1: Well, actually, it's not right. Nice Town [Pennsylvania] is a neighborhood in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. The city lines of Philadelphia go all the way out to the end, above Germantown. And Nice Town is just at the sort of connection point between North Philadelphia, Central North Philadelphia and Germantown. We're on the upper Northwestern boarder of that. So it's well within the city, not a suburb, well within the city. And I grew up in that neighborhood from when I was born. I was born at the house that my folks moved into in 1955 or 1954. I was born in that house. My brother was born at the previous house, and I lived there until I left to go to college. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 1: Hah, I have a couple of early childhood memories. The very earliest childhood memories I have are of our family doing things together. And that's mostly my mother's [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] side of the family at holiday celebrations together or visits together. I remember very early on, probably when I was three years old that my mother and brother were gonna take a trip to Sumter, South Carolina. And they did this to me several times. They wanted to-- they were gonna take a trip to Sumter, Carolina. Rather than upset me, what they did was, they said, oh, you know, we're just going out someplace. We're not going very far. We'll be back soon. But I figured out that they were taking a much longer trip, and they weren't telling me. And I remember crying, crying, crying, crying when I was very young because I wanted to go, and they weren't gonna take me, you know, typical sort of stuff for a three-year old. And I remember also the very next year when I was four years old, when I finally learned how to tie my shoes, I remember that that was a very proud moment when I understood clearly how to tie my shoes (laughter) in several different ways. So, you know, there is some family, there's that family sort of stuff there, some of these other things like that about, you know, me learning how to do things that I remember from very early on. Speaker 2: Okay, now, what was your neighborhood like? Were there row houses, separate houses? What was it like? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1700 block of Pacific Street was the first of four blocks of Pacific Street, going from 1700 up to 20th Street actually. So, our street was row houses on both sides, all with porches. So from the sidewalk there were first four-- three steps up, then a landing, concrete landing, and then another four or five steps up to the porch. So it was a pretty good elevation above the street level. But we all had porches. This is on the North side of 17th Street. The South side of 17th-the South side of Pacific Street, actually, there were houses on this half of the block going on to the West. And we had a 'T' intersection of Aver (sp?) Street that came into Pacific Street, across on the South side. So, on the Eastern side of Pacific Street, from there, it was the sides of houses. And then it was the sides of the buildings that faced on 17th Street. It was a really wonderful neighborhood because my folks, my mother and grandmother, we all knew each other. Everybody knew each other in the neighborhood. And there were plenty of kids on the street so we all played together. We all went to the same schools for the most part. Almost all of us went to Cleveland Elementary School. A few kids went to another school called Kenderton [Kenderton Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I think it was. And then there was a family of girls, I learned later were adopted girls, who went to Little Flower Catholic School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And there was one other kid on our street who went to Catholic school, maybe two other kids on our street that went to Catholic school. But that stuff didn't really matter so much. We all still played together and, you know, did all the sort of neighborhood things together. One of the most important aspects of that, though, was, you know, the double-edged sword of that is that--especially, for kids, is that all the adults watched out for all the other kids. You've heard this story before. You can't get away with anything in a neighborhood like that because no matter where you are, somebody is seeing what you're doing. And you can bet that before you get home, the story will get home, and they'll be waiting for you on the porch, fully understanding what it was you did. And you're in trouble. So you can't, you can't hide. But that's a good thing because not only was there the discipline, but there's also the protection. So it works both ways. And then throughout the surrounding neighborhood, there was someone that my mother and grandmother knew on almost every street in the surrounding neighborhood. So I could always go to somebody's house if I needed to. There was always somebody I could go to. So, it was a very secure feeling in the neighborhood, although at the time of the early '60s [1960s], at the time of the, of the '60s [1960s], it was a very turbulent time in those neighborhoods because Philadelphia had a lot of gang violence. And so there were several neighborhood gangs around that, you know, whose turf you knew to avoid. There were people you knew in the gangs, and there were people you associated with and people you didn't associate with. And everybody knew who they were. Speaker 2: Okay. What were the names of the gangs? Do you remember? Speaker 1: Sure, let's see. There was Westmoreland Street gang, Ontario Street gang, 15th and Venango Street gang. From nearby neighborhoods there was, I wanna say there was a Brickyard gang. There was--did I say Westmoreland Street? If I didn't, that was a pretty big gang. But there was, 16th and Dolphin Street gang. There were the, from further down in--there was a Diamond Street gang. There was the Imperial Alkeys from down that way-- Speaker 2: Imperial Alkeys? Speaker 1: They called themselves the Imperial Alkeys, yeah. There were a lot of, there were a lot of gangs around, a lot of gangs around. Speaker 2: Okay, most of them are associated with a street, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true, yep. Speaker 2: They associated with a turf. Speaker 1: That's right, um-hum. Speaker 2: The gang activity emanated from turf control or that-- Speaker 1: Turf representation, turf control, sure, all of those things. And this all came to intersection of the school you went to. So there was no problem for me in elementary school. We're elementary school kids. But by the time you get to junior high school, then the stuff starts to show up because now you have teenaged kids, albeit young teenaged kids, you have teenage kids who are young members of these gangs or they have, you know, siblings or, you know, associates who are in these gangs, higher-level members in these gangs in the high school right next door because in Philadelphia here, the high school, the junior high school I went to, Gillespie Junior High School [Elizabeth D. Gillespie Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], sits on the same block right next to Gratz Senior High School [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So they had many more gang problems in Gratz [High School] because it's a senior high school that pulls from all these different neighborhoods. So there are younger gang members in the junior high school, but they still have to be dealt with, you know, just the same. They still have to be dealt with. Story_ID: 21844 Speaker 1: Okay. We always ask this question. So here we go again. What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, sights and sounds and smells. Wow, okay, sights, let's do sights first. Sights of growing up. There's the neighborhood [Nice Town, Pennsylvania]. That's a tremendous sight. There are the businesses and stores that are in the neighborhood that are sights to be seen. There's a butcher shop here. There's a dairy store here. There's a store that sells replacement tubes for radios and televisions. There's a drugstore that I eventually ended up working in. There are the people in the neighborhoods. At that time, you know, the guys all had what we called then a "process". You know, they had relaxed their hair. Some people call it conk. In some neighborhoods in Philadelphia, it's called "conk". In our neighborhood, it was called "process". And you can tell who the stylish guys are because they all dress really, really well. And they have the processed hair. There's the interaction of the teenagers that you see at that time. There are the seniors that you see at the time who carry themselves with a certain bearing and a certain air of respect. You know, there's the, you know, the way people keep their homes which is, you know, reminiscent of a much earlier age in the early twentieth [20th] century. There's the, the buses, the cars, the, all sorts of great stuff like that. The sounds. Well, the sounds of growing up, to a great degree, is the music that you hear. Philadelphia has this strong history of great music of the 1960s that comes out of Philly [nickname for Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And that's a very strong element of what you hear because not only do you hear the commercial music on the radio, but you realize that music programs are here, like 'American Bandstand' is here. You recognize that some of the artists, great artists of that time are very familiar with Philadelphia or are even from Philadelphia or have some kind of connection to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that they're here on a regular basis. You can go to great places and see and hear them in Philadelphia. And at the same time, there are neighborhood vocal groups that get together on street corners and sing and harmonize. And there was a group like that in our neighborhood called 'The Royal Five'. And I can remember some of those guys very, very well. And so those are, those are some of the sounds you hear. Some of the smells that are around at that time, mostly are related to food, you know, cooking. There's great cooking going on. There's a great steak shop in our neighborhood. There's a butcher shop in our, as I said, there's a, there's a--I guess you would call it a fishmonger in a sense. There's a fish store in our neighborhood or a store that sold vegetables and sold fish. I remember that smell very, very well. The steak shop I remember really well, some of the other restaurants around, I remember well. I remember the smell, for me in my childhood, I remember the smell of tin solder. I remember the smell of tin solder because my father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] did soldering work for, you know, he'd fix the radios and fix the TVs and things like that. And he had a lot of his old test equipment and supplies still at our house. And I was always rooting through this stuff because it was very interesting to me to look at these devices and try and figure out what they were and what they did. But they all had this smell of tin soldering, the flux that goes with it and all that sort of stuff. So, you know, there's so many things that I can, you know, describe the sights and sounds and smells of, you know, growing up or the neighborhood. Some of the sights, you know, there's the occasional, you know, infractions with the police so there're police cars, you know, here and there every once in a while, nothing really serious. There's the yelling and screaming of kids in the neighborhood. But there is one, one thing, there's like an iconic thing that sticks in my mind from my childhood. We all had backyards. In the summer, the iconic image I have of living there, growing up there is sitting on the back steps in the backyard, midsummer, noon, one o'clock in the afternoon, clear blue sky, nice temperature, quiet. And I can hear the distant sound of a single-engine plane. And I can remember that just as clear as day. And that's an iconic memory for me of that time. It's, it's a mixture of a lot of things because that still resonates with me today. There's the aircraft. I'm very much interested in flight and aircraft. And then the other thing is, it was the first impression I had of the synergy for humans between the colors green and blue. Vegetational as planted is green, clear sky is blue. I don't anyone that doesn't like a blue sky. I don't know anyone that cannot appreciate the blue of the vegetation. Why are we disposed to liking those things so much? It's obviously because we've evolved in this environment. And so it's, it's wired into us. But there's a deep appreciation I have for those color combinations like that, the green of the vegetation and the blue of the sky and how that ties into us as creatures, having evolved on this planet under these conditions. There's something very powerful about that for me. Story_ID: 21845 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you started, did you start school at Cleveland School? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to daycare before that. I think I went to daycare when I was maybe three and a half, and then four, and then I started kindergarten at Cleveland Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Then I went to Cleveland Elementary School, right up through sixth grade. I think I left Cleveland in 1966, in June of 1966. Speaker 1: Now, could you read before you started kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I certainly could read before I started kindergarten. I started reading when I was four in daycare. I started reading then. And this was a very important instruction in our household that, you know, we had to learn how to read. We had to know how to read, had to know how to read. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Yes, I did have a favorite subject in school. From the time I was four years old, my favorite subject in school was science. Speaker 1: Now, did they have science when you were four? Speaker 2: I don't know about them. I had science (laughter). My, you know, at four years old, my science, for a lot of, you know, four-year old, four-year old kids, I'm sure, is just curiosity about their surrounding world, about their surroundings. But I knew when I was four years old that this is what I was into. Speaker 1: And did you know any scientists? I mean-- Speaker 2: No, that's a very curious thing. I did not know of any scientists. Oh, sure, I knew of scientists in the abstract sense. Who was a scientists that everybody could, you know, a name that everybody could mention in the 1950s and 1960s? [Albert] Einstein. Everybody knew who Einstein was. But outside of Einstein, did I know any scientists? Not one, didn't know of one, never met one, never saw one, never read of one. Oh, there was George Washington Carver. Again, abstract, but in reality, did I know a scientist? No. I had a vague idea of what scientists did, but no real clear clue of what that was. Speaker 1: So did you, at an early age, say at age four, were you practicing a scientific method without necessarily guide or did, I mean did you approach things like that? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely, sure, yeah. For me, the question always was, Hum, what happens if (laughter), what happens if I do this? What happens if I do that? And probably typical of a six or seven or eight year old, I spent some time in the bathroom going through the chemical--going through the medicine cabinet. You know, hum, what happens if I mix this and this and this and this. Nothing ever happened, but it was fun to try anyway because you knew by mixing things, something was supposed to happen because this is what scientists did. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again. Story_ID: 21846 Speaker 1: Okay, so you liked to experiment to see what was gonna happen next. Is there a good story in here somewhere, about an experiment that produced a surprising result? Speaker 2: Well, no, not really, you know, at that age, not really. But, but my curiosity about things continued to drive me to wanna understand how do things work? How are things put together? How are things constructed? So I was always interested in disassembling things to find out how they were built. Reassembly, not so much, you know. The reassembly part was the realization that, now that I've taken this apart, I'd better put it back together or else I'm gonna be in trouble, but not putting it together to make it work necessarily. But I was much more interested in deconstructing it to understand what the parts were and how it was built, how it was put together, what's inside this. I think that's probably the driver for me in that. Speaker 1: And that is interesting that you don't, now, you didn't consider your father a scientist. Speaker 2: No, no. I-- Speaker 1: And yet-- Speaker 2: --I didn't consider my father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts] a scientist. But it wasn't until much later that I had a real appreciation for what his talents and skills were. I would say that he, you know, I would say now that he was a consummate technician because his drive was to be able to make it work. His drive was to fix it. And that's what his skill was, and he knew that his skill was that he could understand whatever it was and could fix it. And I, I got that from him. I feel the same way. I don't care what it is. I can-- if you give me some time with it, I can fix it, you know. And I don't, I don't necessarily have any great skills as a, as an electrical technician or anything like that. But what I, what I believe in, like he believed, is that it can't be that difficult, you know. If I take the time to learn about it, I can understand how it works, and I can fix it. So, but, but what my father told me was that I get my interests in astronomy and space science from his father who was very much interested in the night sky. His father's interest in the night sky though was very practically related. It was related to how do you grow crops? When do you plant? When do you cultivate? When do you harvest? This is all tied to phases of the moon, and I remember my father and I had a great argument about this. And my father would say that you have to, you have to plant things, you have to have the right moon to plant things. And I'd say, what does the moon--the moon doesn't have anything to do with it. The moon doesn't exert any force on plants to make anything happen. It was me that wasn't understanding. What he was saying was, crops have a period of growth rotation. And if you don't plant the crop early enough in the year, on the right moon, and he meant the first moon, the second moon or the third moon or the fourth moon of the year, then there's not enough time for the crop to mature. So I was misunderstanding him. He knew exactly what he was talking about. I didn't know what he was talking about. It took me a while to figure that out. Speaker 1: So it's not so much the effect of the moon on a plant, but-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --the moon indicates the time of the year to do the planting. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and it's using the moon as a timepiece, as an annual timepiece to understand when different kinds of crops have to be planted so that they can come to maturity before the end of the growing season. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is farm knowledge that was codified in almanac's like 'Poor Richard's Almanac'-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --as we sit here in the Franklin Institute [Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: 'The Farmer's Almanac', another-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's true, that's true. But I suspect that my grandfather learned it from his father rather than to read it in an almanac. That's what I suspect. I do know that my father liked to have the 'Farmer's Almanac' around because then he could look up the phases of the moon really easily. Speaker 1: But your grandfather would spend time gazing at the sky to-- Speaker 2: That's what I understand, yes. That's what I've been told. Story_ID: 21847 Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did you--in terms of scientific thinking, were you the kind of child, as a child did you demand proof for knowledge? I mean did you start thinking like that? Speaker 2: No, the way I came upon it was through reading. I read as much as I could. I read as much science as I could get my hands on. And what I then did with the science knowledge that I gained was, I would then apply it to stuff in my everyday life. In other words, I would, you know, then talk about this science with people. I'd talk about this phenomena or talk that phenomena or talk about this device or that device and how these things worked and what the principles were behind it. And the response I would get from people would be things like, well, "how do you know? You're too young to know that kind of stuff." But this is what I learned through reading. So I read, I tried to read as much science stuff as I could possibly read, wherever I could get it and however I could get it. So it's not that I took the science and then, you know, and then demanded proof for things. What it did was, it developed instead in me a, a skill for observation and interpretation, observation, development of a theory and interpretation. So I look at a phenomenon, and I try to figure out what's going on in that phenomenon. And I create a theory then of, you know, what this is about. And it's really the way I sort of apply everything, I guess you could say now. And then from there, I try to come up with an explanation for why that phenomena does what it does. Is it, you know, strictly scientific and rigorous scientific and sort of exhaustion of every possibility? No, I tend to go towards Occam's Razor, which is what's the most likely possibility and then test out from there rather than, you know, applying every possibility and then knocking them off, one by one; assemble a body of knowledge, throw out the stuff that doesn't seem likely and then go for what seems to be the most obvious one, simplest and most obvious, most direct one. Speaker 1: Now, did you get, was there any guide, any teacher or adult-- Speaker 2: No. There was no guide, no teacher, no adult. Story_ID: 21848 Speaker 1: So this was, as you--I mean was it, was your interests or can you, I guess, remember when you first read something that was scientific or something that explained what was going on in a way that made you excited about science? Speaker 2: Oh, astronomical events. But I think probably one of the first things I read like that was a description of either a lunar eclipse or a solar eclipse happening in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area in the early 1960s. I would imagine that was the first actual phenomena that I could say that I experienced or read about specifically as an astronomical event or some sort of science experience that was gonna happen because, of course, in my neighborhood where I grew up, there were no science experiences that were happening. There were no scientists I knew. There were no industries I could get involved in. There was nothing like that at all. So I had to learn about science by reading about science. There wasn't anyone I knew who knew anything about--my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] was afraid of electricity. My mother was deathly afraid of electricity whereas my father [Cornelius Ruben Pitts], on the other hand, would handle live wires without even blinking an eye. But nobody in my family, growing up, my grandmother didn't know anything about science. Mother didn't, nobody in the neighborhood knew or was even interested in science. And as a kid, there was only one other person I knew who was interested in science, a kid in my elementary school classes. And we were friends because we both had this great interest in science. So I didn't really know anything. I gleaned it from magazines, from books, all sorts of things like. Speaker 1: Okay, now, here's a, I believe you said at one point that before you were 12, there were three instances that, that all had to do with the profession you're now in. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And the first one is that you were enthralled with rockets of the Space Program? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So I would say that before the solar eclipse event comes along and the things that I'm really interested in, is rocketry. You know, I'm born in 1955. By the time I'm four years old, the Soviet Union [Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Moscow, Russia] has put a satellite into orbit and the United States space program is beginning to gear up to answer that call. Speaker 1: Sputnik. Speaker 2: Sputnik [1957] is the first Russian, is the first satellite that's put into orbit. And I become fascinated by the rocket program because the rockets involve, for me at that time, science of the highest order, combustion, thrust, velocity, access to this environment of space where I've read through my, I've learned through my other readings that as a deadly environment. There's the Van Allen radiation belts. There's no oxygen, no pressure, nasty radiation, freezing cold, all of these things. Yet, these devices are built to lift off of earth and go into space. And I'm totally fascinated by this, and I'm fascinated by both ends. I'm fascinated by the payloads and I'm fascinating by the system that gets 'em there. And I'm fascinated by the mechanics of the system because it's very, very complex. It's all integrated, and it all works [finger snapping] according to, you know, the plan that must be executed or else the thing doesn't work. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like, you were about eight, I guess when John Glenn orbited the-- Speaker 2: In nineteen sixty--in 1963, yeah, I would be eight years old. Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963], yeah. Speaker 2: Yep, I'd be eight years old. But I'm into it before that. I mean I've-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I've followed Alan Sheppard and I've followed [Gus] Grissom and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Alan Sheppard is 1961. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: And you're only, what? Six? Speaker 2: I'm six years old, but I'm already, but I'm already into that. Story_ID: 21849 Speaker 1: All right. Now, okay, so but you're allowed, so because it's the two of you, you and your brother, your brother, five years older, did he have other interests he was pursuing rather than-- Speaker 2: No, my brother was, my brother was, in some respects, a typical sort of teenager of the time. He had a teenage group that he hung out with. I mean he was very much interested in baseball when he was growing up, you know, younger than a teenager. And as a teenager, he and his friends were all interested in the same sort of teenage things. You know, in the 1960s, growing up as a teenager, there's all this great, you know, sort of like social movement around music and things like that. And he's, you know, sort of into that. But he also has developed his skills very highly. He's a great reader and he's also a very good writer. He's developed into a very good writer by the time he's graduating from high school. By the time he's graduating from high school, he's trying to identify what kind of career path he's gonna follow. So, but he, but--and while he's, you know, he's good in physics. He's better in biology, and he's a, he's a good student. Speaker 1: Did you and your brother interact a lot around, you know, the kind of things you're interested in, science or-- Speaker 2: In a way, yes, and in another way, no. Yes, because when my brother was growing up, my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] got him a 'Gilbert Chemistry set'. And so we would both sort of fool around with the Gilbert Chemistry set. She also got for him a 'Gilbert Erector set', and we would sort of fool around with that. She got him a telescope, and we would fool around with that. So, did we have the same interests? He was interested in the space program too. But I don't think it was as intrinsic for him as it felt like for me. It felt like for me that this, this is me. This is what I wanna be involved in. This is what I wanna do. I've gotta know more about this. And so I sucked up all the information I could possibly suck up about rocketry and space exploration at the time. Speaker 1: I just wondered with the five year gap, did you all spend a lot of time together or did he have like a separate set of friends really that just were-- Speaker 2: He did. He had a, well, we, so our circles, he had his circle. I had our, my circle. They overlapped in one place. The place they overlapped was at church. So, church is sort of like a major background piece in this because this is something that we did every Sunday, you know, basically. Basically, every Sunday, we'd go to church, and we're involved in everything there is. We're involved in the children's choir, the junior choir, the senior choir. Right. We both go to Sunday school. It's an afternoon Sunday school, so we get up in the morning, and we go to morning service at 10:45 on Sunday morning, and we have a little dinner maybe between Sunday service and--no, no, no. We don't do that. We might take a break and have some lunch or something like that. But service is over at about 12:15, 12:30, and then Sunday school starts at 1:15. So you gotta be there for that. And then after that, maybe we might have dinner at the church. But the other piece that goes along behind that is that my mother, with her clerical skills, actually worked for [Reverend] Leon Sullivan, part time as a secretary in her off hours after work. So what this means is that on Tuesday and Friday nights, my mother goes from her job downtown on Broad Street and comes to Zion Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where she, you know, does this after-hours secretarial stuff for [Reverend Leon] Sullivan. So what we did was, my brother and I would go down to the church and meet her after school. And we could hang out in the church building from, like five o'clock until nine p.m. when she was done. Well, this turned us into church rats in the sense that we were all over the building. We could hang out with the janitors. Sometimes we had scout meetings that we went to or there was a junior choir rehearsal or a senior--or a children's choir rehearsal. But in the meantime, we had full run of the building of the church. And so we get to know this building very well. And we get to know the people in the building, very, very well. So our circles overlap there. So my brother had his school circle. I had my school circle and our circles overlapped there. Story_ID: 21850 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you had--your pastor was the dynamic, Rev. Leon Sullivan-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center] fame? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, when I was-- Leon Sullivan, had Zion Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at 13th and Mellon and my mother and grandmother, you know, had a house at 16th and Stiles Street, which wasn't very far away. So, they went to that church when Langston Hughes was the pastor, Langston Hughes, no not Langston Hughes, Rev. Langston was the pastor. When Rev. Langston left, Sullivan came in at 13th and Mellon. They were still going to church there. So Sullivan moves the church from 13th and Mellon to Broad and Venango. And, of course, they come to church there. But in the year that I'm born or the year before I'm born, they move from 16th and Stiles up to 17th and Pacific Street which is within walking distance of the church, just a few blocks away. So, when I was--and, and my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] knew, my mother's, my family knew [Reverend Leon] Sullivan well enough that when I was born, he came to see my mother in the hospital. And he gave me a nickname, which he called me for the first fourteen, fifteen years of my life. He called me "Dangerous". And that's what he always called me until I was about fifteen or so. Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason for this? Speaker 2: I don't know. He just thought that I was gonna be a dangerous character. And then after I was fifteen or so, he'd call me young Pitts. Speaker 1: Hum, "dangerous", huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, and so my brother and I grew up in this incredibly, rich mixture of love, support, faith, moral teachings, life lessons, all these sorts of things. We grew up in this incredibly, fabulously rich environment of people who supported what we did and encouraged us to go on and do things and, you know, guided us in the right way of how to live and all of this other sort of stuff. And these are all life lessons that both of us use absolutely every day of our lives and cannot escape from. Speaker 1: Okay, so in terms of, you know, how to live your life, you credit the church more with that or your family or a combination of the two? Speaker 2: It's a combination. It's a, it's a full combination of those two because, you know, my mother and grandmother were teaching us at home, but the re-enforcement comes through all of their friends, most of whom all belong to the same church. And so we'd get all this indoctrination every Sunday. Story_ID: 21851 Speaker 1: Now, was there ever a time when the science conflicted with church? Speaker 2: Oh, of course, yeah (laughter), yes, it did because when I went to Sunday school, you know, I'd, you know, I went to Sunday school all my life. By the time I get to be like thirteen or fourteen, I now have serious questions because I've already started studying the origin of the universe. And so I have these issues because the bible says God created the Heavens and the earth and it happened in seven days. And that's clearly not the case according to what physics says. So how am I gonna reconcile these things. Well, the first thing I do is I go to the deacons at Sunday school, and I say, so "Deacon Jackson, can you help me with this?" "Oh, well, you know, young Pitts, you need to, you know, you'll find the answers for that in the bible." I said, "Well, you know, I went to the bible and it doesn't really explain this." "Well, you'll, have you talked to Deacon Dabner about this. You need to talk to Deacon Dabner about this." So you go to Deacon Dabner and say, "Deacon Dabner, look, I'm having this problem. I need to try and understand how it all works together." He says, "Well, have you talked to Brother Williams about this, you know." And they couldn't satisfy the curiosity I had about this. However, it's at that point that I learned how to separate two things. I learned how to separate religion, faith and science. And I understand what the function of faith is, and I understand what the function of religion is and I understand how they interact with science. I don't fault them for not having, for not being able to give me what I needed because none of them were scientists. They have a very, very strong faith, and religion has done a fabulous thing for our people. And it's an incredibly important part of the development of our people in this country. And, you know, I can't, you know, I can't deny that or ignore it or downplay it or minimize it any way at all. So I learned how to separate these things out so that I clearly understand the place and role of each of them. So there's no conflict for me between science and faith. There may be a conflict between science and religion. That's a different thing. You know, religion is a, you know, a stronger structure of, sort of an organized, you know, kind of belief system whereas faith is just your belief. Now, I don't have any problem with how these things cross over each other at all. Speaker 1: Okay, so in those days, there's no, the two didn't really step on each other's-- Speaker 2: Oh, certainly they did. Of course, they did, yeah, because, you know, people, you know, the bumper sticker or people or the saying goes, "God said it, I believe it, that's the end of it". Well, that doesn't, that doesn't work for me. I believe that God is way bigger than that. And so I have had situations before where colleagues from my time growing up in church will have said about me that I'm an atheist. My brother takes incredible umbridge at that and so does my wife because my brother believes that the way I worship God is through the work that I do. I would say the same thing. You know, my faith is, is way bigger than that sort of limited sense that God did this in seven days and that was it. So other people in the church certainly may have not understood my interests in science, where I'm going with the science, and how that sort of connects with my faith or my religion. And I'm sure they had some problem and conflict with that. Sullivan never had any problem with that. Story_ID: 21852 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so--now, you move on to junior high school at Gillespie, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Gillespie Junior High [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and you were saying when you, as you get into junior high school, you become, you're into more sophisticated studies than about, you're thinking about the origin of the universe. Speaker 2: Yeah, I distinctly remember coming home from school, walking home from school in the eighth grade after having read articles in 'Scientific American' about the age, structure an origin of the universe, but questioning now about the morphology of the universe. What is the size? What is the shape? What is the extent? What's outside the universe? How does this univ--does this universe fit into a larger system that's beyond it? How does it interact with that? How do we study that? How do we learn that? What does the fate of the universe as we know it to be presently, how does that interact with or affect all this other stuff outside? I distinctly remember, I'm walking down Pulaski Avenue, between 17th and 18th and Pulaski, I think it is. And I remember walking past a few shops that were over there. Pulaski Avenue has the Number 53 trolley that runs along it, I think it is. And I'm walking down. I'm gonna come to 7th Street--17th Street, make the right turn to go down to Pacific. And I remember thinking to myself, what is the true nature of the structure of the universe? How big is it really? What's out, what's beyond the edge of the observable universe? What's beyond the expanding boundary of the universe? How do we gain information about that? Can we gain information about that? What does that mean as far as we're concerned? How does that relate cosmologically to faith and religion? That kind of stuff. Story_ID: 21853 Speaker 1: Okay, and I think I read also that you, when you discovered, I mean the layout of the neighborhood helped you to look at the sky. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. So there were a couple of things I realized about the street that I lived on. After I started to read about astronomy and then understand about the motions of the sun, moon and planets and the sky and the orientation that we have on the planet and our relationship as, you know, living on the surface, looking at the sky and those sorts of things, I began to understand something about the orientation of the street I lived on. And the 1700 block of 17th, 1700 block Pacific Street, runs East-West. On the Eastern end of the street is Roche (ph.) Farm Market where we'd go to buy eggs, scrapple, bacon, chicken, stuff like that. Over hear on the Western end is 18th Street, and then the 1800 block and going up to 20th Street and beyond. But I recognize that this is an East-West street. Now, across from us is this "T" intersection that's just about two houses over to the East from us. So there's a street that's now running North-South that intersects with this East-West street. And what I notice is that the sun rises down here over Roche's Farm Market, passes high overhead and sets down here on this end of the street. And I notice that on Bovere (ph.) Street in the summer, when the sun is high in the sky in the middle of the day, the entire street is illuminated. But in the morning, the Western side of the street is illuminated and the Eastern side isn't. It's in shadow because the sun hasn't come across. And as the sun passes, the reverse happens. The Western side of the street is in the shade. The Eastern side is illuminated. So I'm beginning to recognize that at high noon in the summer, this street is fully illuminated, no shadows at all. So I can now read the motion of whatever it is, the earth or the sun. I'm reading one of these, and so I'm starting to think about mechanics, planetary mechanics. So I realize that in the, in the room that I have, in my room growing up, the room I sleep in, I can look out a window that looks to the West. But since we're a row house, there's another house right across from my window, not fifteen feet away. Looking at the wall of that house, of course, is the matching window on the other side. But above that window is a course of bricks, coming down from the roof, down to the top of the window. In the morning, what I can do is I can look out, and I can see this course of bricks. And depending on how many of the courses of bricks are illuminated, I can determine what time it is because of the rising sun. So now, this becomes a celestial clock for me. It's like a sundial or any other kind of, you know, solar clock because I can use the divisions to mark time. And that's what I do with it. I use those divisions to mark time. And I can put this together with the illumination of the street and all this other sort of stuff and have a much better grip or understanding on the motions of the earth on its axis and its motion through space during the course of the year because of the changing angle of sunlight through the course of the year. So now what happens is the world becomes a big solar clock for me because now I look at any building or any fixed object and say, hah, I can look at the shadow and figure out direction from that. And so that's what I begin to do. And so, now in my mind, I carry with me an image of any of these areas that I've lived or worked in that are fully illuminated and I can compare views of what they look like at different parts of the day with where I am to figure out direction. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just a fun little thing to play with. Speaker 1: Now, did you watch the science TV shows like 'Watch Mr. Wizard' and-- Speaker 2: I did 'Watch Mr. Wizard'. I saw Mr. Wizard, not all the time, but I did see Mr. Wizard. Any other science programs that were on, I watched. So in, by 1966, 'Star Trek' is now available. And I begin to watch 'Star Trek' as much as I can. There are other science programs on, but they're pretty cheesy. You know, there's the 'Time Machine', and there's 'Lost in Space', and you know, 'Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea' and these are all these, you know, sort of Irwin Allen, cheesy, you know, productions of all this stuff that happens. And I remember that there are two programs that I'm really enthralled with. One is 'Sea Hunt', starring Lloyd Bridges, Mike Nelson. He's a scuba diver. So, you know, I've also got this interest in scuba diving too because it's the undersea world. So I watch that all the time. And then once 'Star Trek' becomes available, I start to watch 'Star Trek' whenever I can. And 'Star Trek' really, now, begins to embody this fantasy about this future society that travels in space freely, has all the technological advantages that anybody would wanna have and is going around exploring the galaxy at warp speed. What could be better? Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause right here. Story_ID: 21854 Speaker 1: All right, I'd like to ask you about role models in regard to, you know, 'Star Trek'? I don't know, well, I don't know if that's how it should go, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, that's a fine way to shape it. When people ask about roles models, I'm sort of challenged by that because, again, as I mentioned, I didn't really know anybody, any real people in science. So I didn't really have a science role model in that sense. You know, I sort of looked at my brother as a role model in a sense because he's a very good writer, always been a good student, and that sort of thing. But the, the most immediately identifiable person is this fictional character from 'Star Trek', the science officer, Mr. Spock. I didn't think I necessarily looked like Spock, but I had the aspiration to be like Spock, to be logical, to be observant, to understand as much about science as possible, particularly, to be recognized for my knowledge of science. Anything scientific comes along in that program, they immediately turn to Spock and ask for an explanation. Well, this is the kind of thing that really intrigued me because I'd spent a lot of time learning, reading, understanding. And of all the people in the circle that I knew, I'm the only one that knows anything about science really. Nobody really understands much about chemistry. Nobody really know anything about astronomy. Nobody knows anything about rocketry or space travel or any of that. But I do. So I'm sitting on this huge wealth of knowledge that I wanna share with people in the way that Spock shares information with people or provides information about science phenomena. So Spock becomes this role model, if you will. And, you know, I'm sort of leery about saying that because, you know, people get the wrong idea about that. I don't wanna be a television character. That's not it. But the person that I can most immediately identify with because of the specialized knowledge and interests that I have in the circle that I live in, happens to be this character. I, I wish it could be a real person and people will say, well, you know, what about George Washington Carver? What about all the other black scientists and engineers that, you know, came before us? Didn't know about those. The only black scientist we knew about coming up in school was George Washington Carver. Since then we, we have, I have learned about so many other people that could have been role models. But we didn't learn about those people. We weren't taught about those people. I should have suspected, but didn't have any reason to believe or know that there must have been others. And that's a failure on my part, I would say, not to have realized that. But that's who it was at the time for me, was this character. Speaker 1: Okay, so Spock, we also have some African American characters on 'Star Trek' that exists in the future, one regular character being Nichelle Nichols'-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --character. Speaker 2: --yes, that's true, yeah, very true, but, you know, Nichelle Nichols' character appealed to me on the communications side in that here's a technology that she masters. And my interest, of course, is the technology, not the fact that she's an African American in this cast of characters. That, in fact, doesn't really affect me, and I didn't really, I don't really pick up on the multinational character of the crew. That wasn't, that wasn't in the forefront for me. What's in the forefront for me are these people are doing science. This is their job. This is their life. That's what appeals to me. Speaker 1: Did you see the episode, there was an episode where William Marshall played a computer scientist who invented this computer that took over the Enterprise? I always remember that because he was clearly the smartest person on the show in that episode. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, yes. Sure, I do, I do remember that, yep, I do remember that. Speaker 1: And I think the overall theme of it was, "you've gone too far" (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yes, true. Yeah, yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: Which is interesting if you think about it. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum, sure, right. The only time, you know, you get a leading role like that, you've gone too far, yeah. So, don't do that. It's not how you should be. Story_ID: 21855 Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're age ten though while watching this. So this is having a big impact on you, and so, now, did you get any--at this stage, is there a teacher or a mentor or a role model at the school level that's trying to get you into a science program at the Franklin Institute [Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or anywhere? Speaker 2: I don't see a mentor in school until eighth grade, junior high school. There's a teacher named Beth Scholl (ph.) who was a chemistry teacher. And Beth Scholl recognized that I had this interest in science. And she encouraged me to learn more, do more, consider a career. There were two other teachers, Jim Howard is one teacher. The other Howard, the other teacher is a Mr. Owens who's the chair of the science department. And I'm so much into this in high school that they do a couple of things. They give me a lot of latitude. And one of the things I began to do was, I began to do science demonstrations for the school. So at assembly programs, occasionally, I would put together science demonstrations, chemistry demonstrations of various kinds. And I would perform those on stage for the entire school. Speaker 1: Now, this is at Simon Gratz [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No, this is at Gillespie Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Gillespie Junior High. Speaker 2: I'm in eighth and ninth grade doing this. Speaker 1: All right. This is almost, sounds like a magic show in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, some people might have considered it that, but I'm coming at it purely from the science point of view. I'm coming at it from reactions. Here's our, here are certain kinds of reactions that do these different things. And they look pretty cool. Let me show you some, you know. Here's one that does this. Here's one that does this, here's one that does this. Often they involved fire. They certainly involve explosions of some kind. They involve some kind of effusive something or another that's a great visual demonstration of what happens when chemicals interact. Story_ID: 21856 Speaker 1: Walk us through one. Now, how would they do this? For the assembly, would be about science or would it be about something else and you would be a feature of that? Speaker 2: Every week there's an assembly program. Every, I think it was Wednesday afternoon, there's an assembly program. And I would offer to do something for an assembly program. And they'd have the assembly programs, I think, for the different grades, seventh, eighth and ninth grade maybe. I forget how it went, but I would put something together to do the demonstration for the assembly program. So the principal would make an announcement at the beginning of the program and talk about stuff that was happening in the school. You know, they'd sing some songs and things like that. And then they'd come to the demonstration portion of the program where some student is doing something. Often I was that student doing something, and I was doing something in science. So, for example, one of the things I did was, I would create volcanoes. Now, the typical volcano that kids were doing at that time is vinegar and baking soda. It's a generation of carbon dioxide gas. Carbon dioxide gas fills the bubbles and expands, you know, from the interaction of baking soda with the vinegar. And that was, to me that was tame because that didn't involve fire. Volcanoes involve fire. So what I learned was, I learned a chemical reaction in which you use an oxidizer with a heat source. And you put the two together and they create an ash. But when you put them together, they, when you, when you burn them together, when you--so the fuel that was being used in this case is magnesium metal powder. Magnesium metal powder burns very brightly, creates a lot of sparks and stuff. But you need to keep the temperature up on that so you need an oxidizer, something to bring enough oxygen to keep the magnesium metal burning. So I used a material called ammonium dichromate. Ammonium dichromate is a great oxidizer for stuff. It's an orange powder. So you mix it in with the silver metal powder of magnesium. And you put it into, like a coffee can or a soup can or a coffee can. And in order to get the reaction started, you need a great deal of heat. So I use magnesium ribbon, very thin wire magnesium. You can light this with several matches. You can get the high enough. When that starts to burn, it burns with a furious bright light. But it generates enough heat to begin the reaction. Once the reaction starts, what happens is you have this great fountain of sparks and like a green ash material that comes out. So depending on probably what your mixture is and how much you use, you can make a pretty tall tower of flame and spark and smoke and stuff. So that was one I used to do on a regular basis. And everybody really liked that. So that was a fun thing to do. But there were, you know, lots of other chemical reactions that I did of various kinds where you, you know, changing the liquids and changing colors of liquids and, you know, all kinds of stuff like that that I would do. Story_ID: 21857 Speaker 1: Okay, now, this sounds pretty gregarious for a scientist, you know. Usually, science types are typified as nerdy and introverted and that sort of thing. But you're on stage. Speaker 2: I wanna show people what I know. And this is, showing people what I know is the tip of the iceberg for me in something that's much bigger than that. And that is helping-- what I really want to do is I want people to have an understanding and an appreciation for the nature of the environment we live in, the science of the environment we live in. And in order for people to be able to appreciate that, they have to know something about it. So my drive is to bring something to people, that they can learn and know so that they can understand the beauty of how it all goes together because all of the integration between it is absolutely gorgeous. It's remarkable how it all goes together and fits together and interacts and all inter-dependent. But people don't get that. They don't spend much time thinking about that or looking at that. I do. Everything for me is about that and about the physics and the chemistry and the bio of how it all goes together and how it all interacts. But to me, that is absolutely beautiful and gorgeous. And I want people to be able to appreciate that beauty. So my desire is to use my knowledge and ability to help people have some of the same, some kind of appreciation of the natural world and the science that makes it so in the way that I do. Speaker 1: So growing up in Philadelphia, were you, did you come out here to the Franklin Institute much? Speaker 2: I came to the Franklin Institute [Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] several times on school trips, yep, I did. True. And I remember seeing things here when I was a kid that were incredibly impressive. My first impression of the electro-magnetic spectrum and all of its glory of what it can do, I gained from an exhibition that, an exhibit that was here on the first floor, right outside the planetarium theater when I was a kid. I will not forget that exhibit. It really, really impressed me because to this day, one of my favorite topics is all the energies of the electro-magnetic spectrum. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have a scientific hero when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Not until later. You know, in the abstract, people always talk about [Albert] Einstein. Yeah, that's fine, but [Albert] Einstein is theoretical physics. I'm not really a theoretical physics guy, per se. I'm more on the astronomy side, astrophysics. So, for me, the heroes become these people who were on the cutting edge of research in astronomy and astrophysics. And they are people like Allan Sandage, Martin Schmidt. You know, I could say Edwin Hubble, but sort of, but there are other people, Milton Humason is, you know, one of the early researchers of the early twentieth century studying the structure and expansion of the universe, structure of galaxies, the great recessional velocities of galaxies and things of that sort. Those are the people that I sort of see in that regard. Story_ID: 21858 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you enter, well, you mentioned a chemistry teacher that helped you. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she get you involved in something? Speaker 2: She did. Right, she got me, well, she got me involved in the stuff in school. There weren't really many science clubs that I knew of or was pointed to. My mother really wasn't interested in doing that because she saw it all as dangerous. You know, I used to make contact explosives and smoke bombs that I would experiment with at home. It would scare the wits out of her (laughter) when this stuff exploded. She had no idea what it was. I was having great fun with it. So, no, there wasn't really anything like that. For example, there wasn't, I didn't know of a science club at Franklin Institute [Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I didn't know of a science, there wasn't a science club at church. I did have one guy at church who introduced me to a chemist friend that he had that worked for a chemical firm in Connecticut. And one of the other guys in Sunday school and I took a trip with him one day to this chemical facility in Connecticut. And it was the first time I ever got to see a real chemistry lab and see what chemists did. And that was fascinating. And I got to bring back all sorts of surplus glassware and stuff, and that was pretty cool. But, no, I didn't, I didn't know of any clubs like that that I could belong to or join. Speaker 1: Okay, so high school. Now, you went to Simon Gratz [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't. Oh, West Memphis, okay. Speaker 2: So in junior high school, junior high school was pretty easy for me. I did pretty well in junior high school. And, you know, I left that school as the class president and I also left that school with the highest average in science for all three years that I was at that school. The chairman of the chemistry department had given me the keys to the chemical closet. I was responsible for organizing the stock and cataloging everything and all that sort of stuff. And I could hang out in the teachers' lounge of the science department. I had a key to this room. I was the only kid in school who could do this. It was great. So-- Speaker 1: So let me just say this for most people that, I mean if people didn't know, most middle schools in those days didn't have science departments. You know, they just didn't have that in most schools. Speaker 2: Well, Gillespie [Gillespie Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] had a science department, had a very good science department. And, you know, were doing all sorts of things with it. And I was fortunate enough to be involved in that to the point where I was allowed to do all these other things. I was given all this great leeway and latitude to do this kind of stuff, so it was very good. Speaker 1: Now, is this something that Philadelphia had that doesn't exist-- Speaker 2: I think it was pretty common that Philadelphia had departments like this or at least had a nucleus of teachers who had their own sort of hang out and place where they did this sort of stuff. I don't know if that's true for the English teachers in the school. But I certainly know it was true for the science teachers at Gillespie [Junior High School]. That's for sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, at this time, there's a great push on to integrate private schools, integrate schools in general, racially integrate schools in general and also to integrate private schools. Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania] is one of the private schools that came to Gillespie Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when I was in ninth grade, looking for students, good students that would be interested in coming to their school. Now, in ninth grade, of course, this is a time when students are beginning to consider what high schools they're gonna go to. And in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, Gillespie is one of the general high schools where you can take a straight academic course. You could take a vocational course, but I, of course, took the straight academic course. Now, a likely pathway for me in high school decision, high school choices is for me to go to Central High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is the elite academic high school in the city. You have to take a test to get in. You have to score so high. And, you know, if you don't, you can't get in. And this is where you're supposedly gonna get the best high school education. So I had that option. But because of my deep interest in space science, you know, I followed everything that's happening in the Space Program as if it's the food I eat and the air that I breathe. Well, there's a magnet school in Philadelphia. And the magnet schools in Philadelphia are schools that specialize in particular subjects. There's an aerospace magnet school at Northeast High School. So I applied to get into Northeast High School. I also took the test for Central [High School]. I took the test for Central. There was nothing to it. It was a breeze. I kept wondering when's it gonna get hard? Then I applied for and took a test to get into Northeast High School. And this is where I really wanted to go because this was gonna be my pathway into aerospace science. I'm going for rocketry. This is where I'm going. After I applied for Northeast High School, a representative comes to German, comes to Gillespie from Germantown Academy. And this representative says, "We're looking for some students that might be willing to take a chance and come to this elite school. Do you have anybody?" So I'm one of six students that are selected to possibly do this. And after we go through the interviews, after we go through the visits and all this other stuff out to this very elite school, I find out that I have, that I am, in fact, being offered an opportunity to go to this private school. At the same time, I find out that I've been admitted to Northeast High School's Aerospace Magnet Program. And now, I'm at a dilemma. I'm at a major crossroad, the first time I've come to a real crossroads like this in my life. What am I gonna do? And so I talk it over with my mother. And I decide that I'm gonna take a chance and go to Germantown Academy because it's an elite private school. They have much smaller classes, teacher-to-student ratio is really small. It's in this really incredible environment. It's on 300 acres out in the suburbs. They've got every facility you can possibly imagine. And it's a new experience and a challenge. So I decide that's what I'm gonna do. So I drop the Northeast High School thing, and I go to Germantown Academy. Speaker 1: Okay, this 1968? Speaker 2: This is 1969. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], so the fall of '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Fall of '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 21859 Speaker 1: All right, now, that summer had a big event on July the 20th. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell us about that. Speaker 2: I follow the development of the Space Program, detail by detail, right up through the Apollo missions. The first landing on the moon [1969], I'm glued to a television at home watching, watching, watching. But I followed everything going up to that, leading up to that as if I were flying. Now, sometimes I think that people don't understand what I mean by this. But what I mean is that I didn't just, you know, like sort of watch it on TV. No, I got whatever documentation I could find that would explain to me all the technical details I could get, how do the rockets work? How does the capsule work? How does the navigation work? How do the life support systems work? How does everything work? Who does what, where? How does this all integrate together? Where is it all built? Who's designing it? Everything I could possibly learn. I'm learning about the fuels. I'm learning about just every detail I can get. I'm sucking all of this up because for me, when I watch the launch, when the countdown is going on, I'm ticking off all the things that are happening in the launch vehicle. This is pressurized. This motor is starting. This circuit is opening. This flow is beginning. All of that stuff, I'm paying attention to all of that. When the rocket launches, I'm now thinking about what's happening now, what's next? What's this? What system is operating? What's gonna cut off wind? What's gonna happen when? And I have taught myself well enough that I can recognize when things happen that the TV commentators are missing, you know. I see something happen, and I go "Oph, that's that". I knew exactly when that's gonna happen, and I'm counting down when this is gonna happen and when that is gonna happen. So I'm into it to that level of detail. So I watch everything that happens on the moon, all of it. I'm just glued to all of it. And it's like the greatest thing that could possibly happen. It's the greatest thing that could be done, fantastic. And I'm the only person I know of that knows this kind of level of detail about this. I love it. I absolutely love it. So now, to me, it's private knowledge that I have. And to me, this is very empowering. I've got knowledge that nobody else in my circle has. Speaker 1: Now, did you ever encounter people who were skeptical that it ever happened? Speaker 2: Oh, all the time. Sure, yeah, of course. But I know that it, I know it's happening. I know that it's going on because I understand the science and the technology and how it all develops so that it could come this far to do this. I can see that it's happening, and I, you now, those people who don't believe it happened, missed a piece. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there's some kind of conspiracy theory about it, but my grandmother went out and looked and (laughter), she didn't see anything. Speaker 2: She didn't see anything, didn't see anybody. Yeah, yeah, well, you know, I, like I said, I know exactly what's going on all the time. I'm following it moment-by-moment, second by second. I know exactly everything that's happening. Speaker 1: So that level of detail makes this history-making event more real, does it not, for someone who observes that level of detail? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Oh, no, this is, this is real, real, for real. And the people that--now, when we talk about who the heroes are, these are the people who become my heroes, the people who are the flight controllers, the mission controllers, the engineers who do this stuff, the astronauts who are willing to do this to some degree are heroes. But it's much more so on a technical sign for me of who the heroes are then, that do this kind of thing. And these are the people that I am now looking to, as "Wow, they are real scientists." Story_ID: 21860 Speaker 1: Now, there was a, something else I kind of skipped past, and that was 1968, the assassination of Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Did your family follow the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968]? Were they following it and did-- Speaker 2: Of course. We followed the Civil Rights Movement because Rev. [Leon] Sullivan was right in the mix with all of these people who were there. But Sullivan concentrated on the local level. He knew [Dr. Martin Luther] King. He knew everybody in Dr. King's circle. But Sullivan didn't work on the National level like those people did. Rev. Sullivan worked on the local level, and he worked with his neighborhood and with his city. And while his work had national implication, that's where he focused his attention. So, we're certainly aware of what's going on with the Civil Rights Movement, totally aware of that. Speaker 1: Well, how did the death of Dr. King affect you and your family? Speaker 2: Well, it was certainly traumatic. It was the end of so much. It was, it was like a, it was such a horrific event of sort of like the highest magnitude of disregard, disrespect and hate for people, that someone would murder their leader; this incredible, national figure, someone would kill him. It's, it was almost incomprehensible that someone could do this. But even more devastating was the great blow to the African American community that it rendered because if the effect was to take out the leadership of the African American community, that person did just that in a very effective way. But that's such a horrible thing to have happen for humanity, a terrific thing to have happened for humanity, to continue to look for ways to suppress and subjugate these people when all they're after are the same rights that you enjoy, that supposedly, the Constitution of the United States says all should enjoy. So what kind of human are you to wanna take that away from a people. Speaker 1: So, did Nice Town have disturbances or riots or any-- Speaker 2: Philadelphia did; Nice Town did not because Nice Town is mostly residential. So in the more commercial districts of Philadelphia, along Gerard Avenue, Columbia Avenue, there were, there were riots. We lived far enough away from them that they, they did not affect us directly, but we certainly knew about these things, and it was--and such a strong indicator of the effect that that, that that had on us. Story_ID: 21861 Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to raise that before we get you--now, you're in high school-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, Neil Armstrong just walked on the moon. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, you've had a great scientific experience over the summer, so-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --so what was Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania] like? Speaker 2: Totally new world, completely new world, completely new world. So instead of being the BMOC [big man on campus] at Gillespie Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'm now a small tadpole in a much bigger sea. And the much bigger sea is this school that is 99.999 percent white, far wealthier than anything I've ever seen with facilities the likes of which I did not know existed before, with a very much more challenging, rigorous scholastic attitude, environment. So here I am now, completely a fish out of water. The first thing that happens to me is that the football coach sees me and says, Ha, a great prospect for our team. Let's get him on the team. So I go to two days of preseason football practice. The end of the second day, "Not for me". I gave that up and went over to the soccer team and played soccer for my time at Germantown Academy because unlike Gillespie, I'm required to do two sports and an activity--I have to do this. Not only that, but before I get to Germantown Academy, I've got a summer reading list of 10 books I have to read and write reports on, before I get to the school. In the Philadelphia public school system, when you left the door at the end of the summer, at the beginning of summer, you didn't have to do anything. I'm a different guy though because in, in eighth grade, the summer between eighth and ninth grade, in the Philadelphia school system, there was an advanced summer program I could take at Strawberry Mansion Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], summer school for smart kids. I went to summer school for smart kids, loved it. It was great. But when I got to the next level, Germantown Academy, summer, my summer wasn't mine anymore. Summer, I had to read 10 books and write reports on them. I was expected to turn those in when I came to school in September. I had no idea what this was all about. I didn't realize this was mandatory. I didn't do it. I had no idea this was the case. So I, you know in a way, you know, I'm, I'm starting off in, in this new challenging environment. I've got all these things against me. I don't know who these kids are. I don't know where they're from. I don't know how this environment works. I don't know how the school works. I'm one of the few black kids here. I have to take the train. I have to wear a uniform. I've never worn a uniform to school anymore. My feet hurt 'cause the shoes my mom got me, you know, are some kind of oxford wing tips that are ridiculous. But I loved it because it was a new and challenging environment that I had to jump into and try and do something with. So, I did it. I did that. And I'm now way different from any of my friends because I don't know anybody else that's going to an all-white school, an all-white, private school with this kind of level of reputation. You know, and Germantown Academy is the oldest private day school in the country. Speaker 1: Now, were there any other black students there? Speaker 2: There had been one other black student there before me. I didn't know him. He graduated the year, the year before I came in. So I didn't know him. There were a group of other black students who came because, remember, from Gillespie Junior High School, they were looking for six students. Of the six students, my good friend, Gregory King, Martha Poole, Vanessa Tally, Jerome Fox, two other kids, I can't remember right now, one other kid. I can't remember right now. Of those students, only one other student at Gillespie opted to go to Germantown Academy, and that was Jerome Fox. And Jerome Fox was the most studious guy I have ever known. He was a serious student when he was in junior high school. He was all about the books, all about the books. So none of the other folks, that small circle. Of those six, five of those people were my best and closest friends in high school at that time. And so, and we all, you know, had the best grades in school, along with Jerome Fox. But none of the others of that group opted to go to Germantown Academy. I was the only one. Now, it turns out, there was another kid who came in in that same year, Harold King. Harold was Gregory King's brother, but he went to Masterman [Julia R. Masterman School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So it was Harold, Jerome and myself, who all went in that year. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did they--did they put you all in the same room? Did they spread you out or how did they-- Speaker 2: No, you know, we're, we all started in the same grade, but we had sort of like different class rotations and stuff like that. So I never, I don't think I took any classes with either Harold or Jerome. Harold didn't make it through the year. He couldn't stand it. He had to leave. It was too alien for him. Jerome, what Jerome did to adjust to the environment was to separate himself. He was like the black kid in the white school who was strong, defiant. He was gonna be the black kid in the white school. The, you know, the student, the black student in the white school. And so Jerome didn't really have friends. He didn't socialize so much at Germantown Academy. He did what he had to do. If he had to take a sport, he, you know, would try to take a sport, but he didn't really meld with the school, I would say. I was on the other end of things. I did develop good friendships and get into the flow of how things went at the school, and I really enjoyed it. It was a, it was, you know, the most positive educational experience I could have at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 21862 Speaker 1: You're at Germantown Academy, so, and you were describing the other black students there, what they were doing. So during your whole four years, how many, I mean did the population get any larger? Speaker 2: No, the population did not grow rapidly. It did start to grow because the year after I came in, there were a few more students admitted in earlier grades. There were twin brothers who entered Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania] in their seventh grade year, eighth grade year and one or two others who came along also. [Excuse me] And then by the time they really got into upper school, as it was called, Germantown Academy was really beginning to bring more people of color, more African Americans students in at earlier grades. And this also spoke some to some growing affluence in the African American community and the search for better educational options for their children outside the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] school system or taking advantage of schools like Germantown Academy for those who lived in suburban areas. So Germantown Academy is in Fort Washington, Pennsylvania which is a thirty-five minute train ride from where I lived in Center City, Philadelphia. So, obviously, this is not an option that's gonna immediately come to mind for me. One of the most interesting aspects about this, though, is the fact that my brother tells me that when it was time for him to go to high school, he was offered a chance to go to a local high school, a local private school also. I think it was Chestnut Hill Academy [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. But at the time, five years earlier was, you know, enough of a tumultuous time in our family. My grandmother had died recently, and my mother [Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] essentially is now alone without anybody to help raise up. And so for things like that, that it just didn't turn out to be in the cards that he could go to the private school. But by the time I had come along, you know, and had come to that age, things had stabilized enough. My brother is now, as I'm going into high school, my brother is graduating from high school and going on to college. Things are a little bit more manageable. And so-- Speaker 1: Did your brother go to Gratz? Speaker 2: My brother went to Gratz [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], yeah, my brother went to Gratz. And he went to Cook Junior High School, which was not the neighborhood, but he went to Cook Junior High School, and then went to Simon Gratz. And he did well at Simon Gratz, and there's, and was there at a very, very difficult time, both a difficult time for the school system, a difficult time because of the amount of gang violence that was going on. But my brother did well and managed to, you know, not have any real issues or problems at Gratz. And he's a very good example of the idea that in some, in many ways, it doesn't matter what school you go to. It's more the content of your character and your ability to succeed no matter what your circumstances are. Story_ID: 21863 Speaker 1: Okay, so it's the fall of 1969. Who were some of the teachers there that were, you would consider special or mentors, if any? Speaker 2: There was an English teacher, a young English teacher named Mr. Allen. Mr. Allen recognized that I was struggling as a student, and he sort of got it that because I came from a non-standard environment for that school, that there could be all kinds of issues that I could be having. And he took it upon himself to actually come to our house in North Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He rode his motorcycle from whatever suburban community he lived in, he rode his motorcycle down into our neighborhood and came and sat in our living room and talked to my mother about me as a student at Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania]. And that was a very noble thing of him to do, and I mean noble in a good sense because he showed that he cared for me as a student like he would care for any of the other students and, in fact, went out of his way to help, to try to help me. And I consider that to be a great thing for someone to do. Now, other teachers who were mentors at Germantown Academy. Well, you know, I would say that one of my, I had a couple of really great exp--couple of good educational experiences at Germantown Academy, that I would, that I would cite in that way. One was a guy named Stanley Hoerr, H-O-E-R-R, who was a young mathematics teacher who did a really great job of reaching teenaged students in mathematics and did a really great job for me. I had difficulty with Geometry. I had difficulty with Algebra I. But when I got to Stan Hoerr's class for Algebra II and Trigonometry, it was the way that he went about it that made it really easily understandable for me. And that was a good thing. He was the, (laughter), he was a--you know, it's a different environment because--and it was a strange environment at the time because it was on a transition point between being the classic, private school. When I first went to school there, fourteen of us in a class, we'd sit around an oval table. We get to class before the teacher gets to class. We get in, we sit down. We're sort of fooling around, teacher comes into the classroom, we all stand up until the teacher tells us to sit down. If a teacher comes into the room during the course of the class, we all stand up until they tell us to sit down. We wear ties, we wear jackets every day, you know, all this kind of stuff. Stan Hoerr had a different approach. He was much more of a kind of flower child, if you will. He had a record player in his room, and he would play music by this group called, 'It's a Beautiful Day'. And I remember he had, he had a stack of, you know, record albums of groups from the '60s [1960s] that he would play in his room between classes or on breaks or stuff like that, very, very different from the old school guy, Dr. Davis, who had been at that school for about 150 years teaching Latin; straight-laced guy, you know, always had the suit jacket buttoned. He was not a teacher. He was a proctor of the old school, private school variety. And Stan Hoerr was more of a teacher in the sense of let me get right in there with you and help you understand this and understand you and make the environment more comfortable, that sort of thing, very different kind of thing. So that was a good thing. Story_ID: 21864 Speaker 1: And then there was a music teacher. His name was Bill Lessig (ph.). And one of the activities I got involved in at Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania] when I first went there was, I joined the choir. It seemed like a fun thing to do. So I joined the choir. That was a great move because in Germantown Academy, through the choir, it's when I first began to travel internationally. And in my time there at Germantown Academy, I went to Europe twice. I went to South America once. I was in this great sort of chorus or choir at the school. I became part of the barbershop quartet which is, you know, the small, select group of singers. And Bill Lessig as the teacher was one of the guys who sang barbershop quartet. And it was me and Bill and three other guys. And, you know, whenever, where there were concerts, we'd sing a couple of barbershop tunes. But the other thing that Bill had us do was we would around to parties and sing, you know, sets of barbershop tunes. And that, and Bill really gave me a great introduction to music appreciation because I'd go hang out in his room between classes and sit and listen to the music that he had on his, in his record collection. So this is how I learned to appreciate Benny Goodman and Duke Ellington and all sorts of, you know, classics like [George Frideric] Handel and [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart and [Ludwig van] Beethoven and [Johann Sebastian] Bach and all these different things. I learned a lot of that through Bill Lessig. And Bill was on the international trips, and so the five of us, you know, we'd all hang out with Bill. We had a great time with Bill. And here's a funny story that happened with Bill one day. This is a terrible story, but it's true. I think we told this story at Bill's funeral. One spring day, beautiful spring day, we, you know, Bill had some time off. You know, he had an open class period and a couple of us had an open class period. So we went out to a driving range with Bill, hit some golf balls. And we went to lunch after that. And we actually missed a class because we were out with Bill, the music teacher, you know, hitting golf balls at the driving range. So we go to lunch, and we're just about finished with lunch, and we say, you know, Bill, we missed this class. What are we gonna do? And Bill looks down on the counter and there's an ashtray on the counter. And it happened to be a Wednesday. It was Ash Wednesday. Bill put his thumb in the ashtray and put ashes on our forehead and say, tell the teacher you went to church with me (laughter). What a terrible role model he was, awful. What a great guy he was. He was such a great guy. We had a fantastic time with Bill. He had a fantastic sense of humor. He was a really responsible guy. He was a really good teacher. He knew how to encourage kids to work together and do all this sort of stuff. So not only was I in the chorus, not only did I sing barbershop quartet, but every spring, the acting club did a musical. And in the musical, Bill, you know, did all the music parts, of course. But he always made sure that whatever they chose had a piece in it for close harmony men's chorus. And we would sing in these musicals all the time. So this is how I learn all the, you know, classical plays of that time, like Finnegan-'Finean's Rainbow' and 'Guys and Dolls' and 'Annie Get Your Gun' and all these different things. I was always in these things. So it was a fantastic experience, and I made great friendships at Germantown Academy, learned so much from these people who were so, supposedly alien or different from us. I traveled with these people all around the world and gained an appreciation for travel, which I cannot let go of today. You know, my mind is always thinking, you know, I could sit home and watch TV for the next five or six hours. But, you know what, if I can get on a plane, where can I be in eight hours? I can be half way around the world. So, screw watching TV. Let's buy a ticket and go someplace 'cause the world is too big and there's too much stuff to discover. But I, that's how I began traveling, and I continued that through my college career too. It was a great experience at Germantown Academy. It's the experience that has shaped, that began shaping, you know, who I am in my adult life. I got all this moral teaching when I was growing up at Pacific Street from my mother and my grandmother and this great circle of people at Zion Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. They shaped me morally. There's no way I can get around that. I use those experiences all the time. Germantown Academy introduces me to the outside world, and I discovered that there is a world. And the world is big, and there's a lot of great stuff in it, and there's so many different people and so many places to go, so many experiences to have. And you have to go do them all. And I get this great introduction to the idea of education as a, as a great thing. It's not just about getting a job, but it's about the mental stimulation, about the life of the mind. And there's all sorts of great stuff to read about and learn about and know about. Story_ID: 21865 Speaker 1: And I had one other teacher at Germantown Academy. His name was Miles Carter. Miles Carter was the first African American teacher that Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania] ever had, I think. I think there might have been, there was another teacher, but she was in lower school. He was an upper school history teacher, and I learned tenth grade history from him. And he taught U.S. History from the point of black Americans in the U.S. So everything was about the history of the U.S., through the experience of black Americans in this country. It was fascinating. He was always at loggerheads with the administration because I'm sure they didn't want him to teach this way. I'm certain they didn't want him to teach this way. But this is how he taught these kids. I'm the only black kid in the class. Everybody else is white, and what's he talking about? Years of darkness, rivers of blood, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, all these sort of historical confrontations between black Americans and the rest of American society. This is how he's teaching history. He was electric, absolutely electric because he didn't read from a book. We didn't have like U.S. History, 1800 to-- we didn't have that. We had all these other books that he had us read. Speaker 2: What were some of the other books that-- Speaker 1: Oh, I can't, I think we read [John A.] Michener's, 'The Source'. I think we read a, we read another book by Michener. I'm not gonna remember, all sorts of books that pointed out conflict between minorities and majority societies and things like that. It was, you know, real, real accounts of black participation in the Civil War [American Civil War, 1861-1865], all sorts of stuff like that. It was fascinating and illuminating and disturbing and uncomfortable at times. It was very uncomfortable at times. But it was really, really good. And Miles didn't last long at Germantown Academy. I think Miles last maybe three years at Germantown Academy. But I think he did them a real service because it began them on a quest of trying to understand who they are in relationship to the audiences, in relation to who their student population was and should be. Speaker 2: Okay, do you know where he went to school or-- Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: --or who taught him or-- Speaker 1: I do not know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he was very, very well educated. I do remember that. It was like Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or something. Yeah, he was very well educated, but not in an HBCU [Historically Black College or University], I don't think. I don't recall. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. You don't know what happened to him? Speaker 1: I don't know where he went from there. Speaker 2: Okay, he sounds like an interesting teacher. Speaker 1: He's a very interesting teacher. He was a young guy, young guy. And he played rugby, actually, which was a little different because nobody at Germantown Academy played rugby. But he comes to Germantown Academy as a rugby player already, very articulate, progressive. Story_ID: 21866 Speaker 1: So, now, did you, now, how long did it take you to really kind of get into the mix there? Speaker 2: Oh, it took me, well, it took me a year to get in, it took me a little bit less than a year to get into the, start to get into the social mix of things. It took me about two years to get into it academically. You know, I repeated tenth grade. I started out in tenth grade and had to do it over again 'cause I just wasn't equipped for it. I didn't have the skill set for it. The Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] school system just did not give me the skill set to deal with a school like Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania]. And here's an experience from Gillespie Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I will never forget. A math class at Gillespie Junior High School, eighth grade math class, I remember that the class one day, our math class with this teacher generally was more disruptive than productive because of the students in the class and the teacher's inability to control the students. I remember one day it was so bad the teacher broke down and cried, [pause] horrible, that the students were that poorly behaved, just horrible, absolutely terrible. That wasn't the situation in every class, but it was the situation in some classes. And so even though I'm in the straight academic course, courses, I'm still not getting the preparation I need for a school like Germantown Academy because Germantown Academy is expecting I'm gonna read, you know, 60 pages a night; I'm gonna do all this math homework. I'm gonna do all this English homework. I'm gonna do all this science homework, and I'm gonna participate in a sport after school for two and a half hours. So I go to school at 7:45 in the morning. I get home at 6:30 at night, and I still have to do all this homework. And that's just what's generally expected. But I'm not ready for that, so it takes me a, you know, a year and a half, two years to get into the swing of things. But socially, you know, I managed to get by right away. I fell in with a group of hippies, if you will, sort of not really--not hippies really, but sort of the left-leaning social group at Germantown Academy, made some great friends, fell in with a great crowd of kids and had a wonderful time. And to this day, one of those guys is my, still my best friend today. Story_ID: 21867 Speaker 1: Okay, well, who's that? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. What was that? Speaker 1: Who was it (laughter)? Speaker 2: This is Jim Shoemaker (ph.). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: James Steven Shoemaker. He was, at Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania], he was an excellent student. But like Jerome Fox was a scholar-type student, Jim was not a scholar-type student. Jim had ability. Jim just has intellectual ability. He's one of the smartest guys I've ever met. It's not that he never had to study. It's that he could study it once, and he could ace anything that came along. And he could write any kind of paper he needed to write in the hour before the paper needed to be turned in. And he wasn't arrogant about it. He just sucked up the information and learned it and could integrate it really, really well, and could turn it back around. He's a very, very, very good student and like the nicest people in the world, he and his family were like the nicest people in the world. And we got along great together from maybe, I think I met Jim like the first week I was at Germantown Academy. And we just did everything from there. We played soccer together. We sang together, just all kinds of stuff. I used to visit him, visit with his family all the time. He'd come to visit us and stay with us for weekends and things like that. His parents took us, when we were juniors, his parents took us on a driving trip of colleges up and down the Eastern seaboard. And we went all the way down into North Carolina and looked at, and we must have looked at ten, eleven, twelve schools and had interviews. They set up interviews for both of us at all these schools. And we went all the way up to Yale [University] in New England [region in north eastern United States] and had interviews at all these schools. And Jim and I worked together for two summers when we were in high school. And we've, you know, just been very, very, very good friends. We understand each other very well and support each other very well. And so, always, always been like that, outside of anything else that's ever happened. Jim's like the only guy who's ever challenged me about stuff, you know. And that's always been a good thing, and he's helped me understand things when I haven't understood stuff. And I've helped him, and, you know, it's always been a good thing. So, we're still best friends to this day. Story_ID: 21868 Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did Germantown take you in terms of your keen interest in astronomy and space and that sort of thing? Where did they take you? Speaker 2: Well, I kept on, I kept with that, but there wasn't really a focus for it at Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania]. You know, Germantown Academy was college prep and a private school in the finest sense. Here's a broad panoply of subjects that you're gonna learn about. There's, you know, classic literature, and there's language and mathematics and science and history. And you're gonna, you know, do the high school thing of learning this stuff. And that's what we did. And there's all these other activities that are on top of this that you're gonna, that you're gonna do. And so I kept up with my interest in science almost independently in a sense because even though I, you know, took the chemistry classes and the physics classes and the bio classes and things like that, there wasn't really the same kind of outlet for my interest as there was in the other places because, in fact, these are, you know, sort of advanced beyond me because they're, you know, doing chemistry and physics that we weren't doing in junior high school at all or even hinting at doing. So it's, you know, it's more of a challenge in the sense that, you know, I really have to, you know, work at this for school. But I still have all the same interests and I keep that going independently. So I'm still reading all the space stuff I can. I'm still reading all the astronomy stuff I can, seeing everything I can that's related to this kind of thing, still doing that. And that's, that's--and I maintain that all the way through high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you say you're, academically, you kind of catch up in your junior, senior year (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep, yeah, it took me a while to, to learn how to study properly, what I needed to do and how I needed to do it. You know, it's, this is the time, I think, when you learn what kind of a student you have to be, what kind of skills do you need and you learn how to develop those skills that work for you. This set of skills works for this person. That skill works for them. What works for you? And so I had to figure out what skills would, you know, work well for me. And I figured that out and that really helped me a lot. Speaker 1: So, when it came towards time to graduate, your grades were pretty good? Speaker 2: My grades are fine. They're not great. I'm, you know, I'm not at the top of the class. I'm sort of like the high end of average in the class. You know, on the high end of average in the class. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so, now, is there anything else about Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania]? Did you run for class office or anything or-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't run for class officer at all. I'm trying to remember if there even were class officers. I think, I don't think there were. It was a small class. You know, we had a class of like seventy-five kids. So, you know, we, we were the largest class to graduate up until that time, I think it was. But we were all pretty well knit together anyway for the most part. Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole school, what, about 150 students? Speaker 2: No, no, no, the school's bigger than that because it's a lower, middle and upper school. But the upper school is about 350 students, I guess it is, something like that, 350, 400 students in the upper school. So all together, what is it? About 1,200 students, yeah, something like that in the whole school. So, we're a pretty small, tight-knit community. Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated then, what year was it, '69 [1969] to '70 [1970]? Speaker 2: Graduate in 1973. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: In the spring of 1973. Story_ID: 21869 Speaker 1: And, now, you completed a college tour and all that, and so what did, where did you decide to go and did colleges offer you scholarships or-- Speaker 2: I got a scholarship offer from Washington University in St. Louis [Missouri] for engineering. And, of all the schools that we looked at in that college tour, the one that, the ones that appealed to me were University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia]. But I ended up not going to any, any of those schools. In fact, the school that I had the best experience at was a school that wasn't really, wasn't even on the list. After I'd been through all those schools and hadn't really come up with something that I really liked, my high school guidance counselor said, you know, there's one other school that one of our students went to a couple of years ago. And she said it was a pretty good school, and she had a good time there, and it worked out well for her. You might wanna check it out. It's a school called St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York]. And it's way up in Northern New York. I don't know if you wanna even try it, but, you know, you might give that a shot. So I managed to wangle a trip to St. Lawrence University for a tour after a visit to Yale [University]. I went to Yale to, you know, do an interview and stuff over there and then took a bus from there over to Canton, New York. Canton, New York is an hour and a half, two hours North of Syracuse [New York]. It's the very top of the top county in New York State, St. Lawrence County. It's about 18 miles from the Canadian border, from the St. Lawrence River. The county has more cows than people. And it's typically, you know, winter starts in October and ends in April. You'll get snow in mid-October and you can, [off-camera noise] you'll get snow in mid-October, and you can get snow, you know, well into April without any difficulty at all. In the wintertime, it's cold, gray, cloudy. It's an eight-hour drive from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And you would think that this is, like the end of the earth. My mother certainly thought it was the end of the earth. But I went there and had a really great interview, liked the school because it was so much like Germantown Academy. And also, it turned out that they had, it was one of the top ten schools in geology. So because of the environment and what I thought I could get out of the school, that was my choice. That was my decision, and I also got financial aid to go to school there. So I chose St. Lawrence University. Speaker 1: [Cough] Excuse me, okay, now, a top geology school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's looking the opposite way of where (laughter) you've been looking. Speaker 2: It is looking the opposite way. You're right, you're right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But, you know, a couple things had happened. By this time now, the Space Program [Apollo Space Program] is beginning to peter out. It's 1973. There are no more missions to the moon. The Space Program is winding down. There's, you know, there's the sky lab program, but NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] doesn't have anything really moving forward or looking ahead. Space Shuttle doesn't come into the picture until the late 1970s actually. So it looks as if this is dead. My interest is still there, but there's not really a whole lot going on. And what I can't see now is what is my avenue into this? What is my real avenue into this because I'm beginning to learn that in order to, you know, if I wanted to become an astronaut, I have to become a test pilot. And to become a test pilot, I have to join the Air Force [United States Air Force]. I have to become a fighter pilot. This is not the time for me to join the military because it means I have to go to Vietnam. That's what it means. I'm not really interested in that. So, my interest starts to drift a little bit. I'm still definitely interested in science and geology is something that hasn't been off the radar. It just hasn't been as strong. So given what the, what the benefit is of going to a school like St. Lawrence University, I decide that this is what I wanna do. And I also don't have any really strong, I don't have really strong guidance either. Neither of my parents [Cornelius Ruben Pitts and Shirley Mae DuPree Pitts] have been to college. Nobody on my mother's side of the family has, well, the folks in Trenton [New Jersey], some of them have--they've been to college. But they've all become teachers. Nobody is in science. I still don't know anybody in science who can give me any guidance here, nobody. So I make the choice that I think is best for me. I choose a school that's a great experience that I think is gonna be the right experience for me, and I choose to go there. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 21870 Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about St. Lawrence University? So what did you major in? Speaker 2: I majored in geology at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York]. You know, St. Lawrence University is an environment that's very much like Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania]. It's a small school, 99 percent white with a really great campus and wonderful facilities. The added benefit is that it's, it's a long ways away from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, again, a new experience for me. And I loved the challenge of a new experience. So here is another new experience for me in an environment that I'm not used to. So I decide to go to St. Lawrence University, and it takes me a year to figure out that I really wanna major in geology. But I started out taking some geology courses. I also took a lot of really interesting humanities courses that were way out of my league, and they did not help my GPA at all (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, what did you take? Speaker 2: I took a 400-level religion course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I should never have been in a 400-level religion course, but I took a 400-level religion course, "The History of Christianity". It was fabulous. I bombed out miserably. But I learned so much in that course. I loved it, I loved it. So now, what happens is I'm now going to college and I have to relearn my skills, my, my, you know, my student skills again because now I'm at a totally different level. I'm at another level. So I have to, you know, learn a whole bunch more skills about how to be a student at a university. And it takes me a while to figure out how to do this. So, I'm, I'm taking some courses that are a little bit too challenging for me to take. You know, my first year isn't my best year as a college student. But nonetheless, I learn a very valuable lesson. The valuable lesson I've learned is that I'm now at a place where I'm on my own. The set up of the school is that I have responsibility for my work. And they're not gonna hold my hand. And if I expect to do well, then I'm the one that's responsible for that. And I can be just as responsible for attaining good grades or just as responsible for getting kicked out for, you know, poor academic performance. So at the end of my first year at St. Lawrence University, I take a semester off to get my act together about, again, being in this environment. I'm eight hours away from home. It's a new, different, alien environment. I don't feel like I really have the chops to do this just yet. So I take a break. And I take a semester off. Speaker 1: So did you spend that back in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: I did. I spent the time back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I worked at the place where my mother worked, the Upholsters' International Union [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for that semester, earned some money, took a good look at myself and said, here's what you need to do when you go back to school. So I went back in January of 1974. And my performance went up from there. And I learned how to become a student again. I learned how to become a particular kind of student, a student with, a student with focus, a student with interests, a student with a purpose, a student who can appreciate a broad panoply of subject matter because I never gave up humanities at all while I was studying geology and also studying physics. And as a geology student, it was required that I had to take certain chemistry courses. I had to take certain physics courses, and this is where my real interest in astronomy now starts to take hold because when I go back to St. Lawrence [University], I now focus my attention on being a good geology student. So in doing so, I finish off almost all of my geology requirements for a major by the middle of my, by the end of my junior year, by the end of my junior year. I've finished off all my requirements now except for one or two. But I still now have to finish off my distribution requirements for all my humanities and some of my humanities and things like that. But it leaves room in my schedule for me to take more physics stuff. So I do. And I take astronomy. And so now I have a chance to actually, you know, sort of focus on studying astronomy. And this is part of what I do at St. Lawrence University, finish off my geology, pick up some astronomy, finish off my humanities stuff and get myself ready to graduate. Story_ID: 21871 Speaker 1: Okay, now, who at, were there any special teachers at St. Lawrence University [Cantor, New York] or-- Speaker 2: Yes. There are two teachers, Dr. Jim Street is the professor of Geomorphology who really teaches me about the love of a subject. Here's a guy in his 60s, who's teaching Geomorphology because he loves studying the land forms of this planet and the processes that create the land forms and the history of the processes that create the land forms of the plants. He loves this. He's not out to test students. He's out to get students to understand how they can really love a study. And it's clear that he does. And this is something that I learned from him. From Mark Erikson, professor of Paleontology, I learned how to be diligent and persistent because Mark Erikson works with an enormous body of knowledge, understanding the fossil record of the planet. This is a huge and complicated topic. But Mark is a real master at this. And so I learned from Mark how to be diligent and persistent at acquiring, organizing large bodies of knowledge and using them to understand a system. Speaker 1: Okay, so those are the two that-- Speaker 2: Those are the two, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now, was there a black student organization on campus there? Speaker 2: There was, yeah. There was a Black Student Union on campus [St. Lawrence University]. I found myself separate from them, and the reason why is because the Black Student Union tended to be completely separate, and I, and I was too gregarious for that. Many of the black students at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] at the time only associated with other black students and had limited contact with the rest of the student population. And that didn't work for me. It didn't work for me because I had too much interest in learning more about other people. And so I didn't belong to the Black Student Union. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were you involved in any other activities on campus, any other interests groups or activities? Speaker 2: Yes, I sang in the choir at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] all the time I was there and did pretty much the same thing I did at Germantown Academy [Fort Washington, Pennsylvania], small group, chorale work, close harmony work, that sort of stuff around, you know, on campus and we took a tour every year. We did a couple of international trips, the first time I ever went to Italy. The first time I ever went to Italy, I was the tour manager for the St. Lawrence University Choir trip to Europe. I had developed a very big interest in renaissance art and science by the time I'd gotten to St. Lawrence University. My favorite museum in the world, by the time I got to St. Lawrence University is the Uffizi Gallery in Florence [Italy]. So the trip comes along, trip's going to Florence [Italy], and here's my opportunity to go to the Uffizi because there're a lot of classic art, there's a lot of classic artwork that I wanna see that's in this building. But the time that we have in Florence does not include a visit to the Uffizi. There's a bus tour one day that will take the group all around the city and look at all these different things. There's no way I'm going to Florence and not going to the Uffizi. So what did I do? I packed everybody else on the bus, made sure everybody was gonna get to where they were supposed to go, make sure the tour is gonna happen, put 'em on the bus, closed the door, sent them off, and I went to the Uffizi. Now, this is perfect. This is like, I couldn't have asked for anything better. One of the artworks I have always admired is Leonardo da Vinci's 'The Annunciation'. I've always wanted to see this painting in person. So I take myself to the Uffizi that day. What happens to me that day? I get to stand in the room with this painting, just me in this room for about fifteen minutes, about twenty feet away from this painting, fifteen, twenty feet away from this painting. This is like a pinnacle of achievement for me that I'm now looking at this thing that I have appreciated for such a long time. And I've woven it into my appreciation of art and music and science and philosophy and religion and all these different things. And here it is now, right in front of me. And I've been able to engineer things so that I can be there to see this. Speaker 1: Okay, so how is your social life on campus? Speaker 2: Social life's great. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Social life's great. I start out in a single room my freshman year, and I immediately make friends with the guy who lives next door to me on this side and the guy who lives next door to me on the other side. And we remained friends throughout our entire college career. In fact, the guy who lives around the corner from me this way, he and four other friends, four other friends get together and rent a house our senior year, and we lived together in this house our senior year. It's a fantastic time. We have a wonderful social circle. I have a really great time and made some great friendships there and still have those friendships to this day. And so it's a, it's a very positive experience for me. Story_ID: 21872 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you're on the verge of graduation, what are you thinking about the next step? Are you going to graduate school now? Speaker 2: Well, on the verge of graduating I'm thinking, hum, I don't know what I wanna do in graduate school yet. So, let me take some time off and I'll, I'll get a job and do a little work and earn some money and figure out what I wanna do. So the catch here is that in the summer of 1976 and the summer of 1977, I'm back here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--well, 1976, I'm here for the whole summer. 1977, I'm here for part of the summer. So in 1976, I have a job, I've found a job. I apply to four places around Philadelphia. I can only remember two of them now. One of them is the Tasty Baking Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that's in the neighborhood near where I live, and the other one is the Franklin Institute Science Museum [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So I get a job. I'm hired at the Franklin Institute Science Museum. And I apply for a job as a, you know, I come in looking for a job as a science explainer. The head of security wants to make me a security guard because I'm a tall guy. And I explain to him, no, I'm not here for a security position. I'm here for a science explainer position. And he can't quite seem to get that through his head that I'm not here to do security. He automatically assumes that I'm gonna be a security guy. No, I'm not. So, I finally go to interview with the director of personnel for the museum at that time, a guy named Don Gates. And I say to Don, I'm here to be a science explainer. I'm not here to be a security guy. And he asked me about my education. And he says, yeah, you should be a science explainer. So I get a job in the summer of 1976 as a science explainer. And I worked the hours two to ten p.m. I come in at two o'clock in the afternoon. I work until ten o'clock at night. We're open that late because the expectation is that during the summer of 1976, there's gonna be a huge crowd of people coming to the Franklin Institute in the evening to celebrate the bicentennial. Hardly anybody comes. So I'm here with a great group of other college students who are also hired to be science explainers. And we all learn all kinds of skills from each other. This is where I learned how to juggle and all kinds of crazy things like that. But we also do incredible science demonstrations. The best I've ever seen were done during these times when I was here as a science explainer. And I also spend most of my time in the observatory working with two University of Pennsylvania graduate students in astronomy. Gopaul (ph.) Colaumbi (ph.) and Carol Ambrewster (ph.). They both graduated PhD from University of Pennsylvania. I do not know where Gopaul went to, but I do know that Carol Ambrewster ended up as a professor at Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania]. She's still there or has retired just recently. There was another PhD candidate called Tony Hull, who worked here. And I learned a tremendous amount from those three, just a tremendous amount from those three. And they really began to shape my career as a science explainer in astronomy. Tony Hull, I have heard from every now and then. He left the Franklin Institute, left Philadelphia, became an instrument designer for a group called 'Perkin-Elmer', an optical company. And I would hear from him every now and then; never heard from Gopaul Colaumbi ever again and occasionally heard from Carol Ambrewster now and then. So, I go back to school, finish out that year, come back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the summer, work for half a summer here at Franklin Institute and then go do geology field, my geology field studies for the rest of that summer; go back and finish my senior year. One geology course and two physics courses and astronomy, some environmental studies stuff and some humanities stuff. And in about April, March--no, it was actually, it was actually March of that year, I get a letter from the Director of Education, the Assistant Director of Education, Charles Penneman (ph.) offering me a job at the Franklin Institute, a full-time position when I graduate. So I leave school. I know what I'm gonna do. I have a job, and it's gonna pay me $7,000.00 a year. Wow, fantastic. So I come to the Franklin Institute and start work here. And my plan is I'm gonna work for a year or two and then I'm gonna go to graduate school. I'm either gonna go in geology or astronomy. I don't know which one. But I get to Franklin Institute and I have the most remarkable experience. I have this fantastic job, explaining science to people, helping people understand how science works, how the process of science works and what science really is. And I've now learned a ton about this from my work as a geology student at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] and as a physics student at St. Lawrence University. I also learn a bunch of chemistry stuff because I'm also doing environmental studies on the side. So I learn all this stuff about the process of science from all these guys at St. Lawrence University. There's a whole bunch of other people I haven't mentioned, but they were all in there. And I bring that to bear here at the work that I start doing at Franklin. So I'm here for a year or two, and they offer me a higher position, more challenging with more stuff to do. One of those jobs is, we want you to concentrate on working in the observatory. I say, wow, great. I'd love to do that. So I figure I'll spend a couple of years doing this, and I figure I'm gonna spend five years, and then I'm gonna make a decision and get out of here. The end of the fifth year, I get an offer to do the next higher level thing. And my career here at Franklin has been exactly that. Every five years I've been offered something better and greater to do. And every, and every one of those five years, it has been a tremendous experience of new and better and greater stuff. And so I've never been able to leave because I've always had these new, better experiences. Story_ID: 21873 Speaker 1: Okay, so you never went to graduate school? Speaker 2: I never went to graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I realized that going to graduate school was gonna change what my career track was gonna be. The way it was gonna change it was, it was gonna make me a researcher or I was gonna be a college professor. And I realized that that's not me. So for the longest time here at Franklin Institute [Science Museum, Philadelphia Pennsylvania], for about twenty of my thirty-some years here, I've always denied being a teacher, always denied being a teacher. But the feedback that I've constantly gotten from people is, you are a fantastic teacher. That's what I've continually received. And I've always said, "I'm not a teacher, I'm not a teacher, I'm not a teacher, I'm not a teacher, I'm not a teacher." But what I've come to realize is that, yes, I am, I am a teacher. But I'm a very specific kind of teacher, and I work in the informal science education field where I have the latitude to teach it however I feel will get the information across. And I've created for myself a whole other area of study of how people learn and how to present science to people in ways in which they'll understand it best. My focus is astronomy, space science, and under that umbrella, I've done all kinds of things and had all kinds of fantastic experiences, the likes of which I would never have been able to predict at any point before I got to them. Story_ID: 21874 Speaker 1: Okay, can you kind of--we have an outline here, and it's not, I don't know how complete it is. But can you just, so you started in '76' [1976]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in, it says here in '78 [1978] that you were, that you became the Chief Astronomer and Planetarium Director. Is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, let's frame that out a little bit. I started full time in 1978. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I became Planetarium Director in 1990. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I became Chief Astronomer in 1993, and at about the same time, also became museum vice president. So, in fact, in 1990--so, let me really frame it out. In 1990, I became Planetarium Director, Director of the IMAX [Image Maximum] Theater, Chief Astronomer. In 1993, I acquired the title of Vice President of Planetarium and IMAX Theater, retaining the title of Chief Astronomer. Speaker 1: Okay, 1993, it's-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety three [1993]. Speaker 1: --it's what-- Speaker 2: Vice President. Speaker 1: Vice President, okay. Speaker 2: Planetarium and IMAX Theater. I'm one of a group of seven vice presidents here at the museum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That lasts about three years, the vice president's position, maybe four years because the administration of Franklin Institute [Science Museum] changes at that time. And the new regime comes in. Everything gets changed out, and I go back to being meek, mild-mannered Derrick Pitts, Chief Astronomer, Planetarium Director. However, by this time now, I've attained a, a different and growing platform. And that different and growing platform is that I'm, I've become very well known in the IMAX business. I become very well known in the planetarium circle. I'm beginning to get some notoriety as a, as a--oh, I don't wanna way the public face of the Franklin Institute, but it's really more like a science commenter for news services. That's what's beginning to happen. Speaker 1: So you become basically the communicator, I guess, in science-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear), you know-- Speaker 2: That's just, that's just really getting start actually. It's just really getting started. It actually, it actually really got fully started when I was doing a few little things in 1984 or maybe 1985. When Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after lift-off in 1986, I was in doing a planetarium show that day, that morning when Challenger lifted off. I was doing a planetarium show. Before the planetarium show was done, the Director of Communications for the museum came into the planetarium show and said, I need to see you immediately after this. And I knew that it must be something important because they came and interrupted the show. So I got done with the show and I went out, and they said, something terrible has happened. Something has happened to the space shuttle. And I immediately went and looked at the, I immediately went and looked at the coverage. They hadn't, they didn't really quite know what had happened or weren't saying it. But I knew pretty much what had happened. I knew that it had exploded because I had, just like I followed Apollo, I was following space shuttles' progress. And so I knew, again, all the systems about that just as I knew the system in the Apollo missions. And so I said, here's, here's what I think has happened. And this is really terrible, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And they said, well, we need you to do a press conference about this. We'd like you to do a press conference in forty-five minutes about this. And they brought all the local television stations in to Franklin Institute. And forty-five minutes later, I held a press conference explaining what had happened, you know, based on what I knew, what information was available and what knowledge I had. I held a press conference about that. And I think that solidified me, at least in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], as being a go-to guy about science for news stations. So I started doing that kind of stuff, and I have been, you know, doing more and more and more of that. It was mostly local for a long time, and for about ten years after that, 1985, 1995 or so, after about ten years of having done that and also doing some stuff on the national circuit, I decided that I had done enough of that. And I didn't wanna do television any more. I'd made a conscious decision. I wasn't gonna do any, any more. One day I walked out of the museum. It's about three weeks after I made this decision. Story_ID: 21875 Speaker 1: About what year did you make that decision? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety five [1995]. Speaker 1: Ninety five [1995]. Speaker 2: About 1995. So, and I had made this decision to myself. I didn't really announce it or anything, but I just said, you know what? I'm done with that. I've done everything there is to do in television. I had done everything there was to do in television at that time. You know, I'd been in the studio in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I'd been in the studio in New York [New York]. I'd, you know, done all this different kind of stuff, and I said, okay, I've had enough of that. And a woman stopped me on the street right outside Franklin Institute. And she said to me, "You know, I really appreciate what you do on TV, but, you know, my three-year old grandson really appreciates it more because whenever you come on television, he stops whatever he's doing. He watches you until you go off, and then he goes back to what he's doing. He doesn't do that with anybody else." And I thanked the woman and sort of went on, and I realized that the message that she was giving me was that I have a unique opportunity to motivate, stimulate, encourage, influence young African American kids who might see me on television. And I realized that I had an opportunity that many people, most people don't have, can't have 'cause you can't buy that access. So I decided that I needed to continue doing this because the more young African Americans see me on television, the greater the chances that they might realize that there are many options for them in career paths. So I decided to keep doing it, and I have continued doing it for that reason and because the challenge for me is teaching to ever larger and larger audiences on television. So you start with the local news, and then you go to, you know, some regional thing. And then, now, I've done a lot of national stuff for all the national networks, History Channel, Weather Channel, Science Channel, Discovery Channel, CNN [Cabel News Network], ABC [American Broadcasting Company], NBC [National Broadcasting Company], CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System]. I've done the 'Today Show' twice. I've done 'CBS Sunday Morning', and I've done 'ABC News Overseas'. I've done 'Current TV'. I've done 'MSNBC'. I worked with Brian Williams when Brian Williams was on MSNBC [Microsoft and National Broadcasting Company]. I stopped working with him when he got moved over to network television, but I always used to be on with Brian Williams, doing astronomy and science stuff. And it's at that point that I started doing work on MSNBC with Keith Oberman. So I did a bunch of that, and then when he moved to 'Current TV', I continued doing stuff with him. But in the meantime, I've done all this other stuff on all these other networks. So I'm now nationally known for science commentary. It's a tremendous position to be in, tremendous position. I, you know, I, I do it, and I like it. I mean I like it because I get this opportunity to help people understand how beautiful the universe is in its inner section of the sciences, how much science is a part of our every-day lives and how that science in whatever form it's in, is manifested in what we see and how beautiful it is that it all goes together so well, that idea that I talked about before, about why I do what I do so that people can understand--can appreciate the beauty of the universe and how it all goes together scientifically. I have a chance to promote that, help people understand science, and help African American kids see that there is work for them in the sciences. There's stuff they can do and to show them that scientists all don't look the same, you know. I'm a black guy from North Philly, and I have this place that I can work from to help people in this way. It's a great opportunity, tremendous opportunity, and I don't turn it down when the opportunity comes up because what I do with it is I play a numbers game actually. You know, you can't go into a school classroom and say, that kid right there is gonna find this solution to this problem. So for me, it's a numbers game. The more numbers I can hit, the greater the chances are I'll influence some kid who might choose a career in science. Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here. Story_ID: 673473 Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, please state your full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Derrick Hartwell Pitts [HistoryMaker Derrick Pitts]. I work as chief astronomer planetarium programs director at The Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: All right. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: My place of birth is Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Hospital, in fact; date of birth is January 22, 1955. Speaker 1: And what is today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is Monday, March 25, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are on the third floor in the executive wing of The Franklin Institute Science Museum. Speaker 1: And is it correct, we're finishing an interview we started, I guess, about a year and a half ago? Speaker 2: We hope to finish this interview, yes (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yes, all right. Okay. Story_ID: 673474 Speaker 1: So we left off with you doing geological field work while at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York]. I think this is your last year, 1977? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, 1977 was the--was my last summer of field work in geology at St. Lawrence, and by this time, at St. Lawrence I had finished all--almost all of my major requirements for my bachelor of science degree, and I've also been taking physics courses at the same time in astronomy at St. Lawrence University. And I had also spent some time during the summer of 1977 working for Franklin Institute Science Museum as a summer job. I mentioned before that I had been looking around for summer jobs the year and summers before and applied to several places in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and found a spot at The Franklin Institute Science Museum [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was offered an opportunity to come back and work for what summertime I had left outside of my geology field camp, and spent, probably about a month and a half working here during the summer of '77 [1977] and then went back to St. Lawrence for the fall of '77 [1977], spring of 1978. In the spring of 1978 at St. Lawrence, of course I had completed all my course work satisfactorily and was making, you know, great progress towards graduation that was no issue. But a very interesting thing happened during that spring, the late spring still at St. Lawrence, probably a month and a half away from graduation, I received a letter from The Franklin Institute of Science Museum from Charles F. Penniman, the then assistant director of education. Charlie Penniman had been my supervisor during the summer program, as he was the supervisor for all of us college students who were working in the summer program. But the letter from Charles F. Penniman was interesting and surprising, and certainly welcomed, because it was a job offer; it was a job offer to work full time as what was then called a demonstrator. This would be equivalent to a science explainer. Some people use the term docent in other places, but that's not what we use here at Franklin Institute. At the time it was demonstrator. These days it would be a museum floor programs presenter. But I would be charged with the responsibility of explaining The Franklin Institute science exhibits. But I also knew that the reason--part of the reason why I was being offered the job was because of the work that I had taken on doing in the observatory and also my science background, both in geology and astronomy. There was a need here for competent science talent in the museum education department here in astronomy. By the time I had arrived on the scene, The Franklin Institute's museum floor program's astronomy compliment had dwindled dramatically, and they needed someone to step on board and start to fulfill their needs and requirements for everyday operations of the observatory, workshop, teaching, lesson planning and teaching, all those sorts of things. And so I looked at this as a golden opportunity; it's a great opportunity for me to step right out of college, right into a really good job. Story_ID: 673475 Speaker 1: One of the interesting aspects of your life story is that you're studying geology and yet in the summer, I guess, of '76 [1976], you work in the observatory. I don't know if this was the first time you worked in an observatory or, I believe it was, right? Speaker 2: It was the first time. Speaker 1: Gohault Columbi [ph.], Carol Ambruster and Tony Hull] Speaker 2: Exactly. When I came to The Franklin Institute in '76 [1976], here was an observatory, a fully outfitted public observatory for general public observatory--general public observing with three University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] graduate students whom I began working under. And so, essentially I apprenticed myself to them, you could say, and worked with them, both in the summer of '76 [1976] and the summer of '77 [1977]. And actually, some following that, when I came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the summer of '78 [1978] in this full time job Gohault Columbi was just about to leave as was Tony Hull, I think Carol Ambruster stayed on for a little while longer, but soon they left. And I essentially was the lead person working in astronomy in the observatory. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, this is the Bloom Observatory, right? Speaker 2: This is what we now call the Joel Bloom Observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], yes. At the time that I was here, it was not named, but Joel N. Bloom was the then director of The Franklin Institute Science Museum. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us something about the observatory. What's the capacity of the observatory and how is it used here at The Franklin Institute? Speaker 2: In 1933 when The Franklin Institute was established at this location at 20th [Street] and Market Street, it was moving from an earlier location that's South Seventh Street, just below Market. And when it moved to this location, it moved to a much bigger building, and it incorporated a couple of new elements that, of course, you know, hadn't been available at the previous building. There were the museum exhibit galleries, the train room, the aviation room, the energy room, all these different galleries, and uniquely enough, the second oldest planetarium, or the second planetarium in the United States preceded only by the Adler Planetarium in Chicago [Illinois]. Adler Planetarium had opened in 1930, the Fels Planetarium [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] opened in the fall of 1933. Story_ID: 673476 Speaker 1: At the time at which the planetarium equipment was being installed here at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which I believe was during the summer of 1933, the same company, Zeiss [Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany], I believe was here installing a ten inch refracting telescope in our roof top observatory. At the time there were very few places where the general public could go to get a good look at some of these objects that astronomers of that day were describing as their keys of understanding to the true size and structure of the universe. It had only been a decade before that it had come to knowledge that perhaps these things that we see--that we now call galaxies are not island universes, but they are indeed galaxies that are part of one great universe of which we are a part as well, and that numbers of those galaxies not only number in the thousands or in the hundreds of thousands, but in the millions. And so, we're beginning to get a true understanding of the size and scale of the universe right about this time that this observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory] opens here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. The observatory also had a twenty-four inch Fecker [J.W. Fecker, Inc.] reflecting telescope. So we had two very large instruments on our fourth floor roof deck, installed with the expressed purpose of allowing the general public to have a good close look at some of the great objects that can be seen in the center city sky. This would be all the bright stars, the moon, all the bright planets, even a few of the dimmer planets, some nebulae, maybe a few galaxies at that time, and really introduce people to the wonders of the universe as it was known then. Speaker 2: The average person prior to this time wouldn't be able to see these objects, I quess? Speaker 1: No, the average person would not have an opportunity to see objects like this in any magnification, because the only observatories around are the university observatories, those are few and far between. The David Rittenhouse observatory [David Rittenhouse Laboratory] at Drexel University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] would have been, but they only had an eight inch refractor at the time. Other universities around like Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], Villanova had a five inch refractor. There was a twenty-six inch refractor at Swarthmore College [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], that was primarily for research and not opened to the general public for general public viewing. So The Franklin Institute has essentially cornered the market on providing primary astronomy experiences for the general public. Since that time it had continued to do so and held quite a position of prominence in that it's opened every day for viewing of the sun and then opened in the evenings as well in conjunction with the planetarium. So that the way it worked is from about 1934 until about the late 1950s, maybe early 1960s, you would come to The Franklin Institute in the afternoon, The Franklin Institute would open about two o'clock in the afternoon, and be opened until, through the evening hours, and this was so that you could see a planetarium show and then go up to the observatory after the evening planetarium show and see some of the objects that the planetarium lecturer had spoken of just a few minutes earlier. Story_ID: 673477 Speaker 1: I know one of the shows at the observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is called 'Two Pieces of Glass' [sic.], right? Speaker 2: Now, that's at the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: That's at the planetarium, (unclear) all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right. Right. One of those, one of those shows that we've been doing recently is 'Two Small Pieces of Glass,' and this is a program that was produced specifically in recognition of the four hundredth anniversary of Galileo's [Galileo Galilei] first observations through a telescope. And in truth, one of the ways in which I describe the experience that people have today, viewing Jupiter in our telescope for the first time is that for all intents and purposes, if a viewer has never seen Jupiter in a telescope before and they have an opportunity to see it under good clear skies with a telescope like ours, for them that moment of first observation is not very different from Galileo's first experience of seeing Jupiter. So for these modern day observers, I counted it as just as much of a discovery moment as it would have been for Galileo. Now, of course, the ramifications are totally different. Galileo is the first person ever to see this, and as he holds this knowledge until someone else sees Jupiter, he's the only person in the world that really understands the true nature of Jupiter with its attendant moons and the implication about the heliocentric theory of the solar system as he can derive from what he sees. But for today's viewer, for today's viewer, it still holds that same important moment of discovery. I've seen something I've never seen before and it is spectacular. It's ah hah moment for them and just as valid as Galileo's ah hah moment. Speaker 1: Okay. Just for the record here, I did mix two things up there before, the planetarium and the observatory. Those are two different experiences about the same subject matter-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --two different experiences. The planetarium is a show, basically, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, the planetarium is essentially an enclosed space at the center of which, classically there was a projection instrument that projected stars and planets onto a hemispherical ceiling above the heads of those attending the program, and the programs that were given in the planetarium first began as lectures of manually operated star projector with a lecturer who would explain what's available in the night sky and talk about some of the ideas and thoughts and theories about how all of the stuff goes together. Modern-day planetariums now use very sophisticated video projection equipment to tell the same stories. So the projection technology has changed dramatically, but it's still the same experience that planetarium presenters are striving toward. It is providing that magical experience of transference from a day time experience into a night time experience, at a place where the sky is really dark, but it's all simulated. The observatory is where you are actually really viewing the sky. And the way I like to put it is that when you look through a telescope at an object, whatever object it is, a star, planet, galaxy, nebula, it actually is an interactive experience. Most people would say, "Well, you can't have an interactive experience with astronomy, because the objects are so far away." My contention is, that the photons from that object reach your retina and as they strike your retina, they convert or create electrical signals that then race along your visual pathways to your brain where an image is produced that you then perceive as what you're seeing, but it all happens is because the photons of light that left that object actually strike your eye, so you, in a sense, have been touched by that object, so I count it as interactive. Some people might debate me on that, but I still think it's interactive, nonetheless. Speaker 1: Right, right, right I think you're right. Story_ID: 673478 Speaker 1: Did you have other options in '78 [1978] when--I mean did you, were you thinking, well, maybe I'd rather do something else than--go to the Adler [Adler Planetarium] and work, or--? Speaker 2: No. Well, I'm sure there were other options, but this was the most exciting option. This was certainly the most exciting option; exciting for a number of reasons, it's exciting because I can work in--I can work in a really great institution; Franklin Institute Science Museum [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] has a great reputation. I can work with The Franklin Institute Science Museum as a science explainer, this is a fabulous thing to do. I can also work as a science explainer who's getting paid. I have a paid position before I graduate from school. So, in a way I'm fulfilling a couple of things, one is of course my parents [Shirley DuPree Pitts and Cornelius Pitts] always would have wanted me to have a good job; here it is it's a good job. It's a wonderful environment, it's an intellectual environment, and probably one of the things that I didn't realize at the time is it is satisfying one of my desires, if you will, and that is to be able to help people understand the beauty and importance of science. The way I would have described it is that I get to teach science the way I think it needs to be taught so that people can experience it in a good way, have a good experience with it, be excited about it want to know more. And I had at my disposal all the resources I needed to do that, all the physical resources. I have access to chemicals I can use to create demonstrations, I have access to all sorts of mechanical devices, I can create things, I can do whatever I think is the right way to get people interested in the science, and at the same time, it's also over a broad area of science, so I feel as if I can work either in chemistry or physics, or I can work in mathematics, or I can work in astronomy, or I can work in any one of these different disciplines. But it's a satisfaction of my appreciation for science and my desire to want to help people understand science. Story_ID: 673479 Speaker 1: Talk about your first years here at Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: My first years here at Franklin Institute were really a lot of fun. I had a great time working here at Franklin Institute. It was very exciting, because, again, I'm doing all these great things of helping people understand science. But what I'm getting into is I'm beginning to write and produce programs in science. I'm learning all the science demonstrations, and I'm doing all these science demonstrations here at The Franklin Institute. So the liquid nitrogen show is one of these. It's about a forty minute show in which we help people understand the states of matter, solid, liquid, gas and the transitions between them using liquid nitrogen, nitrogen gas as a refrigerated liquid that can exist as a liquid at 320 degrees below zero. So we demonstrate how matter can change states using a super cold fluid to help the processes move along. And so there are a number of different principles that can be explained; it's a great fun thing to do. I also learned how to do the chemistry show. We had a great chemistry show in the lecture hall on the first floor that I would do in which we had about 14 different chemical reactions broken up into different kinds of reactions so we can help people understand chemistry through various kinds of reactions that were exciting to see and exciting to do, again, going after capturing peoples' attention. In the observatory, in these first few years, I am now beginning to look at the telescopes in the observatories in a different way. I'm looking at them in terms of what maintenance and upkeep is required, what modernization needs to be done, what other kinds of supplementary equipment I can add to the telescopes to enhance a visitor's experience and how I can create and bring back the night-time experience of observing public observing in the observatory that probably a decade or two before, twenty years before, had stopped. So one of the primary experiences that visitors can have at The Franklin Institute, see a planetarium show, come to the observatory and actually see the real sky has been gone for perhaps twenty years, and one of my goals is to bring the observatory back to prominence as one of the primary science experiences that one can have at the museum. When you think about it, when you come to the museum, in the exhibit interactions, it's not a direct science experience. You may be working with a device that simulates something or you're observing something that's going on, but you're not directly involved in the direct science experience. You could say that for the electricity demonstration perhaps and maybe in the aviation exhibit, you might be able to work in the wind tunnel and feel some of the forces of flight, or you might feel an electric shock during the electricity program. But where you're actually working with scientific equipment doing direct observation, the observatory is the only place in the building where that can happen. So I began to work at the task of bringing that experience to people, letting people know that we have an observatory, what we do there on a daily basis and enhancing the experience. Story_ID: 673480 Speaker 1: One of the first things I did was I lobbied to purchase a very special solar filter that would allow us to see flares and prominences on the surface of the sun. That totally changed the viewer's experience at Franklin [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], because up until this time, we'd been looking at just sun spots, or looking at flares just on the edge of the disc of the sun in a classic instrument, but not a modern device. The modern device allows us in a very small package to look at the entire disc of the sun and see the active regions just below the upper layer and look at flares and prominences and surface features and sun spots as well in real time right on the disc of the sun in a safe manner. So it's introducing our visitors to the dynamics of our sun as a star. At the same time now, I'm beginning to teach astronomy workshops. Within two years of arriving at Franklin Institute, I'm now beginning to teach astronomy workshops twice a year. I have an eight week spring session and an eight week fall session. And I taught those workshops for let's see, almost ten years not long after I arrived at Franklin, and I would do two of those every year. Speaker 2: So, that starts about 1980-- Speaker 1: That starts about 1980, yes, starts about 1980. I think it actually lasted for about eight years, because by 1990, I did not have the time to do that anymore. So in this period of time I'm changing what work is being done in the observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'm changing how the instruments are being used in the observatory, I'm now teaching astronomy workshops, I teach all of the school lessons. Any school lessons in astronomy, I am creating and presenting those, teaching others how to do them, of course, as I said doing the workshops at night. And it's now coming to the point where in the museum education department in the observatory, I'm doing more astronomy work than anyone else in the building, including the folks over in the planetarium. So now my job is almost exclusively astronomy education in all of these different fronts, almost exclusively astronomy education. So my plan--so after that--so I guess the way I should say it is that, after the first five years, I'm sorry, not after the first five years, after the first two years, you know, my pay is increasing, my level of responsibility is increasing, my seniority as a museum educator and explainer is rising, and I'm beginning to do so much more astronomy education that the planetarium staff is now looking in my direction to collaborate with them for astronomy programming. And it gets to the point where the decision is made after five years that I should begin to do a lot of my work out of the planetarium instead of out of the museum education group. Speaker 2: So, this is around 1983? Speaker 1: This is about--by 1983 I'm fully ensconced in the planetarium. But by 1981 I'm now splitting my time between the museum education program and the Fels Planetarium [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Now, Fels Planetarium had been its own entity within The Franklin Institute from 1933 until the mid to late 1960s, at which time its operations are absorbed into the operations of The Franklin Institute. So by the time I get here, 1978, 1980, it's still pretty much operating as a separate entity. You know all of its major operations like hiring and payroll and things like that had been absorbed into the overall operation of the museum, but it's function and operation still remains fairly separated from everywhere else in the building. They write and produce all their own planetarium shows. They make up their own schedules for how the shows are going to go. The tickets are sold by the museum, but they have their own workers that do all of their own operations. So any maintenance work, any equipment, creation, any of those sorts of things are all under the direction of the planetarium director. So there's no mixing of staff between the two entities, the museum and the planetarium. Story_ID: 673481 Speaker 1: Now who was--was there a long- like a longstanding director before--there, you know before you? Speaker 2: Yes. The history of directors in the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is rather short actually. (Pause) The first director of a planetarium at the Hayden--I'm sorry at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago [Illinois] was Phillip Fox, working for Phillip Fox was a guy name Roy K. Marshall. Roy Marshall comes to The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Fels Planetarium, was the first director. Marshall hires a number of other staffers to work with him, one of which is a young man from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] named Isadore Levitt, Isadore M. Levitt [sic. Israel Levitt]. Levitt starts here almost out of graduate school working in the planetarium, and he becomes, over the years, he actually becomes a legend in the field of the planetarium operation. He works his way up from lecturer to becoming planetarium director and he holds a position of planetarium director from about 1945 or so all the way through 19--probably '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [sic. 1972]. Levitt hires a mathematics professor from Trenton State College [The College of New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey] by the name of H. George Hamilton. Hamilton comes on as a part time lecturer in the planetarium theater, but Hamilton has some very different ideas about how planetarium shows are to be produced. Up until this time, the planetarium shows are a lecturer who operates the star projector, who also operates other individual special effects projectors from the planetarium operator's console. He controls the lights, he controls the music, he controls everything that goes on, but he works in conjunction with a technician who works in the back room. They both work from a script that has timings for cues. So as the program progresses the lecturer operates certain devices and the technician in the back, according to the cues on the time sheet operates other devices that contribute the visual show that people are seeing. But it's the lecturer who's actually talking through the program, and although there's music playing in the background, it's the lecturer whose voice is always heard. The lecture of course varies from person to person. Hamilton suggests that the planetarium show could be much more accurate and much more consistent in its presentation if it's recorded on some recording medium with the voice and the music altogether. And what the console operator does is simply activate the special effects and the visual effects. Levitt thinks this is a crazy idea; he doesn't really like it at all. Hamilton thinks this is the way to go. So Hamilton and another gentleman who worked here at the time, who was really opposed to this, sort of set up a contest of which one was going to work out best. Levitt sort of set on the side and fed this to see what would happen. Hamilton's presentation turned out to be the better of the two methods of doing it, and Levitt adopted this as the way the planetarium show should be done. Story_ID: 673482 Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about the influence of George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton] on the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right, and his method of recording the voice and mixing it ahead of time with music won out. So now, these are your--so was Hamilton your predecessor? Speaker 2: Hamilton was my immediate predecessor, you could say, yes. And the really interesting thing about what Hamilton did was, he changed the industry, he changed the planetarium industry. So from that point on, other planetarium theaters started doing the same thing. But he was a tremendous innovator because George would build all of his own special effect devices. He eventually built sort like a garage or basement version of an automation system to run all of the hundreds of slide projectors and special effects projectors just by pushing buttons right at the console, so you no longer needed a technician in the back room to operate things. So George was a real innovator, and he was a really smart, smart guy. And he was incredibly driven; he was a task master. He expected that you were going to do exactly as he said. He called the shots, he was--set up what was going to happen, and you were going to do what he did, when he wanted it done. And so he succeeded Levitt [Israel Levitt] as the planetarium director. Levitt retired and became the city scientist, and he remained the city scientist from about 1970 [sic. 1972] until 19--well into the '90s [1990s], maybe the early 2000s. Speaker 1: Now, what is the city scientist? We didn't have one in Chicago [Illinois] that I knew of, anyway? Speaker 2: Well, I believe it was an office created by the mayor as the major clearinghouse for issues of science related to the city, and Levitt was the chief of that office when he left Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. He was a very sharp guy. Levitt was very smart, and he had a trademark, he always wore a bowtie; always wore a bowtie. And I was fortunate that I met Levitt several times when I first started at Franklin Institute. But I became very friendly with Levitt in his later years, and would have lunch with him annually or semi-annually for the last few years of his life in which he told me a lot about the early history of the planetarium and the museum. But he was a brilliant guy, and he had a great reputation. He was one of the first guys to ever do media in a big way in astronomy. So in the 1940s and the 1950s, if you needed an authority to either write a newspaper article or magazine article or do a radio program for you about something in science or in astronomy in particular, Levitt was known widely around the country as the guy to speak to. He was clever, he was well spoken, he was smart, he knew all the science and he was a great presenter. Story_ID: 673483 Speaker 1: This leads to a question here. Science--as science becomes more--as, as the world becomes more scientific, I suppose there's always a need for science explainers, and one of them, I guess, pioneers in terms of doing that was Franklin, himself, here who this place was named for. When you were describing the interactive experiments, I thought of Franklin holding hands with people and giving them a jolt of electricity or experiment with magnetism and other things with people, actually in his power. So Levitt [Israel Levitt] was one of the, I guess, in the terms of the 20th century was one of the early science explainers; is there like a history of science explainers that you can tell us about? Speaker 2: Well, I wish I could tell you that there is a history of science explainers here at Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There have always been science explainers because of the nature in which the museum is set up. However, those that really stand out, Levitt was one of those, and he really did have a national reputation for being that. Some other--its' really hard to say, because I'm not sure of the history except that there's not much of a gap between Levitt's time, Hamilton's [H. George Hamilton] time and my time, so I can sort of see back over the time who the science explainers are. Now the other thing that interesting about science explanation is that they didn't seem to come out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], they seemed to come out of big universities in many instances. And that's sort of understandable because--and for coming out of the '50s [1950s] into the '60s [1960s], the primary science that people are hearing most about is about atomic power, atomic weapons, the space programs, space exploration. So many of the people who are recognized as experts that speak about this are represented through government agencies or they're part of the laboratories that have done the work in the atomic power, atomic energy or work for the space program, so that's where a lot of this seems to be centered. And the general public's awareness of science is nowhere near where it is now, as widespread or as deeps as it is now, or as deep as we wish it would be, but, you know in that regard that it's sort of around for everybody to be able to participate in or partake in. So here at Franklin Institute, yes, certainly Levitt, in a way embodies the spirit of Benjamin Franklin in that sense. Franklin is much more curious and is into it for his own desire to understand it. An interesting thing about Franklin is that, although Franklin did a lot of parlor tricks in electricity with people that were friends of his, he didn't really do very much about the public demonstrations of any of the sciences. He actually hired someone to do that for him who would go around the region, around the colonies and sort of demonstrate some of these science principles. An interesting connection to Franklin Institute is that a long-standing program of ours is something called the traveling science show that still does exactly that sort of thing today. However, I think Hamilton sort of took over some of Levitt's role as a public authority, particularly in astronomy, but still not such a strong presence, and that partially because Hamilton not only became director of the Fels Planetarium, but he also became a museum vice president, so he had a lot, a lot on his plate to do. He oversaw almost every operation in the museum there was, so he had a lot to do and didn't really have as much time for that. Story_ID: 673484 Speaker 1: I came up under George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton] as his protege, actually, because I came on to staff, started almost as a technician, working with all the equipment, which of course feeds directly into what my interest is. I think part of the reason why I became so involved in the astronomy side of things here at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and so involved in the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is because of the incredible equipment that's now at my fingertips to help tell this story even more to a greater degree to larger audiences. So getting involved with the planetarium equipment feeds my motor head side, the side of me that wants to do hands on mechanical things. I now have run of all of these instruments and becoming sort of a technician, I'm becoming an expert in how to operate all of this equipment, and that serves me very well as I continue to grow working in the planetarium because I eventually take on the role of, you know, we made a switch actually in 1983, 1984 from the manually controlled planetarium system to an automated planetarium system that was programmed by computer, and I very quickly took on the responsibility of understanding how all the automation system worked and how the computer system worked and did all the programming for that after which I then became the planetarium show producer. So this is the number three position in the department. There's the director of the assistant director of the show producer. Now I have a team of people working for me to put together all of the elements of the planetarium show. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1983? Speaker 1: This is now 1983 when I'm now really fully working in the planetarium I'm employed, actually, out of the planetarium. I'm still doing some work for museum programs, because I still manage and run the observatory. So I'm still doing night programs, still doing workshop teaching, but taking on more and more responsibility in the planetarium. Speaker 2: Now it sounds like this is all very exciting to you, but you were in school [St. Lawrence University, Canton, New York] for geology at one point when you got the surprise letter inviting you to come to The Franklin Institute. So did you ever think about maybe I should, you know, go back to grad school [graduate school] for geology, or maybe I should-- Speaker 1: I did think I should go back to school for geology, but I have to admit, nothing was--nothing seemed as exciting as what I was doing. It just wasn't as exciting as what I was doing. The prospect of what was ahead of me at The Franklin Institute, I could see where things were going. I was progressing along a path that was going to move me right into the position that I would want to have, where I can again teach this in a way that I think is the best way to teach, and I can pull together all these different elements to do that. Now, there's no question, I love geology; no question about that at all. But I think part of the reason why I didn't stick with geology is because it didn't give me--I couldn't see an opportunity where I could interact with people, general public, as I could in the work that I was doing at Franklin Institute. And that seems to be a very appealing part to me, the idea of helping people understand how the universe works. Can I explain where that comes from or why I think that's important? I could explain why I think it's important, but I can't tell you where it comes from. How I get the idea that this is the most important work I can do. Perhaps I don't' feel as if in geology there is anything that is singularly affective, if you will. Sure there's plenty of geological research work to be done, and I can see that that would be interesting, but not enough for me. There's not enough--I think part of the problem is there's not enough creativity within it for me as I see it. I'm sure there's plenty there, but in this realm, I have the opportunity to create new every day. I can create a new program, I can create a new show, I can create a new device, I can put all these together to enhance the experience of people and their understanding of science. So I have this opportunity always ahead of me open to create, create, create, create, and that seems to be the most enticing part about this. Story_ID: 673485 Speaker 1: Now, one thing about the late '70s [1970s] we--was the--I think this is when the television show 'Cosmos' ['Cosmos: A Personal Voyage'] was produced-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --public television with Carl Sagan? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. In the late 1970s, the absolutely fantastic astronomy program 'Cosmos' is now on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], and this is a landmark program that absolutely changes the landscape of incorporating or bringing the general public into a deep understanding of something as complex as the universe. Carl Sagan does an absolutely masterful job of engaging, drawing people's interest, locking them into wanting to know more by the way in which he talks about it, the images that are presented. The images that are presented are far and away better than anything ever seen before. His style of presentation is totally different from anything that's ever seen before. So people are captivated by this. I believe that program was watched in the same way that a modern day PBS drama program would be followed, just millions of people can't wait until the next episode comes. So I'm now looking at Carl Sagan thinking, wow, he really does show how exciting this can be, and I'm sure that I learned from that and began to incorporate it into what I do some of what he does, the familiar way in which he connects with people, the way in which he presents the science as if anybody can understand it. And those are, you know, basic hallmarks of what my style is today. Story_ID: 673486 Speaker 1: I know the world of astronomy is probably as small as the world of African American history (laughter), so you probably met him at some point, right? Did you ever have a conversation with him, or do you have a good Carl Sagan story? Speaker 2: Well, that's actually is an interesting thing. A little bit later on, it depends on how far you want to jump; I'll just start it here. I did meet Carl Sagan. I met Carl Sagan actually twice. I met Carl Sagan twice because I actually interviewed Carl Sagan twice. I have been hosting a program for the National Public Radio [NPR] affiliate, WHYY 91FM [WHYY Radio] here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] since 1990. In the early '90s [1990s] one of the things I would do for that program is whenever there was an influential astronomer in Philadelphia, I would do my best to get an interview with that astronomer. Carl Sagan was in Philadelphia twice in those early 1990s and I managed to snare interviews with him for the radio program twice. I feel very fortunate that I got to meet him and talk to him one on one directly to record segments with him that then appeared here in these programs. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a story about him at all, because I know those were his last years. He passed before, I guess--I know he had passed by 1997 when 'Cosmos' ['Cosmos: A Personal Voyage'] came out. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Yes, he had passed by the late '90s [1990s], but this was in the early 1990s when I spoke to him. I don't have a real story about him. I recall that the interview opportunity was fleeting; he was on his way from one place to another place, he was kind enough with me to indulge me for the interviews, and he worked out very well. I remember being very nervous, because here I am, interviewing the great Carl Sagan; what can I possibly ask him that would be of any interest, but the interviews went well, they weren't very long, you know, they were probably fifteen to twenty minutes, but it was fifteen to twenty minutes of time that was really quite valuable to me, because here I am, a guy from North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], 17th [17th Street] and Pacific Street, young African American guy, now working in astronomy interviewing the person that people know all around the world for his presentation of concepts in astronomy; here I am interviewing him. I can't believe this is happening, but it's an experience that I think had major impact on me. Speaker 1: Okay. Interestingly enough I think nowadays, yourself and Neil deGrasse Tyson, and a few other scientist that are the major figures on television to explain scientific phenomenon, particularly astrological-- Speaker 2: It is interesting. It is interesting that that has turned out that way. Speaker 1: What was the name of your show? Speaker 2: Let's see. The program I was doing at that time, it's still the same program. It's called 'Skytalk,' 'Skytalk,' that same program. Speaker 1: It's still going on? Speaker 2: It's still goes on, yes. It's a weekly program, I do it every week, and it appears on Mondays. Monday evenings now, it used to be Monday mornings, now it's Monday evenings at 6:25. And I can't remember the number of hours I put into this now, but this is a weekly program I've been doing now every week since 1990. Story_ID: 673487 Speaker 1: So in the early '80s [1980s] you're the show producer for the Fels Planetarium [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so were--had a major responsibility for the computerized system presentation? Speaker 2: So by the mid-1980s in the planetarium, I'm working as a show presenter and I'm working as a technician, helping to put the shows together with all the other responsibilities that I have in the museum for the observatory and so on and so forth like that. So I'm part of the show production team. The show producer at that time happens to be the assistant director of the planetarium. And the way the system works is that George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton] writes a script, he drops it on the assistant director's desk and, he says, "Get that done." And the assistant director's job then as the show producer is to pull together all the elements to make it happen. The automation system comes in during this time in the mid-1980s, and I begin working on this automation system, so I understand all the components of the automation system, I've helped to install the automation system, and I've learned how to operate the computer that runs the system. So I spend quite a bit of time working at this and many, many, many late night hours programming the system. What happens is I develop a very intimate knowledge of how it works. If there's anything that goes wrong with it, I'm the guy to call because I know what's probably wrong and can probably fix it. And so I became essentially the expert in how to do this in our system. As my skills continue to develop as a show--as a part of the production team, I began writing sections of the show, I began writing scripts for planetarium shows and as a result of this, I eventually become the planetarium show producer, and this is probably 1985, 1986 that this is happening, right around there, 1986, I should say 1986, 1987, I am the sh- 1986 I'm the show producer, that's right 1986. Story_ID: 673488 Speaker 1: Now another very interesting thing has happened in this time though that contributes to the kinds of things that I do now. In January of 1985 [sic. 1986] the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded minutes after launch. Up until this time, I have done very, very few, if any, very few television appearances explaining science, very few, a couple here and there. Some of the folks at this station know me because I've done, you know, little fun things with this. But at the time other than George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton] and one other guy who was here at the time for a short period, his name was Don Cookee. Don Cooke [Donald Cooke] sort of filled in as the director of the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for George Hamilton as he was doing much more work with the museum [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they needed to have some more oversight in the planetarium so Don Cooke came on board and held the position as planetarium director for two or three years. Don was doing some time doing science explaining on television. And then Don and I began to work together to do some of those things up to about 1984. However, in 1985 when the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded after launch, I distinctly remember I was in giving a planetarium show that day. And before the planetarium show was over, I remember that the director of communications, director of PR [public relations] came into the show and said, "We need to see you right after the show." And I said, "Fine, no problem." So when the show was over, they came back into the theater and said, "Something's happened with the space shuttle." And I immediately went to a television to see what was going on. I hadn't watched the launch directly, but they were replaying the tape of what happened. And as I listened to what they were saying, and as I saw the images, I knew what had happened. I knew that it had been catastrophic failure as a result of an explosion. I didn't know exactly what caused the explosion, but I knew that it had been completely destroyed. The PR people said, "We have to do something with this on television right away. Are you willing to talk to a television station about this?" And I said, "Yes, sure, I'll do something." And they said, "We have about forty-five minutes to get it together." Well, by the time they came back to me, they had set up a press conference. And I now had probably six television stations with cameras pointed at me. I'm standing at a podium, and I have to talk about what's happened. So I am now on the hot seat. Speaker 2: Now is this a press conference for the City of Philadelphia? Speaker 1: It's a press conference for local. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Press conference for all the local news outlets. What they did was they called--between them calling us and us calling them we set up this press conference, I think it was at 1:00 in the afternoon, 1:00 or 1:30 in the afternoon. And for about twenty-five minutes, I stood in front and spoke to them about what I think, what I saw, what I thought happened, what I thought what had probably happened to the crew and talk some about how something like this could possibly happened, and answered whatever questions they had. And it was a tough thirty minutes, it was a tough thirty minutes because I had to put all my emotions aside and talk emotionlessly about what had happened and do a good job. Story_ID: 673489 Speaker 1: Now could you kind of encapsulate what you said? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, it was pretty straightforward, pretty factual. I said it looks as if the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded not long after launch, shortly after launch, within minutes after launch. And apparently the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen tanks were ignited somehow and in that ignition blew the orbiter into pieces. It is not likely that the astronauts survived that explosion. Not knowing any of the details of whether they were still alive on the way down or any of that sort of stuff. But knowing what the construction of the orbiter was like, I knew looking at the images that there was no way that they could survive that explosion, just no way they could, and when you think about the amount of liquid hydrogen, and liquid oxygen, that's just completely catastrophic. I also knew that one of the main problems, one of the main issues about the space shutter orbiter and its launch system were the solid rocket boosters. Once you ignite a solid rocket booster, you can't turn it off. If there were a problem in the main combustion system with the hydrogen flow or oxygen flow or any of those sorts of things, there are computers that can detect a problem within micro seconds and shut the system down to avoid anything like that happening. But the solid rocket boosters once you light them, it's all over. So my supposition and my thinking was something's gone wrong with the solid rocket boosters that caused this explosion. I don't know what, but that is the most likely scenario I can think of. So I explained, this is how much fuel was on board, this is where they were in the mission, the idea of you're a go for throttle up doesn't really have anything to do with it. You know when you look at the images, you can see what happens, the solid rocket boosters are still firing, so they're going off in their different directions, the orbiter is blown into pieces, you can see from the huge cloud exactly what happened. And the fact that there is at that time they're still asking questions about, "Well, there was no down link telemetry, there is no voice, no nothing." My only conclusion is that it's been completely destroyed. Story_ID: 673490 Speaker 1: Prior to Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] I know a couple of astronauts, at least that I know, Robert Lawrence was one-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --one of the first black astronauts-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: --lost his life but it in--wasn't in no way like this. Speaker 2: No. Robert Lawrence was the first African American, would have been an astronaut. He lost his life in a plane crash. There was another Apollo [Project Apollo] astronaut, planned Apollo astronaut, I think it was for Apollo 8 who also died in a plane crash before he flew. Then there was Apollo 13 where there was the explosion in the command module, but the astronauts made it around the moon and made it back to earth safely. But the Challenger is the first time that we ever actually witnessed the complete destruction of a space craft, in the way the engineers certainly knew could happen, because they'd seen examples before of unmanned rockets that didn't make it off the launch pad and collapsed in flames and explosions and things like that, but they weren't manned. This is a situation where you have seven astronauts on board and in the blink of an eye, completely gone and on television; everybody sees this; the family see it at the launch site, everybody in the United States that's watching it at the time sees this happen, we're all feeling the same, you know, blow, emotional blow as this happens. Story_ID: 673491 Speaker 1: As you become an expert in astronomy, this is--this wasn't your field, originally, so did you have any mentors in astronomy that, or do you have people that you, from this position here at Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a scientist that you regularly consulted with and keep you up on the latest activities and developments on astronomy? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a really great question. But let's go back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ever since I can remember, I've always been interested in science and specifically always interested in astronomy and space science. As early as I can remember, I am consuming everything I can find in astronomy and space science. Twelve years old, I'm sitting on an airplane, my mother [Shirley DuPree Pitts] is taking us on vacation, I'm reading astronomy articles in Scientific American magazine, and this is how I begin learning about astronomy. The encyclopedias that we get at the supermarket when we shop, the books I get from the library, the magazines I can find, all the other books I can find, I'm reading voraciously everything I can find. So this becomes my background of knowledge for astronomy and space science as I move into my twenties. The science topic or my studies at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] in chemistry and physics, all of these things are supporting my thirst for knowledge about astronomy. On the side there's the interest in the space program that I keep up with so even through my college years, I'm still ingesting large amounts of information about the development, certainly about the Apollo program [Project Apollo], the results of the Apollo program and the development of the Shuttle program and all of the details about how that all works, I'm already right up to speed when the Shuttle explosion happens, I've already been on top of as much information as I can get about how all of the systems work. I've already read about how the rocket motorists work, I already understand how the feed pump works, I already understand how the fuel flow system works, I already understand how the solid rocket boosters work, I understand how the computer systems work, I understand the navigation systems, all that stuff, I'm already up to speed on that when that happens. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I understand, even at that, do you and anybody else at Franklin Institute consult with astronomers in some of the other institutions and as a museum educator, how do you keep yourself fresh on what's happening, I mean, you have a history of doing that, clearly-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but are there certain astronomers that you associate with and have regular consultation with? Speaker 2: No, not that I--not that I associate with. I mean at that time I'm still friends with Carol Ambruster, I'm still friends with Tony Hull, so I have some connection with them. But what I do is I read the literature, I read the literature that provides me with an update of what is going on in the science field in astronomy at that time, and I'm reading compilations of articles from these journals, compilations of articles from other journals. You know, reading the latest books out of the library, I'm reading articles out of Scientific American, I'm sort of pulling all this information from all these different sources. I don't know any astronomy professors directly. But nonetheless, I'm keeping up with the field by looking at the publications that provide a lot of the content of what's happening in the field currently. Story_ID: 673492 Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered if Adler [Adler Planetarium, Chicago, Illinois] or The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know had like, you know, regular consultation with astronomers? Speaker 2: No. That's a really an interesting thing. The way it would work in either of these places, well Adler, for example, Adler probably has a much stronger connection with an academic in the field because it's a standalone institution, and it's just the planetarium, so that's all it has. I think it did have a research department at that time. It certainly had an education department at that time, as well as a show production team that created the shows out of Adler. Franklin Institute is a different animal because the Fels Planetarium [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is essentially an addition, an add-on to the concept of the museum at the time of the first drawings and designs for the museum. So the Fels Planetarium wasn't part of the original plans of The Franklin Institute as they were drawn up in the late '20s [1920s]. Samuel Fels [Samuel Simeon Fels] of the Fels-Naptha soap family, travelling in Germany with his friend, Max Adler, sees a planetarium device or sees the device that Adler is purchasing for Chicago [Illinois] and Fels decides that Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] needs one and puts in an order right then and there while he's there in Germany in 1929 or so, maybe early 1930. He comes back to Philadelphia, says to The Franklin Institute, "I've bought you a planetarium, can you incorporate it into your design someplace." Well, they do, and here the planetarium becomes part of the plan for The Franklin Institute. The Franklin Institute's earlier connection to academics is through its planetarium directors. So Levitt [Israel Levitt] and Marshall [Roy K. Marshall] and some of the other earlier directors have more academic connections. But the academic connections begin to fall away as the astronomy is becoming much more mainstream in the museum through the late '50s [1950s] and into the early--and into the '60s [1960s] and into the '70s [1970s] So some of the other institutions around the country may have also had some earlier academic connections, but nowadays the way it works is that a planetarium may develop partnership or university connections with astronomy professors around the area, but they may act as advisors to the planetarium shows and things of that sort. And that certainly happens here, but not as a staff member, it hasn't been common here at the Fels Planetarium. Story_ID: 673493 Speaker 1: And likewise I was thinking when you, you were explaining the observatory's use, I was wondering, a few of the astronomers we interviewed talked about having to get on a waiting list for the big tech telescope-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --they have to schedule an appointment that may take months to materialize-- Speaker 2: Or years. Speaker 1: --or years, yes, right. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: I know yours is not as powerful as that, but do you have researchers here that actually use the observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: That's a really interesting aspect about the observatory here. The observatory here is built specifically for general public observing. It's not built for research at all. When I look back at the early catalogs or at the catalogs from the 1930s of what Zeiss [Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany] was building for telescopes, I can't even find a good photograph of the style telescope I have, and the reason why is because it's essentially too small. They don't build telescopes as small as this for an institution of this size. They have smaller garden--they have garden telescopes that are smaller, but they really are just garden telescopes that a wealthy person might purchase to have at home, but the research grade telescope, they don't build anything as small as what we have. Now, when you see our telescope, it's big. But that's small compared to what they would typically build. So it's built specifically for general public observation. We are not about doing research at all, we're about serving the general public. And also, the observatory is located in the center city environment. So the skies are not conducive to doing any sort of research at all. I mentioned earlier that there was a twenty-six inch refractor at Swarthmore College [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] just outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. There is also the Flower and Cook Observatory that belongs to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that was just outside of Philadelphia in media in the 1930s and '40s [1940s). But both of those observatories have come to their demise primarily because of the increase in light pollution around the area and also the access that university researchers have to larger instrumentation that other observatories around the world either in person or now remotely via the Internet. So what astronomers now do is they apply for time to use the big telescopes in the best places. Ours is exclusively for public observing. So we have not had researchers here working at the institute. I've done a lot of my own work in solar observing, monitoring the sun's activity over the last three decades I've been here and keeping track of the dynamics of our sun as a star. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you ever encounter any criticism from university astronomers about the project, or do they have like a critique, you know, good or bad, I'm not talking about just a bad critique? Speaker 2: What I've heard mostly, "I'm sure there must be something else," what I've heard more than anything else from the university community around is "We really love what you do, we really appreciate what you do, you explain science in a way that many people cannot do and you get people excited and interested about astronomy and introduce them to this in a way that we have not seen many people do successfully, so we really appreciate what you do." Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So that's been the general feedback from--? Speaker 2: That's been the general feedback. Story_ID: 673494 Speaker 1: So the Challen- we were talking about in '86 [1986] you were responsible for producing the sky shows. And so what--how did things progress from there? Speaker 2: Well, I'll mention one last thing about the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] event-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --And that is that when I was done with that afternoon of work, the response I got from the PR [public relations] group and the communications group was they said this, "Your performance was the epitome of grace under pressure. (Pause) We know how difficult this must have been, but you were so professional, you did a really fantastic job." The first time I've ever done anything like that. But I think what that did was that set me on a coarse now of doing more and more media presentations. So I think the other thing that came out of that is the local television stations knew if they needed to talk to someone about astronomy or space science, here's a guy who can string three words together and can do it in a concise fashion that really delivers the story. So he's the guy we can go to. I think that's one of the things that came out of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now one thing that I can't help but do, and I think a lot of other African Americans can't help but do is get excited when we see someone like us on television explaining something scientific for something that requires some thought. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what was the response here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from the black community? Speaker 2: It was such a--it was overwhelming, actually. It was overwhelming in that so many people were excited for me so many people were excited to see me doing this. I think we all sort of thought that it was a great opportunity, "We're glad we saw you, we're glad it happened to you and that's just great," but I don't think we entertained the possibility that it would continue, that it would happened more, but people were so warm and so complimentary and so appreciative, and that was the response I got. "Wow! We can't believe we saw you on television doing this; we can't believe we saw a brother on television doing this." And the other thing I certainly got more than anything else was, "Your mother [Shirley DuPree Pitts] would have been so proud." So there was a lot of that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're not only this African American on television, you're from Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: I'm from Philadelphia, yeah. Speaker 1: --So this is a big-- Speaker 2: Yeah, born and raised here, Philadelphia school system [School District of Philadelphia], all those things, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So from '86 [1986] to--from this point in '85 [1985] to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the time that you start doing the radio show 1990, your public--your profile is getting higher and higher, I guess. Speaker 2: Profile is getting higher and I'm doing more and more at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my responsibility level is going up; I'm taking on new titles. Story_ID: 673495 Speaker 1: So a couple of things happen now, in 1987 the decision is made to replace the classic star projector with the brand newest device possible for star projection. This is a device called Digistar. It's the first computerized video planetarium projector. So I'm deeply involved in the transition of this. As the show producer I'm now writing shows that include this new device. This is the first place on the East Coast that has one of these projectors, I think it was the second place in the country to have one of these projectors. We had it because the director, George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton], said, "This is the projector I want." He was given the charge to get the projector because at this point the then chairman of the board of trustees, a guy name Chuck Andes [Charles Andes] is looking at beginning construction of a brand new building in addition to the Franklin [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] called the Futures Center, and the Futures Center is going to have exhibits about the futures of these various science disciplines. It's going to be biology, it's going to be science. I'm sorry, biology, astronomy, earth science, materials and I think one other future science. I can't recall at the moment. So he's charged because of some problems had with the old projectors, Andes has charged Hamilton to get a new star projector. He said, "I want you to get something new and modern." Hamilton has had this projector in mind for some time, so he orders one, it gets installed; brand new system. It cost us about $800,000 to install this new system. Speaker 2: Does that include the cost of the system, itself? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. That's the cost of the system, it's $800,000 for this new projection system, because it's now a computer run operation. And it uses a computer at that time known as the DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation] PDP-11. It's sort of like a mini mainframe computer. And what is does is it produces and projects onto the dome through something that looks like a big black washing machine standing in the center of the room. It presents what called raster images, which are the green lines that you connect together to make geometric shapes, but you can only do the faces of things, so it's very rudimentary computer graphics, very rudimentary. It's just slightly greenish, it has no color, the resolution is really poor, but you can do anything; you can create all kinds of images if you can do the dot line art work to create them, and you can produce star fields all around the universe because these are all just points in the data base. So as this is coming into position in the planetarium, and I'm now the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] show producer, the then director of exhibits, a guy name Bill Booth comes to me and says, "I need you to become the main content provider." Well, essentially, the lead content developer for an exhibit about earth science. So I take on this role as an exhibit developer, and I veer over back to my geology roots and develop an exhibit called the 'Changing Earth,' this occupies the south end of the third floor and surrounds the weather exhibit and the weather station on the third floor. It takes me about two years to pull this exhibit together. So from about 1987 to 1989, I'm working on that exhibit. A year later Bill taps me to also become the exhibit developer for a new exhibit that's going to open in the Futures Center; the future space exhibit ['Space Command']. So now I'm working on two exhibits. I'm working on Changing Earth; I'm about half way through Changing Earth when I start working on the future space exhibit. In the meantime, I'm still operating the observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], still doing all the other astronomy programming in the building and I'm the planetarium show producer. Speaker 2: That's a lot of activity, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: It's a lot, it's a lot. Story_ID: 673496 Speaker 1: So what was your typical day like? Speaker 2: Crazy. Yeah, I had long hours, very long hours, because I'd work on the exhibits during the day and then work on planetarium stuff at night. So I was typically here until ten o'clock at night every day. Speaker 1: Now, were you married yet, at this point? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Yes, I was married. Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife, can you tell us that story? I mean did I wait too long to ask or had you been married a while? Speaker 2: Well, no. I actually first married in 1980 and I was married to my first wife until 1990. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were married during this period of activity? Speaker 2: I was married during that period of activity. Speaker 1: So you worked long hours-- Speaker 2: Long hours. Speaker 1: --and it seems to coincide when your first marriage ended. Is there any relationship to this? Speaker 2: Yeah, you could interpret that, yes, that's possible, sure, right. I was spending a lot of hours, a lot of long hours working late at night in the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylania] and here [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] during the day. Speaker 1: Funny how the chronology, sometimes we look back at something, we see well, you know what happened and then when you're looking back in terms of chronology, you see how things kind of coincide. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure that a lot of the things that were going on in my work life at the time were contributing to the devise, to the demise of my first marriage; I really do think so, yeah, I do think so. Story_ID: 673497 Speaker 1: So you have these two exhibits coming up, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have the two exhibits going and the other planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] work going. It's an exciting time because there's a new building being built [Futures Center]; I'm involved in the exhibit side of that. But little do I know that there's a plan afoot for me that I'm not aware of, and the plan plays out like this. In 1989, I should say in late 1988, George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton], I guess it's 1989, George Hamilton announces that he's going to retire in 1990. George Hamilton is now working as, not only museum vice president, but he's also the project manager for the construction of the new building. He has also been the project manager for the construction of the new IMAX theater, what we called OmniMax [OmniMax International, Inc.] at that time. So George has now moved almost entirely out of planetarium work into managing construction and managing the construction for the IMAX theater. So I for the most part am still working as the planetarium show production manager, planetarium show producer and just underneath, Don Cooke [Donald Cooke], who was the then director while George is off doing these other things. Well Don Cooke, in 1989, also changes positions, and he moves from--he changes his fulltime from being in the planetarium to being fulltime development. So I then am promoted in 1990, let me see if I can get this straight now. Let me see if I can get it straight, is it 1989 or 1990? Speaker 1: We have '90' [1990] here. Speaker 2: I think that's right, yeah that's right. But it's the progression that interesting. So while I'm working on the exhibit development for the new building, George Hamilton begins to loop me into the work that's being done on the IMAX theater. And in early 1990, I am given responsibility for completing the construction of the IMAX theater. At the same time I'm also promoted to planetarium director. So I now have all these roles, I've got the exhibit stuff going on, the 'Changing Earth' exhibit is open and done, I'm still working on the future space exhibit ['Space Command'], I'm still working as planetarium show producer, I'm still running the observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but now I've been given these additional responsibilities of planetarium director and not quite director of the IMAX theater. That comes several months later. The new building opens in April of 1990. Immediately as the--just before the building opens, I am now promoted to director of the IMAX theater as well. So I'm director of IMAX and the planetarium. Shortly after that, within months, I'm promoted the position of museum vice president for IMAX and planetarium theaters. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know it was going to happen so fast? Speaker 2: No, I did not know it was going to happen so fast. No, I did not, and that was really surprising. That was really surprising. I had had no aspiration to become an officer of the museum [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but the promotion came from the then chairman of the board of trustees, Chuck Andes [Charles Andes]. Chuck Andes promoted me into those positions. And I then took on the responsibility for the operation of both of the theaters. So I was responsible then for identifying what films were going to play at the theater, you know, all the budgeting and scheduling and all that sort of stuff, as well as the budgeting and scheduling for planetarium as well. So now the planetarium has a new projection, a new automation system, we now have a new IMAX theater, a new projector with a new automation system, brand new theater. It's never been an--well there had been an IMAX theater in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but that was back in 1976. This is the first IMAX theater in the area since 1976, and I'm the director and vice president for its operations. This now pushes me up to a national stage in that I now have to go to the conferences for what was then called the Space Theater Consortium. The International Space Theater Consortium [Giant Screen Cinema Association], that was the association of theater operators of IMAX theater operation, and I became part of that organization and at one time was the chair of the technical committee for the International Space Theater Consortium. So I served in that role for a couple of years. And this is now probably up to about 1993. Story_ID: 673498 Speaker 1: Two big things I wanted to ask you about. Now I mean--you seem now you have the means of production and you're in the spot to and the authority to do whatever you want to do, and I'm gonna ask you what you did, but the other thing in terms of your promotion, now, were you the highest ranking African American ever at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when you were promoted? Speaker 2: I was the first African American director of the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I believe I was the first African American director of any planetarium in the United States. I was certainly the first African American director of an IMAX theater, I believe, in the United States. I was the first vice president--African American vice president here at The Franklin Institute. When--as I came to The Franklin Institute, there were African Americans working in roles as security, there was a building engineer and there was an African American electrician who, by the way, is still here, but there were no other African Americans working in any positions of responsibility at all, none. And as I progressed, it remained that way fully on until the mid--no, until the late 1990s, early 2000s when Roz McPherson [Rosalyn McPherson] came on board as a vice president of museum programs, marketing and communication. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so she was the first black executive to come aboard-- Speaker 2: After me. Speaker 1: --after you? Speaker 2: Yes, after me. Speaker 1: Where does things stand now? Speaker 2: Things are better now. We still have only one African American officer of the museum, [HistoryMaker] Frederic Bertley, who is the vice president of the Innovation Center, the Benjamin Franklin Memorial [Benjamin Franklin National Memorial] and the Innovation Center. Frederic's been here five years now, I believe, and he's doing very well. But there certainly are more African Americans working at The Franklin Institute in more positions of responsibility, and that's a good thing, of course. Diversity is extraordinarily important. Reid Styles is the vice president of human resources and has been here for a decade now, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was it difficult for you at all, I mean, did you have any difficulty here, in fact, I mean in terms of when you first started in terms of--could you see yourself in the position that you--because you said you had no ambition to become-- Speaker 2: The reason why I say it that way, I had no ambition to become an officer of the museum is because I saw myself as a scientist. I didn't see myself as an administrator or business person; I saw myself as an astronomer. And the interesting thing about it is that the promotion into that position certainly was challenging, because I had no training in management or business. So whatever I needed to do, I needed to come up to speed to be able to do it, and the museum was not offering any assistance in that regard, so I taught myself what I needed to learn, worked with my mentor, George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton], to learn other aspects that I needed to learn, and learned from other people around in the industry that I knew who were in similar positions that could help me as well. I had a really great friend who worked at Discovery Place in Charlotte, North Carolina, who had a position almost exactly like mine, and Sue Griswold was very--was a very big help to me in helping me understand management techniques. So that was a big help, I learned what I needed to learn. Story_ID: 673499 Speaker 1: Now, have you ever held a position here where you were dealing with diversity issues or anything at Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No. I never have held a position where I dealt with diversity issues. When I worked as director of the planetarium or worked as vice president in any of those positions, I could hire who I thought was best for the position, and I certainly hired several African Americans, particularly on the IMAX side of the business. The planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] work was so highly specialized that I really needed to be able to find someone in the planetarium field to take positions that we might have opened. Say, for a technician's position or an artist's position, or any of those sorts of things, and I did interview some African Americans but they did not have the skill base that I was looking for, and in the planetarium field, the planetarium field is far more closed, has been far more closed to African Americans than any of the other museum fields. I mean there's another brother that I know who has worked at the Museum of Science of Boston's [Museum of Science] planetarium for as long as I've been at Franklin Institute, Darryl Davis. But I'm hard pressed to tell you of any other African Americans that I have known in this business for more than ten years. Speaker 1: Okay, so Darryl Davis is at the Boston-- Speaker 2: Darryl Davis is at the Charles Hayden Planetarium in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Now, there's a Hayden Planetarium in New York [New York]-- Speaker 2: Yes, there is a Hayden Planetarium, but they're different Haydens. Speaker 1: Okay. I noticed you said Charles Hayden. Speaker 2: Yes, that's the reason why I make the distinction, yes. Speaker 1: What's the one in New York? Who's the one in New York? Speaker 2: I can't tell you. Speaker 1: Okay, but that's a Hayden Planetarium? Speaker 2: Yes, they're both Hayden Planetarium, but the one in Boston is Charles Hayden Planetarium. I don't know if they are related, probably are, but--but we're all similar in the time of our establishment too, we all fall within, you know, two years of each other. Story_ID: 673500 Speaker 1: So you understand the technical, you helped set up some of this stuff? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: You know, ou're a member of the technical committee [of the International Space Theater Consortium; Giant Screen Cinema Association] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for the OmniMax theaters [OmniMax International, Inc.] and things like that, and you've got all this equipment at your beck--you know how to produce these shows, you can call all the shots, so what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, what I did was--really what I did was, I went about setting up as efficient an operation on the IMAX side as I possibly could, setting up the right management structure and the right operation structure, because what I'm actually in charge is the flagship content component of the new Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Everybody wants to see IMAX; everybody thinks IMAX is the greatest thing since sliced bread. In fact, the IMAX theater was the cash cow for The Franklin Institute for a long time. It has the largest budget, it has the flashiest presentations, it gets the most respect, it has the greatest cache it has all of the top flight stuff. And in fact the corporation describes its operation as the IMAX experience, and they have a specific way that the theater is supposed to run in order to provide what they call the IMAX experience, and the museum is willing to spare no expense in seeing to it that the theater runs absolutely perfectly. So one of the things I realize is that I have an enormous budget it's way bigger than what the need is for the operation, far bigger than what the need is for the operation. So one of the things I set about doing is setting that straight. What's the real budget that's needed? Do I really need $6 million or $3 million or whatever it was for the annual operation of this theater, not really. Let's start to shave this back and put that money back where it belongs, because we really don't need all that. So that was one of the things I did. The other thing I did was set up the relationships that the museum went on to enjoy after I left that position with the film distributors. So I'm the person that's negotiating contracts with film distributors for what films we're getting. This is 'Rolling Stones' at the max ['Rolling Stones: Live at the Max'], all the Grand Canyon films, the space films that come at a Lockheed Martin [Lockheed Martin IMAX Theater, Washington, D.C.] and Air and Space Museum [National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C.], so all of those things. I'm doing the work, establishing the relationships in order for us to get the best deals they can for us with these films to generate the revenue that we're after to help defray the cost of doing those new construction. So that's one thing. In the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] though, I'm also building some of the most complex shows that have ever been built, some of the most complex and most artistically beautiful shows that have ever been done. I have a team that is absolutely top notch in the planetarium business. The best artists, the best music people, the best everything. I'm using the best narrators, I have Leonard Nemoy narrating programs, I have, I'm trying to remember the other guy from Star Trek that I brought in. The brother that did 'Deep Space Nine' ['Star Trek: Deep Space Nine']. Speaker 1: Avery Brooks? Speaker 2: Avery Brooks. I brought in Avery Brooks to do narration for us. I tried to get [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, but that was too expensive. Speaker 1: Has [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols done anything? Speaker 2: No, not Nichelle Nichols. I wasn't partial to women's voices for one reason or another, but I brought in a few other, you know, big names as narrators, which was something that was new. I got these people for free or next to nothing to do this, which is also quite an accomplishment. Story_ID: 673501 Speaker 1: But the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is now on its wane because the IMAX has taken over prominence and things are beginning to shift in the museum. Speaker 2: Now, as we speak, or back in that time? Speaker 1: No, no, no at in that time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At that time? Speaker 1: --things are beginning to shift. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the shift is that once the new building is opened, Chuck Andes [Charles Andes] feels that his job is complete, he's ready to retire as the chairman of the board, the prior director of the museum, Joel Bloom [Joel N. Bloom], had been promoted to president, and then he chose to take his retirement, George Hamilton [H. George Hamilton] took his retirement, and now there's a whole new echelon of leadership coming into the museum. And as it turns out, the decision is to restructure a lot of the upper management, including my positions. So my positions, after several years, this is like 1994, 1995, my positions begin to shift. There's no longer a need for a vice president of IMAX and planetarium. So I now go back to being mild mannered [HistoryMaker] Derrick Pitts, director of the planetarium and exhibit developer. And these are the vicissitudes of what happens in an organization like this. When new structure comes, when new presidents come in and new board chairs come in, things change. Speaker 2: Okay. How did things change, you weren't a vice president anymore? Speaker 1: I was relieved of my position as vice president. The position was eliminated, and I now go back to being director of the planetarium and show producer. Speaker 2: Okay, so the development responsibilities and those kinds of things are gone, basically? Speaker 1: All evaporate, they all evaporate away, all of that, everything that went with it, all evaporated away. Speaker 2: Okay, so how did you adjust to that? Speaker 1: Well, it was tough. It was actually difficult, because at the time, to be frank, the new management that came on board did not like me. They didn't like my position they didn't like the position I had. Being the director of the IMAX theater was a powerful position at that time. You're choosing films, you have the largest budget, you run the portion of the institute that has the most cache. The new administration comes in and they don't like what I'm doing. They don't like anything about what I'm doing, frankly. I think a lot of it was jealously and you know I would be hard pressed not to think that there were some other nefarious feelings. I wouldn't say racism exactly, but I'm an African American and in charge of one of the major assets of the institution, working with a group that I would say has not been the strongest leadership or the best example of leadership at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'd have to say frankly. And so we butted heads, and I was not going to win that; there was no way I was going to win that battle. And I think the objective was to get me to leave The Franklin Institute, I think that was the point. The point was not to fire me, as had happened to some others. In fact the entire planetarium staff was completely disassembled, but I think the expectation was that I would leave, but I wouldn't. I absolutely would not give them the satisfaction of being pushed out. So I stayed on. Story_ID: 673502 Speaker 1: And as I stayed on [at The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I continued to do the observatory work that I had been doing, I continued to do whatever workshop teaching I was doing, I continued to do whatever planetarium work I was doing and I continued to do more and more science spokesperson work. I had radio programs I was doing for WHYY [WHYY Radio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and WXPN [WXPN Radio, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was now creating television programming for WHYY [WHYY-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and during this time produced three television programs for WHYY, all on astronomical topics. One was a program called 'Neptune All Night.' I'll try to think of the other, the other two were similar programs; one was about solar eclipse and the other one was about one of the distant planets also. Speaker 2: So what was the first one? Speaker 1: 'Neptune All Night'? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh gosh, let's see. 'Neptune All Night' was an idea that I suggested to the then vice president of programming, David Othmer, and I went to David and I said, "You know the Voyager space crafts are going to be flying by Neptune, and they're going to download pictures as the fly by is taking place, I think we should do a program in which we look at the images as they're coming off of the satellite, since NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is going to make them available and let's show them to the audience and talk about the pictures, tell them what we're seeing since this is the first time this has every happened, it's a brand new thing, and I think it will be pretty exciting." And I said, "They're going to be downloading the images all night, so what do you say we try something like this." He thought it was a great idea. Speaker 2: That is a great idea. I wish they had done that in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: It was great fun. So what I did was I gathered a group of people to work with me. Well, let me see if I can remember. There's a guy who still works here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he's now the executive director of the Schuylkill Center for Environmental Education [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], his name is Mike Weilbacher. I asked Mike if he would join me because I knew he was a good science commentator. I invited Jack Horkheimer from the Miami Space Transit Planetarium in Miami, Florida because Jack had a program doing astronomy on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and I knew Jack would be a good commentator and he knew the science. Speaker 2: Is that the fellow that has about a three minute program that comes on-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --he looks at the stars and he talks about what's in the night sky? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Syndicator? Speaker 1: That right. That's right. I invited a NASA scientist, a woman then who wasn't very well known, her name is Heidi Hammel. Heidi Hammel became real powerhouse in NASA space science because she became something like the imaging manager for not Voyager, but for two probes after that, either, I want to say it was Galileo, or one of the--I think it was the Galileo mission, but she became a real powerhouse at NASA. Story_ID: 673503 Speaker 1: And Heidi [Heidi Hammel] now runs (pause) the SETI program. I think she's the executive director of SETI [sic.]. Speaker 2: SETI started up around 1989 or so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: It did. Speaker 2: Explain what SETI is? Speaker 1: SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. It was set up as a separate program to operate a number of radio telescopes to detect radio communications, possibly created by civilizations in other parts of the galaxy. Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1992, it actually says here? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] it was set up, yeah. And it was featured in a couple of movies I think in the '90s [1990s] the one was with Jodie Foster, 'Cosmos' [sic.]? Speaker 1: 'Contact.' Speaker 2: 'Contact.' Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Contact. And I think there was another one that had a crazy theme about aliens coming down from out of space and running amuck in Mexico or something like that-- Speaker 1: I don't remember that. Speaker 2: --with, I think one of--Charlie Sheen was in that ['The Arrival']. I saw in the newspapers, when these movies came out, I was explaining that's SETI, that's a real program. Speaker 1: That's a real program, yes. Speaker 2: Even though one is using it as a vehicle for monsters and the other one is using it for, you know, a different kind of a film about actually science. Okay. So, Heidi Hammel was in charge of-- Speaker 1: I think she runs the city program. But she was part of this team, and there was one other guy who was a planetary atmosphere scientist whose name I'm not going to remember. It may come to me while we're talking about this. But I had this panel of people, and the interesting thing about the program was this. This is the way I wanted it to be. All I wanted the audience to see were the images as they were being transmitted through. And we would comment about the images as they came up, and we would do this for the whole night, and you'd never see us, you only the pictures. But we had to get the pictures somehow. How were we going to get the pictures? Well the pictures were made available online. Online, what's that? Well, it comes through the computer and then it comes up on a computer screen, and you can see the pictures there. Well, WHYY [WHYY-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] didn't have a system for that; Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] didn't have a system for that. Speaker 2: So this is in 1990 what; this is after '94 [1994] you're saying, right? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. This is probably 1992. I have to go back and look. Speaker 2: This is before the Internet became--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh this is before the Internet became big. It's like right at the beginning of the Internet. Story_ID: 673504 Speaker 1: And the only place I knew that might have a system that might be able to do this was the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So I got the University of Pennsylvania to partner with us [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I got them to forward the images to us, and they had to set up a special T-1 line, this thing called the T-1 line. Nobody knew what this was, but it was the transmission line that was going to be used to get the images from the computers at Penn over to WHYY [WHYY-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so that we could put it up on air. So they created this--this was the first time images from computer were ever broadcast live on national television. So this program got picked up by the PBS network [Public Broadcasting Service]. Othmer [David Othmer], WHYY and PBS coughed up some bucks to pay for it. We flew everybody in that we needed to have, we set up all this stuff to do it, had the studio for the night, and we ran this program all night long. We'd take phone calls for people to answer their questions, and we'd analyze the image as they went by--as they came in. So as the satellite was downloading the images to earth, we would take the images immediately and (unclear). Now some people--some people had a problem with this. They were sort of down on the idea, instant science. It takes time to fully examine what's going on and be able to correctly interpret. My attitude was here we had fresh science right in front of our faces. Let's show this to the public and have the public enjoy the same kind of excitement that scientists feel when they see these things for the first time. The point is not to be right. That's not the point; this is not about being correct. This is about being excited about science being delivered to us real time right now. "Wow! Look at that, what's that? I don't know, exciting isn't it?" Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the first step in science is observation, right? Speaker 1: The first step is observation. So let's all observe together. What do you see, what do you see? I mean that's the other piece of science is we depend on our colleagues to help us see things from different points of view, to fill in the picture fully. So let's extend that to the public. They can be excited about science too, can't they? Yes. So this is now the beginning of my growing national push to push the science out to people around the country. So this is a nationally broadcast program, I mean something like sixty five stations around the country picked it up and ran it all night long, and you never saw us until the very end of the program. We ran two hours longer. They let us run two hours longer. And finally, at the end, as the credits were rolling, you could see all of us sitting there talking about the images. Speaker 2: Do you remember the date for this? Do you remember the year; was it in the-- Speaker 1: It was in the early '90s [1990s]. We can look it up easily enough. Speaker 2: So Voyager [Voyager 1] was passing by? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, this was Voyager on its way passed Neptune. Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Great images. Voyager 2 on its way passed Neptune, stunning stuff. Speaker 2: Now Voyager is-- Speaker 1: Heading out the solar system. Speaker 2: Right, heading out of the solar system. It's still broadcasting, right? Speaker 1: It is still broadcasting information. It's still doing good science, yes, still doing good science. I'm very pleased with how that program turned out. It was a landmarked program. Nothing like that had ever been done before. Speaker 2: What about since, because we have the Hubble [Hubble Space Telescope] out there now. Has anyone ever tried to produce-- Speaker 1: Well, the landscape has changed. You know, I could do that at that time because the Internet hadn't really fully blossomed yet. So now you find programming like that on the Internet. There's plenty of programming like that on the Internet now. But I did 'Neptune All Night,' I did something with a comet and I did another one of those live on the national network blow by blow showed the descriptions of a solar eclipse in Mexico 1999--1999? yeah, I think it was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Well 1996, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was great programming, it was really good stuff. Story_ID: 673505 Speaker 1: So we were discussing now, you've been relieved of major r- these major development responsibilities, but you're determined to stay because it seemed like you're still having a good time (laughter) in your position [at The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Well, I'm doing all this other great stuff. So here's what's also going on in the background. Also going on in the background is that I have achieved a level of status with a number of astronauts in the space shuttle program. So I now get regular invitations by space shuttle astronauts to come to space shuttle launches. So I must have gone to four space shuttle launches as guests of astronauts. So that means I get to sit right up front, I get to sit on the bus with all the other VIPs that are going to the best seats, and I automatically now get a phone call from the Astronaut Office saying, "Next space shuttle launch is coming, can we send you passes, would you like to come?" So now I'm automatically getting this. What about this, do I want to stop? I mean this is--all right, so the administrative is gone. It's a tough adjustment for me, you know. I've been asked to step out of a position; I've essentially been fired as a vice president, you know. If you remember the television show that was on in the 1970s called 'Branded' with Chuck Connors. They ripped the epaulets off and cut the buttons off and break his sword and kick him out the door. That's what it was like. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had all this other stuff going on in the background. My connection with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] astronauts, ability to go to space shuttle launches, all these things; I'm loving that, I'm absolutely loving that because that's what my element is. My element really is being in that. Story_ID: 673506 Speaker 1: Okay. We left off with the 'Neptune All Night.' We were talking about--but we were talking about events of the 1990s-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --under this new administration, some of the things that you were doing and innovative things that you were doing there. Speaker 2: Right, I had all sorts of innovative things that I was doing in the mid to late 1990s. I had radio programs I was doing, I had the television programming that I was doing for WHYY [WHYY-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I had plenty of stuff to keep me busy as well as all my associations with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and various NASA astronauts. I had plenty to keep me busy, there's no question about that. But the next change came along with Dennis Wint was appointed the president and chief executive officer of The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That really changed things for me here because the old administration that really had sort of pushed me to the side was now rotating out, and so my fortunes began to fair better. I continued all the work that I was doing, but also then began to do more exhibit development work. So I continued developing exhibits here at The Franklin Institute. The next exhibit I developed was one called the 'Franklin Exhibit' [ph.], it was actually two exhibits in one. It was an exhibit about the science of Benjamin Franklin and an exhibit about The Franklin Institute itself called the 'Wonderland of Science.' I did those two exhibits as one, and that was in--I began that exhibit, I believe, in 2002. Speaker 1: I want to ask you about that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I think we skipped passed things that we were talking about on the break, assuming they were on record, but they're not. That's the how, I mean, well, part of your story is that you were actually recruited by another scientist too at one point and actually--and almost showed up, it includes Dennis Wint. Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. I came very close to leaving The Franklin Institute in 1999, and it came at a very interesting way. Our current president, Dennis Wint, had been in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] many years before. He was, I believe, the vice president of the Academy of Natural Sciences [The Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I am told that he had planned to hire me, recruit me from The Franklin Institute to come to work at the Academy of Natural Sciences. For one reason or another, that plan never came to fruition because he left the Academy of Natural Sciences and went to become the president of the Cranbrook science museum [Cranbrook Institute of Science] in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan. From that location, he went on to become president of the Saint Louis Science Center [St. Louis, Missouri]. While he was president of the St. Louis Science Center, that position that he left vacant at Cranbrook was looking for a director, and I had come to their attention as a possible candidate for that. And in fact I made it almost all the way along. I was in the final running with one other candidate for the position of president of that science museum. And that was in late 1998, early 1999. And I remember it very well because my wife [Linda Carroll-Pitts] and I were going to take a cruise later that year in 1999 to see the last total solar eclipse of the century taking place in the Black Sea in Europe. Speaker 1: So this is where I have a note here that the Cunard Line gave you command of the ship for a night? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's true; that's true. As it turned out, you know, my wife and I went for all the interviews for the Cranbrook position, someone actually took her out looking for housing and it was looking as if I was going to become president of the science museum in Bloomfield Hills. As it turns out at the last minute the board of trustees got cold feet and decided to go with a natural scientist candidate rather than the physical science candidate. So, I didn't get that position. We stayed in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 673507 Speaker 1: However, later that year in August of that year, we were off on a cruise to go see this total solar eclipse. It was on board a Cunard Line ship, the Vistafjord [MS Saga Ruby]. And an interesting thing happened on board the ship. I expected that I might give a lecture or two about the solar eclipse. I had offered to do that for the cruise line, but about a month and a half before we left, the cruise line called me and asked if I would actually do lectures for them for which they would cover our expenses on the trip. Well, of course, this is fabulous; I'd love to do this, because I know what this is going to be like. It means I'll give a lecture every few days, a forty minute lecture for a general public audience every few days. This was going to be a long trip; I believe it was twenty-six, twenty-seven days because it left from Venice [Italy], went all the way around through the Aegean [Aegean Sea] through all the Grecian islands and up into the Black Sea and up into southern Russia. So it was a long trip, but this easy work for me. It's not a real problem to give lectures every once and a while. So of course I accepted. It means we get a free trip; who wouldn't want that. But once we got on board ship, something very different happened. We got on board ship, beautiful ship, everything was fine. I along with four other astronomers on board the ship got a call from the captain's office. We were supposed to come to the captain's office to talk about what was going to happen during the solar eclipse. Well, in this meeting with the captain, in his quarters, the captain said, "I need someone who will take command of the ship to get us to where we need to go; tell us where to go and take command of the ship once we get to the sight of the solar eclipse. Now, who of you is going to do this?" All of the other astronomers turned and pointed to me and said, "He'll do it." (Laughter) So, here I am now thrust into this position. And here's what it turned out to be. The captain then met with me separately and said, "Here's what we'll do. I need you to tell me exactly where we need to be and exactly when we need to be there. I'll get the ship there and once I get the ship there, I'll shut everything down, turn the ship over to you and it'll be yours during the course of the eclipse. When you tell us we're done, I'll fire everything up again and we'll take off for our next port." Story_ID: 673508 Speaker 1: So I was now responsible, working with the navigator, to tell them exactly where to place the ship and exactly when. So I plotted out, using all the maps that I had about the solar eclipse of exactly where I thought the ship needed to be and exactly when it needed to be there. And I would communicate back and forth with the navigator and the captain on a regular basis, I was on the bridge everyday checking where we were going and how everything was working out. So I got us to the spot, got the ship [Vistafjord; MS Saga Ruby] right there, the captain turned everything off, the ship was mine. I'm on the PA [public announcement] system, telling everybody what they're going to do, I organized all the astronomers for how they were going to do their observations, provided viewing equipment for everybody on board the ship so that they could see safely and did all the announcing of the event as it happened. Once the event was over, I turned the ship back over to the captain, and he took us on to the next port. Me. Speaker 2: So you had to plot the longitude and latitude or exactly where the ship should go? Speaker 1: I had all the information that told me where the eclipse was going to occur, what the ground path of the shadow of the eclipse was going to be on earth. I used those maps to determine where I wanted the ship to be along that line. There was a lime shadow that ran through the Black Sea. I picked the spot that I thought would be best and said we needed to be here and we needed to here at this time. And when we got there, ours was the only ship there at that moment. Within about a half hour or another hour, three or four other ships sort of steamed into the region nearby us, but you know off a mile or two distance. Speaker 2: How did you determine the best observation point? Speaker 1: So I determined the best observation point or best location to be from a number of things. Number one was how far away--well, first I needed a spot that was going to be along the path of the eclipse. I determined where along the path would be the maximum point that we could get to away from shore and under the right, you know, the best meteorological conditions available at the time. Where are the clouds going to be at this time of day, on this day? So I'm looking at all the meteorological reports hoping that everything is going to work out exactly right, looking at the proximities for cloud cover, you know, this particular location as being the best spot to be in to get the maximum effect of the eclipse, turning the ship in the right direction so that we can watch the shadow of the eclipse as it comes down because I want the ship to be pointed along the path of the shadow so that we can watch the shadow as it comes down passes over the whole ship and the ship will be completely inside the shadow path, and it will go right over the ship. So I used all that information to figure out what the best spot was. Speaker 2: So getting away from shores, to get away from the ambient light, right? Speaker 1: Well, this is a solar eclipse. So it's daytime. What I want to be away from is I want to be away from any weather conditions that are going to affect the local weather right off the coast. So I want to be as far away as I can get but not too far along because I want to get the maximum eclipse time and be in the best position meteorologically. Speaker 2: So how long did the eclipse last? Speaker 1: Six minutes, a little over six minutes. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, and what knowledge can we gain from solar eclipse? Speaker 1: Well we can gain accurate measurements of the orbital velocity of the moon, orbital velocity of the earth, and we can also study the sun by looking at flares and prominences; studying the corona actually, really is the thing that we can, at that time. I mean we had corona grass but we can still do better in studies of the corona of the sun if we block the sun with the moon using big instruments on the surface of the earth. Nowadays we do that with telescopes in space, and we no longer have a need to depend on solar eclipses to show us the corona. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At that time we could still do that. Speaker 2: All right. So, interesting that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So that's 1999. Speaker 2: --All right. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]. Story_ID: 673509 Speaker 1: Then the next big thing that comes along in 2001 is that Dennis Wint becomes the president and the CEO of The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and that's a good thing for me. That's a good thing because as I said those nefarious elements that were responsible for my demise were now leaving The Franklin Institute. Speaker 2: Now was there anything done while they were here that really gets--was hard to take. I mean did they do something that was--I guess create a barrier between the public and the Institute in terms of education? Speaker 1: No, not at all, not at all. They did not do anything to impede the mission of The Franklin Institute. It's just the way they went about management. That's--there are nice ways to do things and there are not so nice ways to do things. And in my eyes they had chosen a path that I didn't think was the best. Speaker 2: You mentioned you lost your--your whole staff turned over for the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 1: Yes. Sure the planetarium staff was--I had assembled an incredible team of talented people to produce planetarium shows. Well they took the team apart. They moved this person out to this department, that person out to that department, moved another person out this department, another person out to this department in the name of decentralization. We can use their talents better if we spread them around the museum. Yes, but what you've done is you've taken a really good team that produces excellent planetarium shows and you've now dispersed that team in ways that they can't work together as they used to before. When you have a really good team, you keep that team together, because the team does well together. When you disperse that team, they no longer can do as well as they did before. So that team was completely dismantled. We no longer have a production team to create planetarium shows. One would say perhaps they were seeing the future of how shows were developed. I would not agree with that because, you know, I have a different idea of how I think things should have been managed. But the attempt was to completely devalue, I believe the attempt was to completely devalue the planetarium from any position of prominence. When you look back at the history of visual presentation here at The Franklin Institute, the planetarium reigned as the supreme theater of visual presentation right up until the day the IMAX theater opened. When the IMAX theater opened all that attention shifted to the IMAX theater, all of it. So the planetarium is no longer seen, at that time, was no longer being seen as a viable competitor to IMAX. Part of my work in the planetarium these days is to restore some of that. Story_ID: 673510 Speaker 1: Here's Dennis Wint, here's the new director [of The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], he's someone who respects you and tried to hire you at a certain point, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Right. One of the things that Dennis--that I really have to thank Dennis for and that he's done is, Dennis has always had a deep interest in developing the full capabilities of the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And in 2001 he approved a plan to renovate, to completely renovate the theater, and I was put in charge of the project of complete demolition and complete reconstruction of the theater, which I did in one years' time. We closed the theater on January 3, 2001, and reopened the theater in October of 2001. We completely demolished the planetarium theater and completely rebuilt it; brand new everything, brought it back up into the modern version of the planetarium, which is a visual presentation theater. Speaker 1: It sounds like you had really good contractors on this project? Speaker 2: I did. I had two teams working on this that managed to pull off the job. So we had the internal construction and then we had the planetarium outfitting done of the equipment and such. Speaker 1: It also seems like you had a really good idea, of what you wanted. Speaker 2: I knew exactly what I wanted. I'd been in the planetarium business for, by 2001, I'd been in the planetarium business for nearly twenty years, and I knew planetariums inside and out. So I knew exactly what I wanted. So it was an easy project for me to do. But Dennis supported that, and Dennis supported that in a number of ways; he made it possible; first of all, he made it possible for me to travel widely to see planetarium facilities in other parts of the country and other parts of the worlds to imagine what we could have and what we should do. He gave me the latitude to create the planetarium theater in the way that I thought it should be created. And even following that, he has given the latitude and provided the support, the funding, to continue building onto the planetarium to raise it up to the level where it is now. So all during that time, I've continued doing exhibit development work, I've continued doing the planetarium programmed development work, Dennis has continued to support all that I've done in both of those fields. Story_ID: 673511 Speaker 1: And I've also greatly expanded the science commentary work that I've been doing out in the public on various news programs where I've been seen. Speaker 2: Right. I know I first saw you, to my knowledge, on, 'Countdown with Keith Olbermann' back in 2007, I believe. Speaker 1: Yes. I actually started out doing work for MSNBC in about 2004, 2005, and I received a call from a producer for the MSN--the nightly news, I'm sorry the 'MSNBC Nightly News with Brian Williams' [sic. 'NBC Nightly News with Brian Williams'], and I was asked if I would occasionally, you know, I was asked occasionally to come on and provide comment about some astronomy event or space science event, and Brian was the host of the show. When Brian left that program to move to the national spot on NBC evening news, my work with him came to an end. That producer then moved on to a new program, and that program was one called 'Countdown' with this guy, Keith Olbermann. Well, sure enough they needed somebody for astronomy content, and the producer, Katie [ph.], called me. It was at that point that I started working with Keith Olbermann, and I worked with Keith for the next three years. And Keith and I had a great relationship. I believe by the time Keith left MSNBC, I had appeared on his program thirty times. But it wasn't until he left MSNBC and went to Current [Current TV] that I actually met him. I never met him in person, but we developed this great relationship, you know, through the camera, if you will. But it worked out really, really, well. We had a good time and I really enjoyed working with him, and apparently they enjoyed working with me because I always got first refusal to do a spot. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I accommodated that a much as I could. Speaker 2: What were some of the phenomenon or observations that you reported or were asked to comment on Keith's show? Speaker 1: Everything. It ranged everywhere from an astronomical phenomenon like a comet or a meteor or a solar eclipse to things on the space science side of why is space station important, what's going on with the shuttle program, what are we doing investigating Mars, what kind of equipment are we using there, do we think that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is pursuing the course it should pursue, are the funds being spent appropriately, should we spend more money on this, what's the future of this space program. All those sorts of things were open items for us to talk about. And so I would be called on to comment specific topics in any of those lines. Story_ID: 673512 Speaker 1: Now in 2006, you also supervised the renovation of the Bloom Observatory [Joel N. Bloom Observatory, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] too? Speaker 2: Yes, in 2006, right in the midst of all the other stuff, I was actually completing--that year 2006, I was doing two renovations. I was doing a renovation--installation of new equipment in the planetarium [Fels Planetarium, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], actually; new planetarium equipment was being installed. I was doing that, and I was also renovating the Bloom Observatory. This, by the way, was the third time I renovated the observatory. I've renovated the observatory once in 1985, once again in about 1995 and again here in 2006. And for the first two renovations, I completely disassembled, cleaned up and reassembled the twenty-four inch Fecker [J.W. Fecker, Inc.] reflector telescope. But in the 2006 renovation, I completely removed the Fecker telescope and replaced with four eight inch reflecting telescopes to boost the number of telescopes we had available. But I also supervised the very first complete disassembly and cleanup and reassembly of the Zeiss refractor [Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany]. It has never been disassembled completely before. I had done work on it and had disassembled it partially, all the optics and some of the tube works, but never had it been completely torn down to the base and removed. But I hired two gentlemen who really knew their business, and I had them completely tear the telescope down, they took it off to a shop, cleaned everything, renovated everything, rebuilt the dry system, cleaned the optics and put it all back together again as if it were new. Speaker 1: I was wondering like who would do--who do you call on to do that kind of job. Can you find them in the phone book, or do you have to-- Speaker 2: No. Through some of my early associations, I knew a guy name Chris Ray. Chris Ray runs a business of building small museum exhibits. But Chris had also, over the last sort of like fifteen years or so, become very adept at renovating older telescopes, older classic instruments. Chris has renovated almost every classic university telescope this side of the Mississippi River. He works with a former professor of mechanical engineering from Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] name Fred Orthlieb. Fred knows the mechanics intimately because of his mechanical engineering background. Chris knows how to do the renovation because of his work with exhibits and also his knowledge of optics. So with these two together, it was the perfect pair to do this very, very delegate work. I had originally thought about, or planned to send the instrument back to the parent company in Germany. I had been to their facility about a year or so before and had considered the possibility of sending it back there, but I thought again about that and realizing that I could save a tremendous amount if I could have it done here in the U.S. But could I find someone and Chris Ray came to mind. So I hired Chris and Fred to do the work for us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was my third renovation of the observatory. Story_ID: 673513 Speaker 1: So, as we approach the present day, what have been some of the developments at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] here and how do you play the role? Speaker 2: Well, there have been so many developments here in the recent years at Franklin Institute that I'm very pleased to be part of. [HistoryMaker] Frederic Bertley as vice president of the Innovation Center and the Benjamin Franklin Memorial [Benjamin Franklin National Memorial], has really made a concerted effort to expand the role or the visibility of African Americans in science here at The Franklin Institute. And I've been fortunate to be able to work with Frederick as he's done that. And he has done a smashing job, just a fabulous job of highlighting the work of African American scientists, and scientists of color, both men and women. One of those programs is called The Color of Science, really you could say is our flagship program about people of color in science. He's now exported that program to other colleges and universities around the country. And here at The Franklin Institute every year, I've been fortunate enough to host a panel discussion among three distinguished scientists every year for the last three years. That program called The Color of Science, the program is opened to the public on a Friday evening; I'll interview the scientists and then open the floor to questions from the audience. So that people can see how science is done and can see how people of color have been an integral part of the development of science here in the U.S. and are so currently. And also talk about some of the challenges and differences that they've seen as they've been in the science community. Speaker 1: Who have been some of your guest? Speaker 2: Let's see. Chad Jenkins [HistoryMaker Odest Jenkins] (coughs) excuse me, Chad Jenkins, Ed Tunstel [HistoryMaker Edward Tunstel], [HistoryMaker] James West, to name a few of the scientists that have been part of the program. It was particularly gratifying to be able to interview and speak with James West, primarily because many people don't realize that your cell phone couldn't be what it is without his co-invention of the electric microphone. Any device that has a tiny microphone in it can be what it is because of James West's work in creating the electric microphone. So, he is a--you could call him a modern-day Edison [Thomas Edison], but I think his work has changed the world to the same degree that Edison's work changed the world. We now have world-wide communication in our pocket because of James West's work. Speaker 1: And Ed Tunstel helped developed some of the robotics for the Opportunity and some of the other rovers on Mars. Speaker 2: Yes. He developed some of the mechanics and also some of the software for the rovers, for the first set of rovers on Mars. Yeah, he's done fantastic work. His work sits on another planet. I don't think you can get better than that. Story_ID: 673514 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just giving you an observation during the break that a lot of kids observe for Black History Week [Black History Month], I guess, that all black scientists are dead, and they don't know any. Speaker 2: They don't know any contemporary black scientists. I've had a really wonderful experience that I've been trying to bring to The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] again. Three years ago I engaged in a conversation with a gentleman name Garland Thompson [Garland L. Thompson] about the possibility of The Franklin Institute hosting or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] hosting the Black Engineer of the Year Awards. Thomson describes this as an amazing program in which you see so many African Americans in the engineering sciences, and I thought it would be appropriate to have the celebration here in Philadelphia. So Garland and I worked together to convince the leaders and organizers that the program should be held here in Philadelphia. I also managed to convince them to hold their Emerald Honors awards dinner at The Franklin Institute two years ago. And the reason why I want to see this program happen more often here at The Franklin Institute is because this was the first time I've seen four hundred engineers of color in one place at one time. It's a stunning view; it's a stunning view because I can't think of a place, we're not just kids, but any of us have seen such a collection of African Americans of such high achievement in one place at one time. It really presses home the fact that we are everywhere. We are deep in the sciences. You may not be aware of it because we aren't getting much play. You don't see us very much as highlighted as being involved in these sciences. I'm not sure if that's recognition of the fact that we are where we've always belonged or if--or that we're being ignored. But the fact of the matter is that we are there. We are deeply in the sciences making all sorts of incredible contributions that history has yet to bring to the forefront, but we need to do a lot more about it. Garland has written a book entitled 'Unheralded But Unbowed' ['Unheralded but Unbowed: Black Scientists and Engineers who Changed the World,' Garland L. Thompson] and it's both a historical and a contemporary look at African Americans in science. So he talks about some of these historical figures, but he also points to so many contemporary figures that are highly successful in engineering and in science. It's a book I think should be in every classroom in the school districts across the country. And I think the program itself, Black Engineer of the Year is a program that we should be able to see so we can clearly understand exactly how much of a presence we have. Speaker 1: Are you going to get it? Are you going to get the award here? Speaker 2: We've done it here once; I want to do it again. I think we should do it every year, I think we should do it every year. But I also want to publicize it more. It's an amazing experience to see that caliber of people all together in one place. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is, once again, the book is 'Unheralded but Unbowed' by-- Speaker 2: Written by Garland Thompson, yes. Speaker 1: --Garland Thompson, okay. Story_ID: 673515 Speaker 1: What else. Now I know you've been interacting with the Tuskegee Airmen of -- Speaker 2: Oh yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: Yes, my wife [Linda Carroll-Pitts] introduced me to the Tuskegee Airmen about a decade ago, and for the last three years, I have--I have been president of the local chapter of the Tuskegee Airmen Incorporated [Tuskegee Airmen, Inc.]. It's been a fantastic experience. These gentlemen have become my latest role models. They are brilliant, determined, accomplished; they all think they are fighter pilots, every one of them. In order to become a Tuskegee Airman, in order to be selected for their program, you had to be the upper echelon of the cream of the selection process. So every one of these gentlemen is an A type personality who believes they are the best, better than anybody else, better than any of their peers. So, they really are highly accomplished and are great role models even to this day, even though many of them are in their late eighties and early nineties, they are all still remarkable gentlemen, all remarkably accomplished. Speaker 1: Who are some of them that are here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now? Speaker 2: Let's see. Jim Williams [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], Eugene Richardson, Bert Levy [Bertram Levy], John Harrison [John L. Harrison, Jr.]. I had the privilege of knowing Henry Moore [Henry L. Moore] and Luther Smith. Luther Smith was a fighter pilot who was shot down over Yugoslavia at the end of his tour of duty at the end of his 133rd mission; spent six months in a German prison camp, and because he was a captain, when the doctors came into his room to examine him, they saluted him as if he were a German officer. So they would raise their hand to him and say, (speaking German) "Seig heil," because he was recognized as an officer. And, I also had the distinct pleasure to know Roscoe Draper. Many people may not know the name Roscoe Draper but they should. The reason why is because Roscoe Draper was hired by the U.S. Army Air Corps to train those that eventually became Tuskegee Airmen through the Tuskegee program. Roscoe already had a pilot's license and was an instructor at the time the program began in 1939. Roscoe is still around these days, in great shape. I believe Roscoe is ninety-four now; lives here in the Philadelphia area, and I can't tell you what an honor and pleasure it is to know these gentlemen, because they are real--what we would call real men. They understand what responsibility is, they take their responsibility seriously, they know how to get things done, and I would not tangle with them even in their nineties for a minute, because they can run rings around me without any problem at all. Story_ID: 673516 Speaker 1: I would just guess you were involved in a lot of civic activities in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], being a spokesperson here at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and it's probably a lot of demands on your time within the city to get you to speak here and there? Speaker 2: Well I've served over the last several years on the board of trustees at Widener University [Chester, Pennsylvania], I'm now beginning my third term on the board of trustees at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York], my alma mater. I've also just started an $800,000 NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] grant funded project to take astronomy education and activities out to community centers around the community with the intent to reach thirty community centers, 780 unique families and we're giving everybody telescopes and instructions how to use them in hopes of connecting them back to NASA's website and the activity that NASA has available for them, all that is to introduce kids in Philadelphia to the night sky and possibly open their eyes to new career possibilities that they may not have known about or considered before, so there's those kinds of things. And other than that, you know, I try to keep a low profile. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you reminded me of a question that slipped by me. When we were discussing NASA, I think it was at the end of one of our segments. Who are some of your, I guess, friends among the astronauts or scientists at NASA, because you said you cultivated a friendship with them? Speaker 2: Sure. Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford], Winston Scott [HistoryMaker Captain Winston Scott], Jim Basian [ph.], Christopher Ferguson, George "Pinky" Nelson [George Nelson], and others, I can go on. All that I've worked with, all that have invited me to space shuttle launches, all that I've done other kinds of programs with, I'm sure I'm forgetting somebody that's not going to like it (laughter) if I don't remember them. Story_ID: 673517 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a good relationship with Charles Bolden [HistoryMaker Major General Charles Bolden, Jr.]? Did you know him? He's the current director--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I've only met, I've only met Charlie Bolden once. And that's when I was on my way to--did we talk about the star party on the White House [Washington, D.C.] lawn? Speaker 1: No. We better talk about it after this. What year is this, and what happened? Speaker 2: This was in 2010. September of 2010 I receive a call from a friend of mine, an astronomer who works at the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], I want to say, Stephen Pompea. Stephen Pompea called me early September, and he said, "I wonder if you'd be available to help out with a program next month in Washington, D.C.?" And I said, "What kind of program is it?" And he said, "Well it's kind of a star party." I said, "Sure Steve, what can I do to help?" And he said, "Well, we need somebody who knows how to run a telescope, who really knows how to run a telescope in an urban area, under an urban sky, and you're like the best person I know who can do that; you have tons of experience doing that, so you're the best person I can think of for this." I said, "Well, great, sure, I'll be happy to. What do I have to do?" He said, "Well, I'll have to ask you not to say anything about this, and if you say anything about this, we'll yank your name out of it right away. But we're going to do a star party at the White House, and we need somebody who can run a telescope without fail in an urban situation." I said, "Oh, sure, that's not a problem. I can do that, what do I have to do?" He said, "Well, can you pack up and send a telescope down here right away." I said, "Sure." And he said, "I'll let you know; in a couple of days, I'll call you back and let you know what the details are." So one thing leads to another, and we get to this date in October, and I sent my telescope down, I go down to--I go down to D.C., and I go onto the White House grounds at about four o'clock in the afternoon, and standing in front of me in the line, you know, to show their credentials is Charlie Bolden, so I introduce myself to him. Of course he doesn't know who I am, but I introduce myself to him, and tell him how much I appreciate what he's doing and so on and so forth like that. So we get into the White House and my telescope's been unloaded, and I set my telescope up in a spot that I think is going to be appropriate. A couple of guys come walking along, you know, there's a group of other people out with portable planetariums and such. You know it's going to be a star party for about two hundred middle school kids out on the White House lawn. Two guys come toward me, and the one guy says to me, "How quickly can you disassemble and reassemble this telescope, you know, set it up for use?" And I said, "In about five minutes." He said, "Really?" "Yeah, sure; what do you need?" He said, well, I may come back. About twenty minutes later he comes back and he says, "Are you sure you can do that?" "Of course." He said, "Well, later on this evening I might ask you to take that down and set it up over there, right near that doorway," and it's the south door way, south portico exit from the White House. "Okay, I can do that." Story_ID: 673518 Speaker 1: So, just before I leave from the--for the evening, just before I leave to go back to my hotel room, get a little bite to eat to come back at 6:30 in the evening to start the program, the guy comes back and he says, "Okay, you're going to be in." "What are you talking about?" "Well, the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is going to look through your telescope. He and his wife and the kids are going to look through your telescope. We're going to set it up right there; it's going to be right next to the podium; he's going to give a presentation about the event here; he's going to talk about this and about this and about this, and then he's going to come over and he's going to look through your telescope. So what I want you to do is when you come back, I want you to set the telescope up right there, and I want you to point it at this object." And the object had been selected by the president's chief of the Office of Space Technology and Science [U.S. House Committee on Science, Space and Technology]. And I said to the guy, "No we're not going to look at that object, because you can't see that object here in downtown Washington [D.C.]; that's ridiculous, we're not going to do that." And he said, "Well, we have to have something that's over on this side of the sky." At which point I realize that it's a photo op for the president to be looking through the telescope. So I selected a different object to observe, one that I thought that they would be able to see and would actually be able to comment on. So sure enough I come back, the guy says bring your telescope. So I bring the telescope, sit it in that location, the president comes out, does a presentation, he looks through the telescope, his wife looks through the telescope, and then he proceeds to go out around the field and talk to the kids and see some of the other stuff. So I go back and I stand by the telescope, standing right there; people come by and look; half an hour later the president comes back by, and I say, "Mr. President have you seen Jupiter through my telescope?" He says, "No, I haven't," and he comes over and he introduces himself (laughing), shakes my hand, and we're talking about the telescope. And he says, "Michelle [Michelle Obama], come take a look at this." She comes over, I greet her, she looks through the telescope. She calls the girls over. Sasha [Sasha Obama] and Malia [Malia Obama] come over with their [maternal] grandmother [Marian Shields Robinson]. So Sasha and Malia are there, grandmother has looked through, the president has already turned his back, he's talking to somebody else, Michelle is sort of off to the side; the two girls and the grandmother. The grandmother has sort of turned away and the girls are there with me, and Sasha is tall enough to look through the telescope but Malia isn't. So now I've been doing star parties for decades when somebody is too short to look through the telescope, there's two things you could do, you could adjust the telescope or you can pick them up to look through the telescope. My natural inclination, knowing I'm not going to be able to adjust the telescope, is I'm going to pick her up. So I go to pick her up and just before I grab her to pick her up, I go (gestures), because I recall earlier in the evening, off in the shadows, I've seen these guys dressed in like gray leotard type suits with machine guns, and I'm thinking, I'm just about to pick up the president's daughter; what's going to happen to me here. So I sort of like did a quick check and then I reached around her waist picked her up and held her up to look through the telescope, it worked out just fine. So I had talked to, you know, while they were there, I talked to them for a few minutes and, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So you had Jupiter up there? Speaker 1: I actually had a different target up for them. I had an object called the Double Double [Epsilon Lyrae], which is a double star in the constellation Lyra over on the western side of the sky at that time, which is perfectly positioned because it was pointed in this direction, the news crew was out there, so they could take a picture at a ninety degree angle of him and his wife looking through the telescope, so I set it up like that; it met their objectives and it met my objectives too, so. Speaker 2: All right. That's a good story. Story_ID: 673519 Speaker 1: Now at Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where--what's the future looking like? Speaker 2: Well the future--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: For you and the institute? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, you know, I'll probably stay at The Franklin Institute as long as I like. I am now back producing planetarium shows, I'm now producing full dome shows with the best show production team in the world, a group of folks I've known for a long time, and now we're now producing shows that will be distributed worldwide. I expect that to continue. I have the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] grant funded program that I will complete in another three years, but I hope to reapply for funds in the future so that I can package this program and distribute it nationwide. I think it's exactly the kind of program that can be used in any community, anywhere. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--let me just go back to that for a second. So, you're providing like, through this program telescopes and instructions for kids to observe? Speaker 2: Right. What we do is we provide training for workshop instructors at community centers for their kids to assemble and disassemble a portable telescope, a really good telescope that can be broken down into its individual components and reassembled easily by any kid. And the objective is to get the kids to not only understand how the telescope works, but to learn what they can see where they live. It's reinforcing the idea that science is wherever you are, and just because you live in an urban neighborhood where there's plenty of street lights at night, it's no excuse for not understanding how the night sky works. That's no excuse for you not realizing that you too can have career in astronomy and space science; it's no excuse for you not knowing that there's an enormous panoply of careers that you can pursue if you just know about them. So we provide the telescopes, the tripods, the resources, the books, everything; everything, everything they need in order to make this program work in the communities. We will also help them with star parties in the communities, we'll print information, we'll do everything we need for them to able to do these workshops in the communities, again, in an effort to help kids realize that right where you live, you can do astronomy. This is exactly what I did when I was growing up. I knew I could do astronomy right where I lived. Speaker 1: What's been the reception? Speaker 2: It's been fantastic; the reception has been marvelous. We've done a year of programming so far. I'm just about to start the next cohort in this year, 2013. I have eight slots, I have fifteen applicants for eight slots. I'm going to have to push some people off to the next cohort next year, and I don't see any lack of people lining up to participate in the program. Speaker 1: Okay. What else. I went back to that before you got finished. Speaker 2: I know that I will work to expand this program, and I also hope to--the other thing I hope to be able to do is to try to produce some more large-scale television programming in astronomy or space science. But I also am very much interested in trying to create a program--I'd like to put together a number of other African American men in this community to create a program of career experiences for African American kids. And what I mean by that is I want to take kids to places where they can see some really exotic careers; take them to see what people do in work places of really incredible places to go see. I want to take them to Goddard Space Flight Center [Greenbelt, Maryland] and see what engineers do, I want to take them to international airports and see what pilots and aircraft mechanics do, I want to take them to all kinds of incredible experiences like that so they can see what the opportunities are for them out there rather than just what they see in their neighborhood. It's expansion, it's opening doors, it's all of those kinds of things, I want to try to create a program like that. Story_ID: 673520 Speaker 1: And I also look forward to expanding the role that I have as a science communicator in the national media. Speaker 2: Okay. Are you a regular contributor to any shows that are currently--I know you've been on 'The Colbert Report,' I know 'Countdown' ['Countdown with Keith Olbermann'] is not in existence anymore, but what other programs? Speaker 1: The programs that really stand up in people's minds right now are the 'The Colbert Report,' I've also done my 'CBS Sunday Morning,' I think I've been on '60 minutes,' I did MSNBC with Keith Olbermann for a very long time, it was three years, I've also done 'Late Night with Craig Ferguson' ['The Late Late Night Show with Craig Ferguson'] twice, and that's been very well received, thank goodness. But I've done a lot for CNN, CNN International, Fox, NBC, ABC, CBS; I've done stuff for all the national networks and a few internationals as well, and I look forward to expanding that role if I can as a science communicator. Speaker 2: Okay. Now your path to being the science communicator that you are today was one that I don't think that anyone could, you know, imagine at the time or figured out, it kind of happened because you came into--you were prepared and the institution was prepared to bring you on, but what would you advise for people who want to be science communicators today? Speaker 1: The advice I would have for people who want to become science communicators today is to learn the science, learn something about communication and put yourself in places where you can actually do that. You know, working at a science museum is not one of those career paths that people would automatically think of as a possibility as a, you know, a lifelong career, but in the time that I've come along, this has become much more possible and I've actually done a lot to create these kinds of positions actually when I really think about it because I, you know, the position that I have here as chief astronomer, I've created that position, I've made that position what it is and the fact that it has the science communication part on it is something that Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] has never had before to the level that I've taken this. So I've also created that piece as well. So someone who's interested in science communication can come to it this way. And the thing about it is that it's more than just knowing the science, it's the ability to connect with people and to explain science in a way in which they find it palatable and the way that they can accept it rather than me giving to them what I want them to have or what I think they should have. It's about sensing what it is that your audience wants and being able to present it to them. So I think experience with public speaking is incredibly important. I got my experience from doing lots of programs in Zion Baptist Church [Zion Baptist Church of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], at the boys' day and the men's days and all that sort of stuff, standing up to give presentations in school all those kinds of things. And that really did, you know, at least start to get me used to doing this, and that's a very--that a very important experience. But if you don't get that experience somehow, if you don't take advantage of opportunities when it comes up then you never get used to being able to speak in front of a large audience, and that's really what you're doing. If you decide to become a science communicator in the video world then you're talking to large audiences and you have to be able to understand the dynamics of how that relationship works, and you have to be able to take advantage of that and use that so that you can communicate what you want to communicate. Story_ID: 673521 Speaker 1: What--we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think my biggest hope for the African American community is that we gain a better appreciation of who we really are. We have a tremendous history and legacy of accomplishment on this planet. It's unmatched by almost any other group on this planet. Yet we allow ourselves to remain saddled by and mired in our early history in this country. It was a terrible time for us to be enslaved people, but we can grow beyond that and we need to grow beyond that recognizing that history, but recognizing that history in the context of our entire history on the planet. We need that so that our kids will better understand what great strength they have as their history, so that they can clearly understand what they can achieve going forward. It's always said that you can't know where you're going if you don't know where you've come from. Unfortunately, we tie ourselves to where we come from too much of the time only to the four hundred years of our history as enslaved people, but our history goes so much far back beyond that with such incredible accomplishments. That needs to completely wrap around this brief period in our history in this country. And we need to look around us and see what accomplishments we make and see what contributions we bring and we need to use that as our stepping stone to push our children forward into the future for the betterment and the accomplishment of us in the country going forward. If we don't do that, if we remain tied to that brief but terrible period then that will always define us and it shouldn't always define us. We should be defined by all the rest of the wonderfulness of our culture and our contribution. We need to let that go and we need to move on; don't let people forget, but we need to use all of that history as a stepping stone for our kids to realize what their potential is. Story_ID: 673522 Speaker 1: Yeah, we're just continuing the discussion before. Speaker 2: If we look at where we are right now at this time, you know, it's (pause)--yes, there have been great accomplishments made by some of us, by many of us, but when I look at where the kids are in our culture and how they relate to their history, what it says to me is they don't know enough about their history to appreciate who they are and where they come from. So that's why I think understanding their history is so important. That history gives us--can give us pride about who we are as a culture that blip of four hundred years was a nasty period, but we are so much more, I mean, again we're so much more than that, but our kids don't know that today, because our kids don't know the full history of who we are. They only know the high points of what they see in the news today for the low points of what we see in the news today. And, yes, we have an African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], but there's so much in the news about us that is defamatory and derogatory and just bad. It would give the impression that there is no great accomplishment other than sports and entertainment, some in academia, but certainly not enough to warrant pursuing a course like that, you know, in a great sense. But if these kids knew much more about their history, they'd understand what great heredity they have, what great genes they have. And it's those genes that are the basis from which they can choose to accomplish anything they want to do, but I think that they don't know that enough. Story_ID: 673523 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently or go back and change if you could? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, actually, there is. I have a fabulous career here [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I've had a wonderful time; I've done great stuff, great experiences. If I could go back in time, back to about the mid-1960s and course correct, the thing I would course correct for is I would join the [U.S.] military, I would join the [U.S.] Air Force, I would have become a fighter pilot, I would have applied for the astronaut program, I would have done everything I could have done to become an astronaut, there's no question about that. I certainly would have done that. I would have chosen a career in aviation. But I didn't know anyone in aviation when I was growing up, no one. If I knew then what I know now, there's no question that I would be in an aviation career. I love aviation, I love the idea of space flight. And if I got a call today, if I got a call today from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] asking if would fly on a space shuttle that they've taken out of moth balls last week, they're not sure it's really going to work, but, you know, I could take a trip anyway, I'd certainly go. Speaker 1: Okay. Have you talked to Charles Harris [sic. HistoryMaker Dr. Bernard Harris, Jr.] and Bolden, Charles Bolden [HistoryMaker Major General Charles Bolden, Jr.] about their trips? Speaker 2: Yes, I have. I've talked to all the astronauts. All the astronauts that I've spoken to, I've talked to them about what the experience is like. Mae Jemison, I've talked to Mae Jemison, I've talked to--I've talked to Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford] any number of times about the experience, I've talked to Winston Scott [HistoryMaker Captain Winston Scott] about the experience, I've talked to all of them about what it's like to live and work in space. And I still love the idea, despite whatever the discomforts are, I still think it would be the ultimate thing to do. Story_ID: 673524 Speaker 1: Now, likewise, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy, I guess, in science education? Speaker 2: Well, I think the legacy for me in science education or what I see as a legacy are those kids that have grown up into adults and are now pursuing a career in some science that, see me someplace or meet me someplace and say to me, "Because of you I chose this career path." I've had that happen a couple of times, and it's a really moving experience, it tells me that I've done something positive and I may not have been aware of it. The thing that I'm always trying to do is I'm trying to reach those kids who are like who I was when I was a kid trying to figure out how do I express my interest in science. I try to reach as many kids as I possibly can, not with the idea to identify those who might turn into astronauts or astronomers, but I want to reassure or excite that one student that if they love science, they should pursue it because they can have a great life and a great career, and they shouldn't feel strange or weird or odd about it at all, but that I'm here to show them that you can have a great life as a scientist. So I'm hoping that my legacy turns out to be that I have encouraged hundreds of kids to pursue careers in science. Story_ID: 673525 Speaker 1: I need to ask you about Neil deGrasse Tyson because he's out here a lot too on television explaining science-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and runs an observatory-- Speaker 2: A planetarium, correct. Speaker 1: --planetarium in New York [Hayden Planetarium, New York, New York], so do you know him? Speaker 2: Isn't it amazing that at this time in history, there are two prominent intelligent articulate African Americans in astronomy on the public stage as the major contributors to any conversation about something in astronomy and space science? Isn't that amazing, it's great. I know Neil, I've worked with Neil off and on; we've done a couple of things together, and I think Neil is a fantastic explainer. I think he does a wonderful job of exciting people about science and moving their emotions about science. So that's why I think it's fantastic, it's just wonderful. Who could have ever predicted that something like this would happen. Speaker 1: I know it's impressive to me, I mean, I love to see this when I turn on TV to see you or he or, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. And there's actually an instance when Neil and I have done something together on a national footing. We both worked on a promotion for a PBS [Public Broadcasting System] program on astronomy, and we shop the promotion here at the WHYY [WHYY-TV] studios in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So we're in the studio together, and the funny thing is that while we're in the studio together, a couple of things happened, one of the things that happened was that you know, that the camera was set up on a tripod had a teleprompter on the top, and something must have been odd about how the tripod legs were spread out because unfortunately, the thing flipped over, the teleprompter, the whole camera came crashing to the ground and broke the teleprompter. So there's something funny about that, and it got Neil and I singing a song that we both remember from our childhood. And we were singing it together. Unfortunately, it's not on tape, or maybe fortunately, it's not on tape. And it's the song, it's the kids' song, 'I'm a little Tea Pot.' I don't know if you've ever heard that song, you know. (Singing) "I'm a little teapot short and stout, here is my handle, here is my spout." I was just doing something over at the studio earlier this--late last week, and the guy that shot the piece that I was in, remembered Neil and I acting that out while we were in the studio waiting to replace the camera and the teleprompter. That would have been something to have on video. Speaker 1: Yeah, I haven't sung that since kindergarten. That observation led to the singing of that song? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was something about that that led to that, but I think that I'm so pleased that both of us are here at the same time and that both of us can occupy this space, you know, in whatever similar or different ways we do so and that we both have this prominent role as the spokespersons for astronomy and space science. I think it's remarkable that that can be. Speaker 1: Right. At the national television level now, I guess, it may be only can be, I'm thinking Bill Nye, Ira Flatow, there are other people out here but the group is very small. Speaker 2: The group is very small. Speaker 1: So, do you ever think that considering how privilege a position it is to hold? Speaker 2: You know, it's really an interesting thing about that for me, and I think about this frequently. I clearly understand that it's a very small pool. I understand how fortunate I am to have the opportunity that I do have to speak to the nation on these issues, or to be asked to comment on these issues by the networks. I try to keep all that stuff in perspective, and what I mean by that is I like to keep it in perspective in that I'm appreciative for every opportunity that I have. In a number of instances those opportunities could evaporate in a moment at a moment's notice. And I for no reason try to fool myself that this should continue for any particular reason. I mean I clearly understand that I'm good. I assume that I'm good because I get called back to do it over and over and over again. But I like to keep that kind of stuff in check. I like to keep my ego in check about that because I know where I'm from I know what can do, I'm happy to be able to do it, but I don't want to get carried away, you know, thinking that it isn't a great privilege for me to have the opportunity to do this. I welcome the opportunity, and I look forward to creating more opportunities to do this. But I'm a guy from 17th [17th Street] and Pacific Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that has made good, and that's a great and wonderful thing. And I don't want anybody to get the idea that I'm from someplace else and that they can achieve what I've achieved or more. But I do think about how privileged I am to have the opportunity to do what I do, and it is rare. I really do believe it's rare. Story_ID: 673526 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you something about your family. You remarried in '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, tell us how you met your wife [Linda Carroll-Pitts]? Speaker 2: I met my wife here at The Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] actually. She was the chief of staff for the commission of recreation here in the city [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and an ex official member of the board of trustees. And while I was vice president here at Franklin, we met each other here at board meetings, and we struck up a friendship and developed a relationship from there. So I met her in 1994, nineteen ninety- no, I'm sorry, I met her in 1992, and we struck up a friendship and began dating and married in 1997. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have any children? Speaker 2: Yes, I do have children, I have 450,000 of them, and they go home at the end of every day. No, we don't have children. We have so much fun doing all the stuff that we do that we haven't been able to fit that in. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now is there--what did your parents feel about your career? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, my mother [Shirley DuPree Pitts] didn't live long enough to see my career come to its full fruition. My father [Cornelius Pitts] did get to see some of that, but I think what my mother did see--I know what my mother did see, she was extremely proud of, extremely proud, and my father, the same way, without any question. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything else I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think we covered most of the general stuff and a lot of the specific stuff here and there. But, no, I think that's--that pretty much covers it. Story_ID: 673527 Speaker 1: Here's a question that occurred to me before I ask my last question. What do you think about the state of STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education in the United States at this point? Speaker 2: Well, my personal opinion is that STEM education is extraordinarily important. So, let me go back and give it a more general view of that. I think that state of education in the United States overall is in very, very bad shape. I think it needs to be--I think the whole system needs to be torn down and rebuilt. I don't know how you do that. So I don't have a remedy for that, but I think the way in which we go about teaching kids today is no longer the most productive way to do that. It doesn't recognize that kids learn differently, that many kids learn in different ways, it doesn't recognize that kids have different aptitudes, and that those aptitudes are the places where you can have the most effective teaching if you can find out what that aptitude is. I don't like it that the system is not--does not integrate things very well, does not integrate the subjects very well. I don't like that the system doesn't point out what the goal of getting an education really is. You know we always point to the fact that if you want to have a great career, you need to be very well education. Well, we don't connect those things together well enough in this country for kids to understand that what they do in the seventh grade is going to affect where they end up when they're twenty-two or twenty-three. I think we need to do a much better job of that. Having said that I think the teachers are trying to do the very best job they can. I think teachers are wonderful people and I think they need to be paid better than anybody else in the society for what we ask them to do. We always say our children are our future. Why do we pay teachers minimum wage if that's the case. That's a ridiculous premise. Now, on top of that, I think the need for STEM education is paramount, paramount because if we don't teach our kids these STEM issues, these STEM subjects, we're going to find out that one of the legs of the stool that this country is built on is going to collapse because we don't have enough scientists in the pipeline to be able to sustain this technological existence we've built up around us. So without that, what then happens it becomes an issue of national security. We talk about this off and on in different places, people think that I talk about the need for space exploration to encourage us to have astronauts floating around in space because it's fun and that's not the case at all. The reason why we need a strong and robust space program is because it directs technological development in the country. And with that technological development, that helps to keep this country safe on a national security level. We're number one in technological development application and advancement then what happens is we happen to be in a good secure position. The moment we lose leadership in that area, other countries around the world may get the idea that we've become weaker, and some might think, North Korea might be one of these. They might think that they could attack us, and we don't need that. Not only do we not want that, but we don't need that. So we need to keep a strong technological footing in this country to sustain what we have. That means our children in our schools need to have good STEM education so they can consider pursuing these technological career paths. It also won't hurt in any other area they choose to pursue a career. So I think STEM is critically important, critically important, not to get kids to think that they all must become engineers or scientists, but without that strong discipline of how to do the mathematics and how to do the science, you can't be the best you could be at all these other things you might aspire to be because science and math are involved in anything you want to do. If you want to be the best at that, it won't hurt you to be the best at the science and the math behind those issues. So I think it's critically important that we figure out how to revamp this education system, how do we bring the STEM topics to the forefront, how do we push those ahead, and how to we create an education system that really does what education is supposed to do, what the value of knowledge and life-long learning are supposed to be. How do we get that in our education system? Story_ID: 673528 Speaker 1: Have you ever had a, or do you ever recognize kids like yourself who come here for the same verve for science and the same excitement about coming to a place like Franklin Institute [The Franklin Institute Science Museum, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from the hood, you know. Do you ever see kids like you come through here? Speaker 2: Yes, I see kids like me quite frequently. One of the things that often disconcerting about seeing kids like me is that they have not yet developed the verbal skills to be able to articulate what their interest is, but you can always tell because these are the kids that hang around after everybody else has left, and these are the kids that do have a question, and it's maybe one question. So the only thing they've said, but it's a deep and probing question. So yes I do see kids like me in a lot of different settings. I look for more kids like that all the time because those are the kids we need to make sure to get their curiosity satisfied as much as possible. Speaker 1: Kids like those--I know you were talking about the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] program and you try to get them involved into a program that will help them develop their keen interest? Speaker 2: Sure. One of the reasons why I am so keen about getting kids involved in the NASA related program is because NASA now has this tremendous resource of images that are so compelling. I mean if you just sit and look at the pictures from the NASA satellites and from the Hubble Space Telescope and the space probes, how can you not be excited by what you see whether you're looking at earth, maybe you're just looking at earth, maybe you're looking at the moon, maybe you're looking at another planet, maybe you're looking at a galaxy, somewhere in those images, there is some compelling attraction that can bring you into wanting to know more. All I want to do is get a kid to ask a question about something so that can go to another question, that can go to another question that can take their curiosity someplace it hasn't been before. But that's the purpose of trying to get them involved in these NASA things because NASA's got the images, NASA has the compelling technology, NASA has the exciting stuff happening. I don't care what you say about how much the program costs, it doesn't cost that much. That's a red herring discussion about that kind of thing. But for what it can do to excite a young mind, show me another program that can do it the way that does. That's what I'm interested in captivate that curiosity. Story_ID: 673529 Speaker 1: We just had an event that occurred and we were talking about it as we came in. We never got it into the discussion. The asteroid that almost hit earth-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --well it was a long way off actually, but this huge asteroid that passed by and then the meteor that hit in Russia? Speaker 2: Yeah, there are two events that have really captured people's imagination lately. Back in February an asteroid was passing by, or early March it was I guess, passing by earth at a distance of seventeen thousand miles. Astronomers knew exactly where it was, they knew what the trajectory was, they knew that it was going to be seventeen thousand miles off; they knew that for certain. And were planning to observe it as it went by, had calculated the trajectory and all that great stuff. What we did not know is that there was a meteor that was also headed in our direction. And actually had quite a close call because the object was about 55 feet in size, I think it was. It fell fairly far down into the earth's atmosphere over a city called Chelyabinsk in Russia, and it exploded just above the surface, and so many people saw that through their dashboard video cameras that it became a worldwide phenomenon almost immediately. But it captured such attention and also captured so many people's imagination about what are these objects, where did they come from, what can they do, what are the chances of what could happen if one hits earth. All these sorts of questions were generated out of those events. And it's a perfect example of how these kinds of unique things that can really make people sit up and take notice of how the world around them operates. I think it's a fabulous kind of knowledge to have in which you have some small inkling or notion of how all of this goes together from right here in this room where we sit to the way galaxies interact with each other thirteen billion light years away. It's the same knowledge, it's the same formula, it's the same physics. To have that is a fantastic thing to hold right in your hands this understanding of how it all comes together and manifests itself in the things that we see here and the way the things operate on the other side of the universe. Speaker 1: Have you considered writing a book? Speaker 2: Yes, that's a task I have to do this summer. I have to write a book this summer, I really do. What's it going to be about, gosh, I don't know, but I'm going to write it this summer, whatever it's going to be about. Story_ID: 673530 Speaker 1: Last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different, more personal. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) I would like to be remembered as a guy who did his best to try to help people understand how beautiful the universe is and how wonderful it is that the laws and principles that govern how a simple flower unfolds at the beginning of spring, how those laws and principles are the same as those that govern how stars are born somewhere else in the galaxy or somewhere else in the universe. I want people to think that I helped them somehow learn how to appreciate some of that. Speaker 1: All right. Well, thank you very much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thank you, Larry [Larry Crowe]...