 Story_ID: 373349 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start by slating and my name is Denise Gines and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me please, including your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay, it's Howardena Doreen Pindell [HistoryMaker Howardena Pindell], so that's H-O-W-A-R-D as in David E-N-A, everyone puts I in there, but it's E-N-A and then Doreen is D-O-R-E-E-N, and then Pindell is P-I-N-D-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: April 14, 1943, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, okay, and what is the, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an artist and I teach in a university on Long Island [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], and I teach studio courses and I am also the M.F.A. director. That is the director for the MFA degree program. I've been out there since 1979. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 5, 19, oops, 2007. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview. Speaker 2: We are located at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] on the corner of Broadway and 42nd Street [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 373350 Speaker 1: Before we get started, just a few warm-up questions that will be People magazine-ish type questions, okay? What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I like blue. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite food? Speaker 2: I love food, let's see now. I love southern cooking. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I always think about the Caribbean when I want to go away, but I hate flying and I hate boats (laughter) so, I really, I would love to go back to Egypt, you know if could get over hating of flying. I was there in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was really a fantastic experience. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Well, you know I usually, sometimes I'll say, "Are you kidding?" I say that a lot, and I usually say God or oh God or whatever. My parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell], oddly enough, I cannot remember hearing them say, use God's name and they rarely, well we always went to church on Sunday. I mean I was forced to go to church. I wanted to be a Catholic and my parents didn't want me to so they sort of bagged me and dragged me to the Presbyterian church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I guess that's where oh God came from and that was where I was exposed to, you know, religion, but my mother always said when something went wrong the devil (laughter), you know so I can really hear her saying the devil more than I can--I don't remember her ever saying God. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Springtime. Speaker 1: Springtime. Story_ID: 373351 Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're gonna start talking about your family or your family tree. How far back in your family tree can you remember? Do you remember your great grandparents at all? Speaker 2: I don't remember them. I remember my father [Howard Pindell] saying my great-great-grandmother lived to 113 and that she was blind in one eye from a slaver's lash, but then he later apologized like sixty years (laughter) later and said that, "No, she lived until her late nineties." I mean he himself just died last year and he lived to ninety-eight, so he I think is one of the oldest people in his family. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about your, your--do you know about your grandfather then? Speaker 2: Well he didn't like his father, so I never really met him. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: Philip Pindell, and the Pindell I would call them clan lived in Annapolis, Maryland and recently, I would say within the last month my father's sister's son had been staying touch with the Pindells for years, and after my father died he gave me the phone number of a Rhonda Pindell [Rhonda Pindell Charles], who's an attorney in Annapolis, and I called her up and she was so excited to hear about, you know hear from me because she had heard, she said that the Pindells had heard that there was a Pindell in the black history books, and they had never met me and my father really would have no communication at all with the Pindells who would have family reunions and everything. So they're going to have a family reunion this spring and they've invited me to come down as their guest, their guest of honor for the reunion, so I'm really excited (laughter), you know because I never, I never met a Pindell once. Speaker 1: Do you know why your father didn't like his father? Speaker 2: Well, the, the only thing that I heard was that he was mean, that's all I heard. I, I just don't you know, I never met, I never saw him and it's interesting because my father was generally a very even-tempered person, a very peaceful person. He never liked arguments, and as he became very elderly, I'd say around '97 [1997] or '98 [1998], he started to get really mean (laughter), so I later thought, "Well gee, maybe this is the way his father was," 'cause he--it's very common with dementia. It's very common with elderly people that they just snapping at you, and they get very impatient and time becomes very strange for them in terms of let's say they waited five minutes, and for them it's an hour, so they start snapping at you. So, he at the end became, with dementia, an angry man when he was never like that before. Story_ID: 373352 Speaker 1: Talk about your dad then, tell me his name? Speaker 2: His name was Howard Douglas Pindell [Howard Pindell]. Speaker 1: Needless to say that's how Howardena [HistoryMaker Howardena Pindell] came about (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes (laughter) H.D.P., yes, yes. Speaker 1: And when was he born? Speaker 2: April 8, 1908. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: Annapolis, Maryland. Speaker 1: So tell me about your father, what kind of father was he? Speaker 2: Well, you know it's very interesting. I would say he was my favorite of both my parents. He had a kind of joy in living; he loved nature, he loved animals. I mean, just my animal vice seemingly comes from him, although a lot of that he didn't have at the end, he wasn't interested in. He was very patient and I remember if I looked at something as simple as dishwashing, my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell], if I had to wash dishes it was like a struggle you know, to get me to wash dishes and it you know became really almost a power struggle. And with my father, he'd say, "Oh, let's have fun with this," and he always turned it into a game, so everything that he did was pleasant. He didn't believe in showing any real anger, although I think a lot of that comes out of growing up in the South, where if you showed external anger, you know, in certain environments, you could get killed, so you know he may have developed it as a self-defense mechanism, but he was a very kind of peaceful guy, he was a really good cook, he was, he got his degree in mathematics from Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and then he paid for (simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know what year that was? Speaker 2: No I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can find out. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: But he sort of was able to pay for, he went to Columbia University Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] and worked his way, he lived in Harlem [New York, New York]. I think it was during the Harlem Renaissance, and paid for his, you know, schooling. Then he got a degree from Columbia and he also I think had a degree from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: What were the degrees in, do you know? Speaker 2: I know the degree, of course, was in teaching from Columbia Teachers College, but he was interested also in psychology and I think he got a psychology degree that was in some way connected to statistics and test giving, 'cause I remember I was a guinea pig for all the tests, you know he tried them out on me. He, it's hard to explain. He also was very supportive of my art. I remember, my third grade teacher told my parents that I was talented and that they should take me to museums and art galleries and they should introduce me to artists, and to the letter, they did all of that and my father was the one that would basically, you know, drive me here and there and help me with supplies and--you know, so he was very hands-on supportive. Story_ID: 373353 Speaker 1: Did he tell you stories about his [Pindell's father, Howard Pindell] growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, he did actually. In fact I did a series of tapes with him, sort of a little oral history series. He, okay apparently, he was illegitimate child of his mother [Sarah Jane Hinkson] and then she married and had another set of children, so his brothers and sisters were half brothers and sisters, and I believe this his stepfather was from Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago], and he didn't like him either (laughter), so I don't him, I never even met him. But anyway, he grew up in Annapolis [Maryland] with one of his mother's sisters and he grew up on a farm and he would talk about the farm animals, how he liked them and he talked about also someone had shot him in the head with a BB gun, so he had like these dents in his head. I think it was just another child. He talked about walking five miles each way to a one-room school house in all weather. So he had tremendous physical strength, I think because of starting early on he was using his muscles. I mean I'm like a ten pound, no I should say a five hundred pound weakling because my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] always had me in some kind of you know cra- what do you call it? Carriage, stroller. Speaker 1: Stroller? Speaker 2: So I was never moving around, you know I wasn't really exercising and that became you know sort of a bad habit of mine right through to today, but he remembered starving, he remembered being very hungry when he was on his own and he would eat yeast to fill up his stomach, and it, it gave him, again, he never got colds, he never got sick, he only got sick at the end of his life, but I don't remember him having a common house cold. You know my mother and I would be sneezing and whatever, and he was always just fine. So he had tremendous stamina in terms of walking places, just in general, you know, I mean he was, I always thought of him as someone who was pretty remarkable. I would say he had a small group friends, oddly enough I mean they weren't people that were like him in personality. They were just people that he considered his friends. He liked music, he would go to concerts, but generally though classical musical concerts. I mean, like I would have on the radio gospel and I would have on rhythm and blues, and he would be like, "Ugh" so he was sort of, I don't know he went from a kind of background where he was basically a country bumpkin, to someone who wanted to be, he said he even changed his accent, that the kids made fun of him at school because he had such a country accent, that he didn't learn how to speak the so-called King's English, so you would never know that he use to speak all kind of broken English; so I mean he was kind of an amazing person to sort of remodel or revamp himself, so that he wouldn't become the butt of jokes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had one eye that wandered, so he had slightly crossed eye. He was very handsome, that was something they said about his father [Philip Pindell], his father was very handsome. He was actually pretty good looking up until the end, so women kind of thought he was cute, but he pretty much, I mean he pretty much stayed you know, he, I don't remember him like not showing up you know (laughter) at night, I mean he was very loyal to his own family, yeah. Story_ID: 373354 Speaker 1: He [Pindell's father, Howard Pindell] grew up in Annapolis [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Annapolis, Maryland. Speaker 1: And then and he, he stayed there the whole time? Speaker 2: No, his mother [Sarah Jane Hinkson] actually lived in Baltimore [Maryland] so he would go to Baltimore and stay sometimes with his mother. He was here in New York [New York] for a while with school, but generally he was, he was in the Frederick, Maryland area and became principal of a school in Frederick, Maryland in 1935, I think it was in the '30s [1930s], and became a, what would you call it, I don't know if it is a defendant or whatever, I don't know legal terms necessarily, but he was in a test case that was being pushed forward by Thurgood Marshall before he was on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. My father basically, had organized a teachers union [Colored Teachers Association of Anne Arundel County] to try to fight the fact there were unequal salaries between whites and blacks, and he put himself forth as a guinea pig because he felt that the other people had families and he at that point didn't have a family, so if he lost his job, you know it wasn't a great hardship, and he did indeed, as a result of his activism, lose his job. He in a way was cleverly manipulated, you know, by the white administrators, but anyway the case was actually won in 1939 with a different, I guess plaintiff is the word. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he as a result of losing his job ended up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that's you know, he met my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] when he was still in Maryland because she was at Bowie [Maryland State Teachers College at Bowie; Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], she was doing teachers training, working with students, and so they came to Philadelphia and he started working for the Quakers. They had a boys club for African American youth, and then he started to work for the state, finding jobs for people who were mentally ill, or who had physical disabilities. And he was someone who was real good about helping people. He sort of went out of his way to help people, so people from way back then even remembered him. I remember there was someone who he had helped way back then who, you know came to the funeral and everything, I mean he just, he was someone who was very helpful, very helpful, and then after that he went to the common pleas court and became a court administrator, so he was in charge of, I think for a while he was in charge of the Youth Study Center for so-called juvenile delinquents. He was also at one point, head of narcotics and probation. So he had a large office under him and he was someone who worked very hard. He also taught privately, he tutored students privately, in the sciences and mathematics. He tutored me, I was really having a hard time with chemistry, and I did well after you know he tutored me. In fact one of his students who he had tutored for SAT tests, got a perfect score on the SATs; amazing, ended up at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, University] then Yale Law [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], then I won't even say what happened to him (laughter). It's so discouraging, but anyway not in a, it's discouraging in terms of life goals. He ended up selling ice cream to the Vietnamese, selling Dairy Queen or something. He was into being an entrepreneur, he was trained as a lawyer, didn't practice as a lawyer. So I think he was in real estate and whatever. And I was, I was always saying, "Oh, if only he had been in an advocacy position, you know to help our people, rather than you know kind of--," anyway, I should be cautious 'cause who knows when his family will see this tape (laughter), but anyway I remember being critical of the fact that he had such a big brain, you know, and he really, again I haven't seen him in years so he may have been doing something, I don't know about, but anyway I was impressed with the perfect score. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373355 Speaker 1: So what happened, your dad [Howard Pindell] now is in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, that's where he died, yes, he, we, he stayed in Philadelphia. They bought several homes, they--first we were in an apartment on Penn Street which was in the Germantown area. Speaker 1: Is that where he first settled down, where he met your mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell]? Speaker 2: I don't know, that's kind of vague. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know, I think they knew each other in Maryland and I remember he said, I think they may have even had an apartment in New York [New York] for a while, it's just, I know they're both gone, so I (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So I can't really reality check that one. Story_ID: 373356 Speaker 1: Who was the disciplinarian in your family? Speaker 2: I would say my father [Howard Pindell] was, but my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] was the one who showed the most anger and rage and impatience, and but, he was a disciplinarian in terms of the silent treatment. That would be more scary than my mother getting upset you know. I would kind of run away from my mother and I would--laughing or something, you know I just would find her anger so silly sometimes. Story_ID: 373357 Speaker 1: You said that you didn't know much about your grandfather [Philip Pindell], but what about your grandmother [Sarah Jane Hinkson] on your father's [Howard Pindell] side? Speaker 2: Okay, my grandmother was a wonderful woman. Her name was Jane, Sarah Jane Hinkson, H-I-N-K-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was basically a housewife but a real sweet, her family was very sweet, very--just kind, gentle people. I remember she, I think she had, let's see there was Edward [Edward Hinkson], one of her sons became a professional military person and then he started, I think he was head of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at one of the black colleges in the Virginias. Then she had twin daughters, Margarite [Margarite Hinkson] and Albertine [Albertine Hinkson], who were very, they were fraternal twins, they didn't look alike. Marguerite just died this past fall. Albertine, she died in '90 [1990], so that family lives really--in fact his mother died in her late nineties, I think ninety, somewhere between ninety-five and ninety-seven, so they all have an amazing longevity, and then she had a brother, Uncle David [ph.], I remember. He lived until his mid-nineties. I remember his wife, Aunt Blanche [ph.], she had when I was a little girl, she had stomach cancer. Of course we were not allowed to be in hospitals. I can't imagine how much suffering, you know that she, this was back in the '40s [1940s], and I remember they laid her body out in my grandmother's living room, and I of course as a little kid didn't understand, "Why is this woman sleeping in the front room for?" You know. So all night I would get up and run downstairs to see if she had gotten up yet, you know I just, or I'd check to see if the body was still there (laughter). Anyway, but they were just nice, gentle people and his mom was a real good cook and Marguerite, her daughter was a phenomenal cook. Speaker 1: Those were your father's sisters and brothers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His half, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Half-sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were very nice to me. We use to go there, I can't remember whether if it was Thanksgiving or, it was one holiday when we'd always go there for a meal and for a little kid, waiting seemed forever like it might--my grandmother meticulously prepared this meal, and I remember waiting it for it was like, "Oh, my God," it just seemed forever that we'd be waiting for it and then finally, "Aha," we'd sit down and her favorite, my favorite dish that she made was chopped spinach with butter, salt and chopped egg on top. So I've to this day I love spinach. Most people hate spinach (laughter) but no, she was such a good cook and such a nice person. Story_ID: 373358 Speaker 1: Okay, so now let's talk about your mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell], do you remember your grandfather or grandmother on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Well my grandfather died when I was really young. I've only seen pictures of him. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Presley Lewis, Presley Lewis, I don't, I don't remember really more than that, but my mother's sister is now, she's in her nineties, she's ninety-one or ninety, is researching the family tree and sent me recently the program, the funeral program for one of his relatives. It's, he's vague, I mean I don't, I remember hearing that he could be difficult, and I also heard that he didn't like for his children to have a black birth certificate, he wanted them to have an Indian [Native American] or a white birth certificate. So the confusion with my mother, I think is one of the reasons why she was so angry a lot; she had a white birth certificate, but she, she was browner than I am, and she went to white schools because she had this birth certificate during heavy-duty segregation. I saw her yearbook and she was the only brown face in the sort of sea of faces, of white faces. Speaker 1: Was your grandfather, was he white? Speaker 2: No, he was, he was from apparently one of the islands, I think Jamaica or his family was from Jamaica, but then my mother always told me that he was from Honduras, so the family was from Honduras, so (laughter) you know, I don't know. I would love to find out, but anyhow, so he was dark, very dark brown, kind of sharp features and then grandma, as an old lady looked white, but she in her youth looked like a mixture of black and Indian, you know the old, old fashioned pictures I saw of her, but I mean she had all of this energy. She died, she didn't really die, but she had a stroke, fixing the roof at eighty-seven. So she was one of these kind of pioneer woman and she loved wrestling, she would watch wrestling on television. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Loula Lewis, L-O-U-L-A, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, they had, what they had was a piece of property where they could raise their food. Speaker 1: Where was this? Speaker 2: This was in Hamilton, Ohio, southern Ohio near Covington, Kentucky. In fact my parents eloped to Covington to get married; that was in December sometime, I don't remember what year. They were married a long time like fifty, sixty years, a real long time. I don't know my grandmother, I just remember her being real sweet to her grandchildren; she had a lot of grandchildren 'cause she technically had about eight kids. I always thought ten, I think my mother would say ten, but I think it was about eight kids and one died. The sons are all dead now. The daughters remain, there're two of my mother's sisters that are left, one is ninety-five and the other is ninety, and the kids were all the different colors of the rainbow, like the boys were mostly dark like their father, and the girls were mostly light like their mother and my mother was right in between both of them, yeah, so it was kind of like a rainbow situation, but it meant people got a little weird, because I mean first of all you have a white birth certificate, and you're not white. Story_ID: 373359 Speaker 1: How were they able to do that? Do you know? No idea (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea. I think that the hospital looked at my [maternal] grandmother [Loula Lewis] and that wasn't the time when men would go in for the birth, so they didn't see the husband [Presley Lewis] and grandmother looked white to them, and so they would just given them a white birth certificate. My mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] didn't change it until she was in her sixties because she was going to retire and she wouldn't of been able to get her social security if she had a passport that said she was black and you know the records didn't correspond, so before my grandmother died, she had to go to court to testify that her daughter was black. So it's kind of complicated, but my mother was, I think my mother put up with a lot of taunting and harassment when she was in school, so she you know just had a lot of turmoil and it led to turmoil within the family when they would just do simple things like go to the movies, and the whites would sit downstairs and the blacks would sit upstairs. Part of the family would sit downstairs, the part that could pass and the other part of the family would sit upstairs. So I mean there was a lot of bitterness, you know about that. In fact one of the relatives by marriage, Coremenia [Coremenia Lewis], the one that's the oldest now, she's ninety-five, married a man, I can't remember what his name was, I think maybe she had two husbands, but he committed suicide in the arms of his daughter because he couldn't pass. He was light skinned but he had very crinkly hair and his daughter, that you know he died in her arms, she was blonde and blue-eyed, and she eventually passed. She literally from what I was told had her tubes tied and she married someone white and lived somewhere, you know in the Midwest somewhere and you know, you know she hasn't been in touch with her mother, she hasn't been in touch with the family. There were these crazy things on my mother's side of the family. There was a similar thing where one of the sons, it wasn't Vernon [Vernon Lewis], it was Malcolm [Malcolm Lewis], married a woman named Vashti [ph.], who was, I think her name was Vashti, who was again very tied up in the whole race thing, and she didn't want, and it doesn't even make sense, she had a fence built and she didn't want the family to go across the fence. She'd say you could just go to the fence and say, "Hello" to them, but then the irony is that everyone says, "Oh, she got her comeuppance." Malcolm was a physical ed [physical education] teacher and he eventually just had a heart attack. She apparently moved out of the Ohio area, moved to California and died homeless; you know, so I mean it's just really strange. I mean she, at least this is what I hear she became a bag lady, but she had driven away all of the family and her poor kids they must've been really screwy from you know: "You can't talk to this one or that one." "You can talk to this one or that one and so forth." I have no idea what happened to her sons, I really had no interaction but I can remember going to visit them and just sort of you know, I still have this vague image of like talking to them or at least seeing them across a divide (laughter), I'll put it that way. So there were some sort of nutty things on my mother's side of the family. Story_ID: 373360 Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name, we didn't--? Speaker 2: Mildred L., I think it's Mildred Lewis, Mildred Edith Lewis Pindell [Mildred Lewis Pindell]. She was--. Speaker 1: And Lewis is spelled which way? Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: When was she born? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I think it was 1905, but I'm not sure and she was five years older than my father [Howard Pindell], and she had me when she was forty, I mean which is kind of interesting because I have some, I was born with basically one malfunctioning kidney which they didn't find out, I mean it was like a birth defect that maybe came from my being such a late, you know a late pregnancy; and at the time I guess they didn't have whatever they have now, the extra vitamins and all that, but no one knew about my kidney until I was in my forties maybe fifties, fifties. Yeah, just do a sophisticated test. Story_ID: 373361 Speaker 1: Your mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] and your father [Howard Pindell] and, okay you said that your mother and father met in either Maryland or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they went to visit your [maternal] grandmother [Loula Lewis] in Ohio? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and then how did they get married? Speaker 2: Then they, they eloped, they eloped from, they went from Hamilton [Ohio] to Covington, Kentucky. Hamilton is near the southern border of Ohio and Covington is near the northern border of Kentucky. So they just slipped into Kentucky and got married, it was sometime in December, I believe between Christmas and New Year's. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said that your father was younger than your mother? Speaker 2: Yes, five years younger, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Five years younger, okay. Story_ID: 373362 Speaker 1: Now, tell me what kind of education, how much education did your mom [Mildred Lewis Pindell] have? Speaker 2: All right, my mother received her bachelor's [degree] I believe from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], she also received a master's [degree], and I'm not sure whether it was from Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] or Ohio State in history and geography. She was very, I remember when she would travel she'd would pick up rocks for me (laughter) you know or if I was gonna go somewhere, she would give me a sort of general sense of the climate and the place, you know a sense of the land and so forth. She was a real smart lady, both of my parents were very smart and she was talented in writing. She had written a small piece for one of the, I think it was a Chicago [Illinois], one of the black papers in Chicago about the segregated [U.S.] Army. I remember I have a sort of discolored copy of it and she was very talented in the arts. I would say in the visual arts. I found out after she died, we went through her things in terms of the things she had brought back from school. She taught actually in normal schools throughout the South and in Arkansas and in Maryland, but after I was born she felt because it was World War II [WWII], that history had changed, the map had changed, that she would teach elementary school. So she started when she went back to teaching, teaching third grade. But what we found when we went through all of her things after she passed away, we were consolidating things to store them, she constructed posters the way I construct my work as a professional. Let's say, if she wanted to portray the ocean for the students, she would find like snippets of ocean from different magazines, and then she'd put them all together, and the way she collaged them together was what I later developed in my collage technique, but I never saw these things, she did them at school. So that I felt was very interesting in that she was, her visual work was very sophisticated but it was used you know for school posters and things like that. She was someone who loved to read or to collect books. I remember she had black history books she would collect. She would tutor students, you know, after class in reading and she taught me how to read. I love books, I mean in have so many books my floor started to sag at home so I had to take them and move them to school and now one of the biggest things I'm concerned about is when I retire in six or seven years, if I can survive that long, what is going to my books? 'Cause I love living with books. I mean for me, I need two things in my life: room for my books, and a studio. I mean, sort of in that order because the books nourish me to do my work, you know they create a kind of intellectual climate for some of the things I do, and then I need you know a decent studio. But, I mean now my apartment is such a--so crowded that my poor studio I mean, I'm sort of working elbowing everything outta the way, and I mean I have more books but I want them all together. Speaker 1: So your, so you sort--anything else that you might have found in your mother's belongings that was interesting to you? Speaker 2: Well one of the things was how she kept her belongings. My mother was extremely neat. Well, I would almost say dramatic, I mean extremely neat. My father [Howard Pindell] and I would you know the way my work involves with, you know it's involved with clusters of things, I mean I live like that (laugher) you know clutter, and my father and I were clutterers, you know we just, I mean everything became so clear after she died. The house became like, cluttered. You know, before everything was neat, you know everything was in its place. Her purse was neat when she died. Now how, you know, you know how women's purses are, I mean a jumble. Everything, her will, everything that she, she was extraordinarily organized. Her desk was you know, everything was organized, she did not have one piece of paper out of place. My father and I were very much the opposite, but I wish I had her ability to be neat. I mean, I just, anything I put down becomes clutter (laughter), it's, you know it's just this odd habit I have. Story_ID: 373363 Speaker 1: Anything else about your mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] that you wanna share? Did she ever talk about her growing up? Speaker 2: I think it was a very difficult time for her. She did not talk about it that much and she sometimes would cloud the issue by indulging in fantasies, but I think she must've had a painful upbringing because she would say things to me like, I mean that were totally absurd, and I remember them. I was--be confused as a child. She said, "Well the white family that lived next door were relatives." Lie, that's not true (laughter), you know or she would say, "We have German," and the family next door was German. They were very, very poor. She would say, "We have German relatives." "Where are they?" You know she just, she would have these, or she would say; you know, her father's [Presley Lewis] people were from Honduras. No, they were from Jamaica. She had this, she would sort of you know, have these fantasies, where she would create the world as she wished it to be. So that led to some confusion, in my mind, you know especially when I was trying to track down the relatives and you know, trying to get a sense of a family tree. However, recently I've done something, well at least recently something's been available to all of us that's helped, or at least has begun to clear up some of the mystery on an unexpected scale--National Geographic has their genome project, so if you open the website and you key on genome project you can buy a kit for about one hundred dollars and you send them, they send you a thing so you can take a DNA sample. They test it, and within about two months you get the results, and it turns out, that my family on--it's the matriarchal thing they trace for women. The family on my mother's side are considered--and they have words for like haplogroup or whatever, an L3 which means that my family, my mother's side of the family were from--everyone's from East Africa 'cause that's where all you know and humankind really originated, but the L3s were the first ones to leave Africa to go to the Middle East and migrate through India to Australia and become the Aborigines and migrate to the Pacific to become the Polynesians. Also, they migrated north so that they were in Egypt, so I assume they would be among the ancient Egyptians, and also, this takes us back though a long time ago even beyond Egypt like 20,000 to 80,000 years ago. They were also, I guess Libya, Algeria, Morocco and some of them migrated south, but what the National Geographic people say it is the line died there. I assume that's when we were all brought over into slavery. But then, to make it even more interesting, they are hooked up with another group that's called like, Family Tree [The Human Family Tree] something or other; and they said that the basic DNA for my mother's side of the family is from Uganda, which I never, you know Uganda, I mean I never, and they gave me the email address of a woman who is also registered with their project, a woman named Diana Molly [ph.] who lives in England who had a common ancestor, that is a common mother fifty-two generations ago which is 1,000 years ago. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: I mean that's mind blowing, that is mind blowing and the first--I mean, the irony is the first country I touched down on when I went to Africa was Uganda, and it was during Amin [Idi Amin], and everybody was terrified because what they did was commandeer our plane. We were supposed to fly, this was East African airlines [East African Airways Corporation]. I was going to Kenya. Speaker 1: We, we'll, let's (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, all right, we'll get, but it's fascinating. Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to get to that story, 'cause that is fascinating. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373364 Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I'm the only child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm the only child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I begged them to have more children, but no (laughter) I'm the only child. Speaker 1: Because you said your mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] had you late in life right? Speaker 2: She had me late in life. I was sort of pushing them to adopt, but they wouldn't, wouldn't do it. My mother was very, she said, "I don't want another woman's mistake," and I thought, oh, God, you know, I'm staying away from that one (laughter), so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wish I had brothers and sisters, yeah. Story_ID: 373365 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: This is weird. Standing in a crib and my father [Howard Pindell] had handed me the Sunday paper. I know that's just, I mean it's inappropriate to hand a toddler a Sunday paper, but I love reading newspapers. It's like the, I just, that was just a clear memory of just standing in the crib with the, you know the bars and somehow the Sunday newspaper being in the crib, but I remember my father handed it to me. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I have, well we were in the apartment on Penn Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I don't know I was probably about this big, I don't know, I don't know. And I can remember the apartment, in terms of the stairway. I remember the landlady really clearly, a Mrs. Hill [ph.]. Speaker 1: Mrs. Ill? Speaker 2: Mrs. Hill (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hill, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was a big, very light skinned woman who was sort of like a tyrant, she was very scary. Story_ID: 373366 Speaker 1: What else do you remember about your childhood? Speaker 2: Well I remember my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] would kind of have tantrums, or she would get really angry at me and I remember fleeing to the local candy store across the street and the woman who owned the candy store--I was just so upset she would give me you know the chocolate-dipped vanilla popsicles, to calm me down. I mean, I remember, I don't know whether I bought them or she just gave them to me. Oh, I can't even remember her name but I can see that, it--I can just, you know see it fairly clearly. Church, I remember a lot of church when I was a kid. In fact, one of the photographs I brought shows me in front of the church and I think I developed a kind of bitterness towards the church. First of all I was mad that I couldn't be Catholic, I was really pissed off about that. I mean I was very young, but I saw that the Catholic church at that point wasn't segregated, but what bugged me was the Presbyterian church was segregated and there was a small black church and three or four blocks away, it was like line in terms of the black neighborhood and the white neighborhood, still in the '40s [1940s]. There was a white Presbyterian church, gothic, stained glass windows, you know, huge; and I just couldn't understand why would God or Christ would allow for this, you know, I mean just thinking from a child's mind, point of view. And so I've carried that with me for a long time so I'm always in the midst of this argument which almost seems like an adolescent kind of argument, "Is there a God, isn't there a God? Why does he tolerate the suffering in the world?" and so forth. But I always remember clearly going to the black church, I remember very nice people being there. The minister was a bit of a cad, he was sort of sleazing around the women and he had a beautiful wife, she looked like a black Marilyn Monroe, and he would deadlock her into the house so she couldn't get out, you know he, you know the lock where you have to have a key to get out-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --which of course is a fire thing, I mean that's dangerous, but I remember my parents would sometimes drop me off at their house to babysit me if they had something they had to do. I remember, I think they had a very nice son, and the wife eventually was institutionalized, and he remarried after that, I think. She died in an institution. Speaker 1: Why did you want to be Catholic, just because it wasn't segregated? Speaker 2: I thought because it wasn't segregated and I loved the smells and it was real pretty, (laughter) you know, just all the icons and the you know, it was just very dramatically--visually very, very fulfilling to see it, you know it was very, I just you know loved it, loved the--and the fact, it was like if a religion had charisma, Catholicism for me had charisma. And the Presbyterian church was just boring, you know, just boring. There were, there were no pictures, you know, oh well they had one picture of Christ knocking at a door. They had a nice choir; that was nice, I liked the music. Story_ID: 373367 Speaker 1: You started telling us about the neighborhood [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Describe your street, who lived on the street, what kind of jobs did these people have? Speaker 2: Well you know I don't, I remember my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] had a friend Dorothy Tyree [ph.] who had a daughter, Dorothea Tyree [ph.]. She, apparently the mother had Dorothea after my mother had me. They lived a couple of blocks away. I don't remember anybody else on the block. We lived in houses that were, they had line a front porch and then some of the houses were divided into apartments. We lived you know in the apartment in this particular house, but they were big, big houses, but you knew the demarcation between the white neighborhood and the black neighborhood and you knew that you couldn't shop, you know you had to be careful shopping in the white neighborhood because they didn't really want you and they'd stare at you. It was horrible, it was really horrible. I just remember it was very neat. I remember again very nice people coming to the church. I just, I don't have much of a clear picture other than there was a line that you didn't cross. Story_ID: 373368 Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of something happening as far as, you said if you went shopping or went somewhere, where--were there any instances that-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --that you had to come up against with whites? Speaker 2: Well, you were stared at a lot; you were stared at and hated. I mean, I, I remember hate stares when I was a kid. I remember thinking, what are you staring at me like that for? You know it was like, at least the whites then felt they had the right to have everything and you were nothing and you didn't have the right to be in their area, and remembering how that gradually changed. I remember Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], there was a store called Rauls, Rolls, Rowls [C.H. Rowell, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], whatever, which would be equivalent maybe to a like a Saks Fifth Avenue now, but a small version of it and I felt very intimidated going, you know, in fact even today I prefer doing mail order. I don't particularly like, but I don't feel intimidated about going into a store, I just don't like the hassle (laughter). I'd rather sit down with a catalogue and you know figure it out. I was not technically thrown out of anywhere, but, but I mean I think the most kind of heinous example I can think of in terms of you know being in the white area, my parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell] sent me to a school, elementary school called Thadeus Pastorius School [sic. Francis D. Pastorius School; Francis D. Pastorius - Mastery Charter School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was in the Germantown area. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me? Speaker 2: Oh, God I don't know. Thad, Thadeus, T-H-A--D-E-U-S, or T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S Pastorius, P-A-S-T-O-R-I-U-S, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Thadeus Pastorius. Speaker 2: I think it was near Chelten Avenue, whatever, it's so vague in my head, and I remember their sending me to kindergarten there and the kindergarten was predominately white and I, they, I remember the teacher distinctly saying, "If you have to go to the bathroom, raise your hand." I raised the hand and the white teacher came over to me in a rage and tied me to the bed, you know with like, I can remember either sheets or jump ropes, you know a rope, close line, and I remember I had to go to the bathroom really bad, but I said I'm not gonna pee you know (laughter) period. I'm not gonna give her that gratification. The only thing I can figure out now is that she felt because it was during segregation although Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] didn't have signs up, that I should not go to the bathroom in the same place as the white kids went, or she just didn't want to take me, you know, I was black from her point of view. And I had a lot of rage about that for a long, long time, and I remember the rage doubled because when I explained it to my parents, because they had grown up you know in hardcore segregation, my, the reaction I got was, "You have to learn to follow authority." In other words, if she is the authority you have to agree with it, and I said, "Fuck that," excuse my English, but I became like really rebellious from then on, I mean like really rebellious. Speaker 1: So she tied you to the chair? Speaker 2: It was a cot. Speaker 1: A cot? Speaker 2: They had cots for the kindergarten kids to sleep in, and so she literally tied me down and I can remember just, you know a sense of humiliation in being tied down. And I mean, if I thought of it like from a white kid's point of view, what did they think, I mean, you know in terms of, I mean that's where they're building up racist stuff themselves. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That, you know that they can, they'll observe this and it's not gonna happen to them, or that I'm really bad and that's why it happened to me, or, or the terror of other black children there, like, "This could happen to me, she's doing that to her," whatever, I just, I was really angry. I, I think that's where I really became so angry I became almost unmanageable (laughter). I was so mad, I was so mad. Speaker 1: And this was in kindergarten, okay? So what year are we in kindergarten? Speaker 2: Kindergarten, I don't know, would I be four years old, five years old (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess that'd be four years old or five, yeah. Speaker 2: I was born in '43 [1943], so it'd probably be maybe '46 [1946], '47 [1947] somewhere up in there, I think 1946, '47 [1947]. Story_ID: 373369 Speaker 1: Now, was there a time when you were traveling with your family, something about root beer mugs? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, oh yeah. It was the reason why I use circles. Yes, my father [Howard Pindell] and mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] and I would periodically drive to Ohio, and in fact, that was always difficult because the, the motels would not allow black people to stay there so we had to like really drive fast (laughter), or drive you know like all night. In fact at one point they took a cook stove and we would cook out in the woods 'cause you couldn't, so in segregation you couldn't even get food. My father and I, my mother was busy with her mother [Loula Lewis] and her sisters, I think maybe Entellena [Entellena Lewis] was there, her youngest sister, and my father and I drove into Kentucky and my father loved root beer so we stopped at a root beer stand, I mean my father was someone say if it says, "You can't go there," you'd go there anyway, and they served us root beer you know in chilled mugs, but at the bottom of the mug was a big red circle, and apparently in the South what they would do if they were willing to serve people of color, they would mark the silverware and the glassware, so what they had I mean, if you, it was a circle about the size of the base of this glass you know on a root beer mug. And I asked my father, you know, "What is that?" And he explained that if you're colored, you're African American, then they will mark your silverware, your glassware, dishware with a red circle. So I always tell people you know I was scared by a red circle, by a circle, and so I was obsessing about circles ever since, but I remember being just genuinely shocked, you know, that we would, you know, that anyone would get you know silverware. I can remember when we had driven south, I think we were going to visit some of my parents' friends in the Carolinas in Durham [North Carolina], going to a filling station and the rudeness of these sort of redneck guys that ran the station, the way they talked to my father calling him Howard, and you know because I had the credit card, and then you were like terrorized, you know you didn't want to go to the bathroom anywhere, because if--you know you either run into that kind of you know hillbilly kind of offensive behavior or it could be dangerous. So I can remember traveling with them and my father wearily going into a motel and being told it's no vacancy and then when you leave it says vacancy sign is on that they don't want anyone black. I would say, yeah those are my memories from the '40s [1940s] maybe early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: How did those, well how did it make you feel though as a child? Speaker 2: Upset, insecure, angry, but I think that the thing that really brought it home was the white teacher, inappropriately being furious at a student who followed her directions (laughter) you know like what is this? So ever since then I just--it's also I think given me a kind of uncomfortable feeling about white women, that I've always found when I've dealt with, like in current times that are not as segregated or not, it's more subtle that I find there's always this and I even get the phrase from an Asian friend, she said when you're around white women, the white women act like, I'm white and I'm in charge here. This particular individual was an Asian woman artist who was talking about the women's movement and how if you get involved in a women's group, the white women always assume that they're the authority, they're in charge. So, I've run into that umpteen times. Story_ID: 373370 Speaker 1: So let's go back to elementary school. So you went to this school [Francis D. Pastorius School; Francis D. Pastorius - Mastery Charter School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for kindergarten. Did you leave that school and go somewhere else. Speaker 2: Yes. My parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell] eventually pulled me out of that school and I went to a place called the Stevens School [Thaddeus Stevens School of Observation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but it wasn't the white private school. There's a Stevens School in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I think in the Chestnut Hill area. This was the Stevens School on Spring Garden [Street]. Spring Garden was near central Philadelphia and it was, it was a school actually that had a lot of diversity. I remember we would celebrate the Chinese New Year and the Jewish holidays and so forth, and that's where the teacher, a woman named Mrs. Ozer [ph.] told my parents that I was talented, so it was, it was really a more multicultural school than one would expect at the time, and I was there through let's see, I don't remember what grade because I went also to Cooke Junior High School [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Cooke Junior High School? Speaker 2: Yeah, C-O-O-K-E Junior High School in Philadelphia, and then from there I went to the Philadelphia High School for Girls [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was a public high school but it was for gifted children and all you had to get--take a test to get in usually. Story_ID: 373371 Speaker 1: You told us about how you began to go to the museums and the art with your father [Howard Pindell] because the teachers said that you were talented. So you always knew that you wanted to be an artist? Speaker 2: It was the only thing that I enjoyed doing. I also took music classes but I was; I didn't have the kind of stamina I have for working on my artwork. I would get bored with practicing. I wasn't really that gifted in music. I had taken voice lessons, piano lessons, cello lessons. I tried to reach myself the pipe organ. I mean I enjoyed music but now for me music is more something in enjoy as a hobby as a leisure thing, but with art I really could just, I had the stamina to work for long hours you know and just to enjoy. I mean, one of the high points for me is going to an art supply store. I love art supply stores (laughter) you know, they're, they're very, you know, it's inspirational you know to see all the things you can work with. So I have that still and I don't have that about music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, being a professional at it, I wouldn't have been good. Story_ID: 373372 Speaker 1: Is there anything else about your elementary years that you remember? Speaker 2: Well, let's see Stevens School [Thaddeus Stevens School of Observation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? I remember I started to run around with a little girl gang. My mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] was really upset, but anyway I think it was from being tied down, I just then started, I found other angry little girls and we (laughter) sort of were a nuisance. And then let's see, I went to, let's see, Cooke [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was more like something out of 'Grease,' you know, out of, it was like, it was a co-ed junior high school, and you know then you start worrying about how you look, and you know just as you grow older. My favorite class was home economics (laughter) believe it or not. They, they, the teacher there I think was very nice, and I did well enough there that I was able to go to Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] without taking the test so at least my grades were high, and I remember there was a teenage kind of thing, again where the girls are flirting with the boys, the boys are flirting with the girls. You know it's, and I remember, I remember so clearly, just the struggle of African American women to have like, a physical persona. I remember I had a friend there, Denise [ph.], who was a very smart, I mean she was black, she was extremely smart. She ended up going to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts] for, I mean (unclear) she had to be very bright to go there. And I remember she wore a wig once, just you know like a playful like a ponytail or something, and a young, a group of black women or children jumped on her, and pulled her wig off. I mean, it was, I remember just feeling like if you want, you had to be careful how you looked, because you could become the focus of assault. Speaker 1: And this was in junior high school? What year are we in now, let's see? Speaker 2: Let's see, high school, Girls High was, I graduated in '61 [1961] so we would probably be around '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Was Cooke Junior High School, was it integrated? Speaker 2: Was it what? Speaker 1: Integrated. Speaker 2: Yes, very; but it wasn't focusing in terms of school projects on what different cultures did. The elementary school, Stevens did, and we did have programs about different cultures in terms of learning the songs. I can sing a lot of Hebrew songs. I was very aware of the Chinese holiday, the New Year. There they made an effort, to share the traditions--but not at Cooke, no. Story_ID: 373373 Speaker 1: At Cooke Junior High School [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] tell me was there a teacher or someone there that might have inspired you in any way, especially with your art (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To tell you the truth, no I don't remember even art class there. I know that's weird but I don't remember one thread of art there. I remember I had, I think a lot it had to do with hormones. I had a crush on one of the students and it was like, ugh, I mean I wish that one could separate education from having crushes (laughter), 'cause I was obsessed with this kid, it was ridiculous. But no, I think what I remember really, the nicest teacher was my home ec [home economics] teacher. I remember we cooked shad and the bones disappeared, I mean it was like magical, you know. And when I went to Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] they gave me a big party, like a little send-off party. I just remember just being appreciated as a person, like the teacher was very respectful of all the students, but no, I don't even remember the teachers. Speaker 1: Did your father [Howard Pindell] continue to take you to see art and, and to museums and things during that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So your interest still was there with the art, you just don't--? Speaker 2: Yes, well what they would actually do is they would take me to a museum and sort of drop me off you know (laughter). It's not that they would necessarily walk around with me, they would, I would you know, meet them at a specific time, I guess to come home; but no, I just was kind of, I would say almost like a blighted period, where I was just a teenager, or early or late adolescent, whatever and I just got you know involved, with how to dress and then just seeing what happened to my friend Denise [ph.], feeling like, oh my God if I were something that offend someone I be like get attacked, but that was only, I probably was there only two years and then Girls High was a four year high school. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: So I left, I think I had one more year at Cooke before I would have graduated, but then Girls High took me on for that third year, so I was at Girls High you know for the full four years, and Girls High was located right up the street from Stevens School [Thaddeus Stevens School of Observation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so it's like I was back in that neighborhood again, but it was the old school. They then refurbished or built actually a building near where Cooke was so I ended up in that area. I remember Girls High was very intimidating, there were a lot of smart people like instead of my being a smart kid in class, I was kind of sort of smart. I remember I failed French, (laughter) what a humiliating, oh God, and a lot of the kids I think had more sophisticated backgrounds, you know some of the things that were new to me that weren't new to them. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: I think the foreign language 'cause I wasn't really exposed to foreign languages. I think that was one, my weakest point. I just hadn't heard the languages. I did have, oh, no. I started studying languages in at, at Girls High. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean eventually I did okay, I think I had French for a while then I had Spanish, but I think in a home where the you know the kids have been exposed to a foreign language they're more likely to hear it, and so I just really floundered, I was like so stupid with language. I still am, but I, you know I'm more familiar than I, you know as an adolescent I was totally unfamiliar. Story_ID: 373374 Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did outside of school, what type of music did you listen to now? Speaker 2: Well, let's see now. Speaker 1: 'Cause we're talking in the middle '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Well, it was painful growing up. I remember listening, let's see, oh God, if I could remember the names. I was listening mainly to black musicians and kind of the crooners (laughter). I know my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] liked Nat King Cole, but I was interested in like dance music, you know where the teenagers were dancing to at the time. I remember there was the twist, and oh, God, I'm so. I was the wallflower; that was something that was so painful when I was growing up. Like I'd go to these parties, and I was always--if anyone's gonna ask anyone to dance they were not gonna ask me. I remember I was this skinny kid with glasses, you know, standing up against the wall. While everybody danced that I was the one not dancing. I remember feeling like such an eyesore. And the music, I can't remember, I mean I can hear the music in a way, but I can't remember exactly the names of the groups, but it was whatever the popular music was-- Speaker 1: Music was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) within the black community. Speaker 1: Okay, what about, did you watch television at all? Speaker 2: Well, I remember 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] (laughter), I remember 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie,' I remember the Mousketeers, we eventually got television, I remember, of course black and white, and I remember being afraid. It was a program called 'Truth or Consequences' or oh, there was a really odd program that showed you kind of freaky, scary things and I couldn't stand it. I think they showed you, how when they did werewolf movies the face would transform, you know with the make-up and it scared me to death. And then I remember there was this movie that was out around that time, which it's sometimes on television, called 'The Thing' and that was, that scared me to death, I could like barely watch that movie, oh. Story_ID: 373375 Speaker 1: What kind of student were you, well as far as studying and being organized at what, you know, what kind--? Speaker 2: I think that I had so much kind of turmoil, both from home 'cause my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] and I didn't get along that well, and just general turmoil dealing with, for example, when I was going to Stevens School [Thaddeus Stevens School of Observation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the elementary school there were problems with gang wars; and it was whites against blacks, and blacks against blacks, and whites against whites. I remember one of my classmates at Cooke Junior High [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], it was still going on. He was, one of my white classmates, his brother was in a gang, and what I understood was he tried to intervene in a fight, he got stabbed at the base of his spine and became a paraplegic; so you know, I mean just, it, there was so much turmoil plus you have the segregation and the racism and all, and the--you know the hormones and the growing up. I was really a wreck (laughter), I was just you know very unhappy, very--just ill at ease, felt really uncomfortable you know the whole thing with sexuality feeling very uncomfortable, where some of the other women were more advanced sexually than I was. I was like, the, the--you know the smart kid with the glasses. I just felt out of place everywhere, I felt really awkward. So it was, I would study hard, but I think I had so much on my mind, that's why I wish in a way I could have gone to school without having all the turmoil; even college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], I mean I think college could have been easier if I didn't have all the turmoil, you know 'cause it was during, it was in the '60s [1960s] you know during the Civil Rights Movement. But I think the turmoil that took the greatest toll were the hormones, you know getting involved with relationships, or not having a relationship, and just the whole social pressure, that I think was, I mean if I had been able to just study (laughter), I would have done better I think, or done my work, which eventually I did. I moved away, when I was in Boston [Massachusetts] for school I moved in with a family, and I was able, it was less turmoil for me than being in the dorm. Speaker 1: So in this gifted program, or gifted school for girls [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you weren't able to study and concentrate on your work? Speaker 2: I was more able to study and concentrate (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, more able, you were? Speaker 2: I would say when I was in Cooke Junior High it was just not-- Speaker 1: Was not? Speaker 2: It wasn't easy. Story_ID: 373376 Speaker 1: Okay, so moving on to high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was there someone there that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well. Speaker 1: --that might have influenced you a little bit? Speaker 2: Well, there were two teachers, the art teachers I remember clearly, pretty clearly. There were three art teachers, one hated me (laughter), she was horrible, a woman named Mrs. Cartledge [ph.], she was horrible, but the white students I've met, you know over the years who had her said she was horrible, too, so it wasn't that she was just not after me. Then there was a Mrs. Bloch [Gladys Bloch], and Ephraim Weinberg, who were very helpful with the arts. And my only disagreement was when I found that Mrs. Block tended to grade me high on things that I now with more knowledge about the arts, things I would consider weak, and she would grade me very low on things that I considered very advanced. And I mean from a perspective now, just looking though all those things where the grades were still on them, you know. So I, I think there was some confusion there as to their own level of sophistication in the arts, which confused, me because I would really be graded poorly for something that was excellent, and I found that with Mrs. Block more than Weinberg. He was, he was very encouraging, but he had a nice personality and later on he became head of a museum and invited me to that museum, you know he knew me as a professional artist later. Story_ID: 373377 Speaker 1: So were you still interested in reading? Did you start reading at this? Speaker 2: I started (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What age did you really start? Speaker 2: Very young, very young. Speaker 1: Started very young. Speaker 2: Very young. Speaker 1: So now you, what, what are you reading now? Speaker 2: You know, that's an interesting point. When I was very young, I loved things like 'Doctor Doolittle' ['The Story of Doctor Doolittle,' Hugh Lofting] and 'The Wizard of Oz' [L. Frank Baum]. Then, I think I was just reading school textbooks. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, I can remember, let's see what can I remember? Language books, I was still struggling with language, that's, I was think taking French at that point. I was still, that, that seemed to pull a lot of my energy. There were some books we had about history, but I remember mainly struggling with the language books. I mean, I can visualize those books. I mean, they were a living thing for me. Story_ID: 373378 Speaker 1: In high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] did you go to the prom or-- Speaker 2: It was a miserable (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or were you active in--? Speaker 2: --experience (laughter), but yes, I went to the prom. I mean I would invite--my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] had friends with sons, so you know, I was not at the stage where I was really with a boyfriend, but oh, yes. I remember going, it was miserable, miserable. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and that's because you had to go with a friend of a (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I had to dress up you know in something long with a crinoline and then I was, you know my date was someone I hardly knew--and I was very shy, I was very shy. Story_ID: 373379 Speaker 1: What about sports at this point, any--? Speaker 2: I was about as sporty as a marshmallow. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: That was my weakest point, I remember in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I almost didn't graduate because I had gotten like a D in physical ed [physical education] (laughter). I was--oh, it's interesting, the person that was in my high school was Shirley Clarke Franklin [Shirley Franklin], who you know was your mayor [of Atlanta, Georgia] and she was very, I mean she was smart, she was you know, strong. She would compete during the contests, during the physical ed side and I was just awful. I never felt physically strong, now I don't know whether that's connected to my kidney. I don't know whether it's from being in a stroller too long when I was a kid, but I never had physical strength. Story_ID: 373380 Speaker 1: Did your family have magazines at home? Do you remember Life magazine and--? Speaker 2: I remember Life, I remember Time, I remember Ebony, and I remember Jet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, now we're coming up to the civil rights era in the '60s [1960s]. Were your parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell] involved in civil rights at all? Speaker 2: My father was when he got fired that time, but then they kind of discouraged me from getting involved, I think they were afraid I'd go to jail or whatever, but what, I think of the thing that I remember the clearest, I was really angry about Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], so I would go and picket Woolworths, you know when the groups were picketing you know about the segregated lunch counters, and I would have to tell my parents I was going to the hairdresser. I couldn't tell them I was going to go to Woolworths and picket them, 'cause they would get hysterical. So I would just, you know I'd go to the hairdresser's (laughter) and then I'd go to Woolworths, you know. I just had to tell them that. Speaker 1: Do you remember any talk about Emmett Till? Speaker 2: Nothing, I leaned all that on my own. Speaker 1: On your own, and Rosa Parks? Speaker 2: I would say, in general I mean she was just a hero, you know I mean, you couldn't miss Rosa Parks (laughter). Speaker 1: I was just wondering whether your family talked about it or did you just learn about it in school or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always learned about it. Speaker 1: --or was it later, later on that you learned on. Speaker 2: No, I learned about it at the time. Speaker 1: At the time? Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure I heard about it, but my parents wouldn't, my parents-- it's almost like civil rights was a taboo subject matter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, it's, when we would go to a motel and motel would turn us down, there was never a discussion about why, you know, why would they do that, it was like silence, you know and you just knew, you know, you knew the reason 'cause it was that vacancy sign out as soon as we left, so you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, what about voting? Did your parents vote? Speaker 2: Yes, but my grandmother [Loula Lewis] was against voting. My mother's mother said that the men should vote, and yet she was up on the roof fixing the roof (laughter), the men should fix the roof, you know (laughter), from that point of view, anyway. Story_ID: 373381 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school, and how did you decide where you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, I mean in a funny way, it was a default decision. The high school generally was very good about placing the white female students, but they always told the black female students, or regularly told us to go to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], which was a teachers college in Pennsylvania which wasn't that well known for being a very good school. I wanted to go where I could get art as well as a university education. So after looking through catalogues or at least reading about them, I choose Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. My father [Howard Pindell] and mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] helped me apply, you know, I mean I didn't apply through Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] 'cause they weren't really offering any help, except for Cheyney. So I got into Boston U in the January class, but there was no January class. I graduated from high school when I was sixteen and the class for the B.F.A. program began in September 1961, but I graduated in January '61 [1961]. So my parents were willing to pay for an extra, and I think I had some little scholarship money, we were willing to pay for an extra semester where I just took liberal arts courses, and then I joined that B.F.A. program at the school in September, I joined a class. Story_ID: 373382 Speaker 1: Well, it had to be a big difference leaving and going to Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: I hated it, I hated Boston. It was gray, it was cold. The segregation in Boston was more prominent than Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in that if you went to restaurant, the restaurant, the maitre d' could say, "I'm sorry, we don't serve blacks." I mean, you would go with your school friends and you know, they'd stay and you'd leave or they would come with you and leave, but you just never knew. When I would buy art supplies, they were always like reluctant to sell anything to me, but I remember buying my supplies and getting them even if there was sort of unpleasant feelings or unpleasant vibe, I still got my supplies; but I, you know I could go to a restaurant and just be told, "Get out," (laughter), so I remember that was unpleasant. I remember in the dorm, I was running for a office and they took me off the ballot because they said I'd be inappropriate for that office, because I wasn't white. Speaker 1: Do you remember what office it was? Speaker 2: Yes, it was some kind of social liaison with, I think MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with Boston, with Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and with my particular dorm, which was a very big dorm called The Towers and they just simply, you know, if the--I think it was the housemother and her committee of students, white students invited me into a little meeting and just said, "We've taken your name off the ballot because you're inappropriate." So I really hated Boston, for a while I was in an international dorm, which I found more comfortable, more affable, and then finally I just got so annoyed, that I lived with a family in Cambridge [Massachusetts], a family, a musician and an artist who had a daughter about maybe about five or six years younger than I. Their son had gone to Norway to build boats, and they were kind of like hippies, but they ran a summer program that I had attended, and invited me to live with their family. We ate well (laughter), we ate well, it was better than the dorms, but that kind of isolated me from school and I would ride my bicycle back and forth to Boston. But I, in a sense, was happier and studied much better in that environment. Speaker 1: This family was black or white? Speaker 2: It was a white family, but kind of hippie whites that the husband taught cello and the wife was an artist, and they had a couple of kids but they had one kid at home and a dog. They had a house in Cambridge near Harvard. Speaker 1: How far was, is Cambridge from Boston (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to think the equivalent. Well, it's closer than we are right now to Harlem [New York, New York]. I would say, it would be like my living in Inwood [New York, New York] and going to Harlem. Speaker 1: Okay, it's--. Speaker 2: I mean it's right across the river [Charles River] and it's real easy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's close, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know, it was a very, I mean the sad thing is, I, I have two feelings about it: I did well academically, so I was put in an honors dorm and I should've probably stayed in the honors dorm because I think that was a better situation than my being in the huge, kind of anonymous dorms, because I would have, the environment was set up for me to really study; but then the difference was with the family they, I had a really big room and I could paint in my room. So I was really focused on my work, and I mean really strongly focused, and then in the following year I lived in a cooperative house in Cambridge with other, students from other schools. That one I think was a less successful experience, because then you get tied up into the whole social thing with the different schools, and I just, you know, I don't know when it comes to my emotions (laughter) I get, I can get very confused. So, I mean I did well, I still did well in school and I was still going you know back to Boston to you know to attend my classes and all, but I remember the good part about that was, I had applied to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I got in and I remember being thrilled (laughter), well, but I, I wish I had, had probably two years with that family, and I would have been able to focus more than getting all involved with a boyfriend-girlfriend thing 'cause that, that saps my energy (laughter). Story_ID: 373383 Speaker 1: What was your art like at this time? Speaker 2: I was still a figurative painter. I started off working in a kind of academy style when I was in high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and junior high [Jay Cooke Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and oh my parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell] took me to Saturday classes, so I was going to Saturday classes throughout my, my public school time. But now, I don't know, my work was maturing in terms of being able to draw, my drawing got much stronger, but where I went to school [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], the emphasis was on a kind of brown sauce school. In other words you would paint, and your values had to be correct, that is your gray scale, your lights and darks, but they weren't interested in color and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] really brought the interest in color all through a course I took that was Albers, Josef Albers color theory course. So I had the drawing skills fairly mastered, or at least certainly improved by the time I got to graduate school, but the color stuff was really shaky; and then when I got the color information, you know just the education there then I was able to put it together and just start to grow, you know in terms of my own personal style--but I basically entered Yale as a figurative painter. Speaker 1: Do you remember what your first piece was? Speaker 2: Yes, you'll love it, a little brown bunny rabbit (laughter). When I was a kid I painted this, I have it, I still have the painting, it was on a canvas board and it's a little brown bunny rabbit smoking a pipe. It was like my father as a rabbit (laughter). Oh God, an oil, I mean I was a, I had learned actually two when I, you know before I got more information, paint by numbers and you can buy them again now. They're selling them again. I had one that was Christ in Gesthsemane and one another one which was the Virgin Mary, and I was trying to paint like that without the numbers and I was just such a failure (laughter), you know, when I was a little kid. Story_ID: 373384 Speaker 1: So you graduate from Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and tell me about Yale? Speaker 2: Well Yale was actually an incredible education because they exposed us to a lot of, they had a very, shall we say, active visiting artist program. So artists would come in from New York [New York], it was very pro New York, which I thought at the time was really bad, but. Oh, Richard Lindner, Helen Frankenthaler, John Cage, there was a filmmaker, I think it was M. Schiller [ph.]; I'm trying to think who else came, a fellow named Knox Martin--we were exposed to you know, an actively, functioning--Red Grooms also of actual, you know a totally functional group of artists who were very successful in their fields were you know working in the studio. But, I felt it was so New York that there was a New York kind of, almost a stigma. A number of us sort of you know gave New York a stigma, because there was like a slickness and a kind of coldness, callousness, and there, some of the men in the program, they were competing with each other to see who could get the loft first in New York, and who could get the first show, and there was like a kind of cutthroat, blood thirsty feel to it. I think there were only fifteen people in the class, and maybe there were five women, but the men were like, "Argh," you know, they were really at each other's, you know, "I got to a office 50,000 square feet," or whatever, you know you've have a competition to get this before you even graduated. So I remember, you know with a group of students in my class sort of pooh-poohing, "I'm not going to New York," (laughter). Whatever, but there were no jobs. They were not at the time hiring African American, Asians, Latinos, anybody in the art schools, they were only hiring white men, and the women couldn't get the jobs, even the white men that didn't graduate got jobs, so I mean there were, I mean what do you? And while I was at Yale, I was working in the Garvan Collection [Mabel Brady Garvan Art Collection], which was the American and British collection. I took art history as a minor, and one of my professors brought me into do museum work which was basically, I mean what was I doing? You know, polishing silver or whatever, beautiful stuff, but they at the time recommended me for a Ford Foundation [Ford Foundation Fellowship] in museum work and Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] turned me down, because they said I was an artist, but they were encouraging me to go into museum work as an alternative, so I ended up at the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York]; but it was a fluke, because I came to the city because it was the closest I could, well I didn't want to be in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with my parents, because my father [Howard Pindell] wanted me to go back to school to go to, into elementary teaching and I didn't want to do that. So I had very little money, and I came to the city and through a friend at the dorm at Yale, I found a roommate and so I was living on a shoestring and pounding the streets looking for work. I believe I took the welfare caseworker test, 'cause a lot of artists were working as welfare case workers, and I got a job at an art gallery that still exists, called the J. Parker Gallery [ph.] on Madison Avenue; they sell posters. And I walked into the Modern to use the ladies room, I had a little membership and I said, "Well," you know after I was feeling like, cynical, you know I've looked everywhere, I've signed up with agencies whatever, I walked in I thought, "Well, let me go to personnel," so the personnel person at the time was an Asian woman and she saw that I had museum experience (laughter). Whatever, and she sent me upstairs to interview for a job that they had in the Department of Circulating National and International Exhibitions [sic. Department of Circulating Exhibitions]. The person who interviewed me was Victor Smythe [Victor N. Smythe] who later became a curator at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]. He was a Panamanian artist, but also, eventually became curatorial and he said that well, "A job just became available; the woman literally quit this week. I want to have you interviewed for that job." He said, "It hasn't even been announced yet." I mean with, it was all like serendipitous luck. So he sent me to meet a woman named Inez Garson, who was one of the administrators there and her assistant was Lynn Schaffern [ph.] who later became an attorney and was the head attorney for NOW [National Organization of Women]; I mean she is now in that position; and Liz, I'm sorry Inez Garson eventually went to the Hirshhorn [Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.] and became a curator at the Hirshhorn. Anyway, she liked me, apparently, immediately and wanted me to get the job but they had to advertise the job. So they went through, you know interviewing people. She said, "If you can wait, you know, for about a month, we have to, we have to interview other people, and I'll let you know at the end of the month." And at the end of the month, August 1st they let me know that I would have the job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I mean it was luck, pure luck. Story_ID: 373385 Speaker 1: I just wanna step back before we go on talking about working at the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York]. When you are in college, when you were at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], this is right at the Civil Rights Movement and a time when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] are killed and the Vietnam War, also. Did you have any, did you march or do anything, or be involved in any of the activities with the war? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember I was eating in the law school during graduate school 'cause they had a cheap contract and good food and we would, they had televisions there and I would watch the Vietnam War, and I would go New York [New York] to walk in the marches, the peace marches so, and also my work changed. Suddenly I started, I didn't realize this until later, I went to a friend who was working at the medical school and I was able to get a human skeleton, not a cast, but a real one that they used you know I guess for teaching purposes, and I started painting skeletons. So, I mean, I was literally painting death in my paintings, but it didn't dawn to me at the time that this was connected with the war but I had never, ever you know thought of using skeletons. So that changed actually in the work and I think that was you know my consciousness of the war, and then the amount of death that was going on, 'cause I think 3 million Vietnamese were killed. I can't remember what our numbers are but they are certainly nowhere near 3 million, yeah so. Story_ID: 373386 Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 2: Now, I was in New York [New York] then, I believe I had started at the museum already. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember being around, you know, the, of course the staff at the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] and they were afraid that literally there would be riots in Harlem [New York, New York]. I just remember the tension from that, at the time I was living in Brooklyn [New York] I believe, yeah in Brooklyn, and I think I also, that, I think it might have been that weekend I went back to New Haven [Connecticut] to, I think it was a wedding. One of my, you know, colleagues from school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], but I remember I was very upset by it and I did a piece about it that would, that actually was traveling in the Martin Luther King show where I showed King and Coretta Scott King and I started using the collage, newspaper and water based paints. It was about eighteen by twenty-four, yeah. Story_ID: 373387 Speaker 1: And what about Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]? Speaker 2: I remember I was in Boston [Massachusetts] when Kennedy was killed and I became very personally afraid, because I felt the racism in Boston was really intense and I thought immediately if a black man killed him they'll kill us, 'cause I remember being on my bicycle sort of peddling, at that point I was sixty--what, what year did he die, do you remember? Was it '64 [1964] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-- Speaker 2: Remember when Kennedy-- Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963] or '64 [sic. 1963]. Speaker 2: I was trying, I think I must've been living in Cambridge [Massachusetts] at the time, so I remember I was peddling and I was just really afraid if he killed by someone black, that the whites would literally kill us. I remember that a real strong thought. I was sort of not, I didn't trust Kennedy, he, he was very liberal but, which was fine, you know which was great considering, you know and I'm sure they killed him, there's conspiracy theories that you know the mafia killed him or the government, a shadow government killed him, whatever, but I didn't--I didn't trust him because he was so good looking. I know that's stupid, but I thought, "Oh my God, this man is so good looking, you know, he can get away with anything," so I had kind of an adolescent take of him which was silly (laughter), but I would see he and Jacqueline Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] in a car, driving past the school, you know, since of course they lived, their family was up there, so I would see them periodically, and I thought he was a real good-looking man, so I was like, "Ooh, be careful (laughter)." Story_ID: 373388 Speaker 1: Well, all right let's go back to, you are now working at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] and so after they waited and they had to interview all these people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --then we can pick up from there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They brought me in; I was brought in as a curatorial, no it was called exhibition assistant and what I did was work, doing basically the grunt work on shows that were being traveled by the school to university galleries, and in some cases to foreign museums. My first assignment was a Max Ernst show, which was put together by Lucy Lippard, he was very involved with the feminist movement and she introduced me to the feminist movement as a result. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I mean it was lucky that I got to meet her, I wouldn't have met her any other way I'm sure, not until later. Speaker 1: Do you remember an exhibit or was it during your time, 'Harlem on My Mind' ['Harlem on My Mind: Cultural Capital of Black America, 1900-1968'] that there was a lack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know there was protest. Speaker 1: --right a lack of participation of minorities? Speaker 2: Yes, well I think that's as, as I worked in the museum and I saw how segregated the museum was itself, in other words there, maybe there was Jacob Lawrence, maybe, I mean nobody else, (laughter) you know. Maybe Bearden [Romare Bearden] maybe. I became very aware and that was one of the events that made me more acutely aware of museums and their culpability. Benny Andrews, who recently passed away, he was very involved in getting you know people together, at least standing out the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and protesting, 'Harlem on My Mind,' but were other groups as interesting. There were black and white groups that were protesting the Modern and I assume and Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] and women's groups who were protesting these various museums for their lack of inclusion of women and people of color--and it was a pretty active thing. I mean there was a group called GAAG [Guerrilla Art Action Group] and then there was the Art Workers' Coalition in the late '60s [1960s], there were different feminist groups and then the employees themselves went on strike, granted it was for workers' rights and having decent working salaries, 'cause when I started working at the museum, I started for one hundred dollars a week, and I got after two years a five dollar raise; you know, so you know it was barely, you know a living wage, it was and by the time you take taxes out, social security there was hardly anything left; so, the museum was picketed quite a bit during the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 373389 Speaker 1: You started working for the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] in 19 (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967], August '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: In '67 [1967] right after you came out of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So when you think back, because there aren't very many curators-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --of female -- Speaker 2: And there still not. Speaker 1: --and black. Speaker 2: Yeah, there are females that are white, but-- Speaker 1: Not, not black females? Speaker 2: Not black females, no very few. Speaker 1: So, what, what do you think about the fact that back in the late or early '70s [1970s] that you were in that position? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was just luck, to tell you the truth. A confluence of my working in a museum before, even if I was doing grunt work, the fact, I mean it was so few people who worked in a museum. At the time, museum work became a place for women to seek as a place of employment. One of the women in my class was actually was working in the department that I eventually joined, cataloging books for them as a temporary position, so there were odds and ends of jobs you could get, as a woman; and the teaching profession, again, which is very closed, I think it's kind of amazing, but I think it has to do with my having a Yale degree, my having art history minor, my having a professor who taught me, willing to give me a recommendation and my having museum experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and again of no use to museum experience. I mean what I had before was (laughter) was silly, but anyway. Story_ID: 373390 Speaker 1: Well, you talked about a lot of different organizations that you were involved in, the feminist women's groups (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --what groups were you involved in? Speaker 2: Okay, actually I was not involved in the black women's groups that were established here that were basically New Yorkers. In a sense I was the odd person out, because I was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; and I felt it, you know. It's like I didn't have any real connections here [New York, New York], I guess you would even say socially, you know with, with families my connections were back in Philadelphia. The group that I think was the most prominent that I joined was called A.I.R. [A.I.R. Gallery], Artists in Residence [Artists in Residence Inc.], it was a women's feminist cooperative gallery down in SoHo [New York, New York], but I mean, I was the only person of color and then Ana Mendieta who was Latino joined, and I think an Asian person joined, but generally women of color were tokens. I think they basically wanted me to be in because I was at the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], 'cause they thought that maybe that way they could, I mean I may be wrong, but I wouldn't be surprised if that might have been one of the reasons why I was invited to join. Speaker 1: Well were you part of the original group that put the organization together? Speaker 2: Yes, but I was not the corps, there was a corps of like four or five people that went around and selected the rest of the people for the group. Speaker 1: Well didn't you come up with a name? Speaker 2: I came up with a name, yeah. Speaker 1: How, how did that happen with the Jane Eyre thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there was a meeting. I remember yeah it was great. It was a meeting at Joyce Kosloff's down on Worcester Street and we were playing with names, and first name was Jane Eyre and then I said A.I.R., Artists in Residence and it stuck, so they kept it. Yeah, so I did name the gallery, I did name the gallery. Speaker 1: So what was some of the things that they wanted to do? I mean what was the first and second and third thing on the agenda, that was their priority--? Speaker 2: I don't even know if I can remember back that far. I think they wanted to be able to have a physical presence in SoHo so that when the art magazines went around to review, they couldn't say that you were off in the boondocks; they, you know, they could walk by your show on their way to Paulie Cooper [Paula Cooper Gallery, New York, New York] or on their way to Castelli [sic. Leo Castelli Gallery, New York, New York] or whatever. I think that was one of the main things was to have a show place in the prominent area where other galleries were and also to you know showcase women's work. Basically, we started off with two-person shows and then that became like a one-person show, in later years. I was only with the gallery I think three years or so, because I found committee work with having a full-time job, it was kind of a little tension between the women in the gallery who had husbands who supported them or who had maybe even money, what did they need, you know a job? And the people who had jobs, the committee work was very had on the people who had jobs because you had a full-time job plus the committee work, plus you had to do your own work, and the other women didn't, some of the other women didn't have jobs; so they, you know, were free to do whatever. Story_ID: 373391 Speaker 1: So I decided to try the commercial sector, but also the alternative sector. Linda Bryant [Linda Goode Bryant] had Just Above Midtown Gallery [New York, New York] and she had, I think David Hammons was part of it. This was before David Hammons was known and she had a space, I believe it was on Leonard Street for a while, Leonard or Franklin [Street], and then she also had a space she eventually got on 57th Street, so I showed with her a little while, then I started showing in group shows with Rosa Esmond, but then it was a typical kind of white gallery mentality where they have a black artist, they will not list you with the gallery staple, but people kind of know they can find you there. They didn't want to show they had any black artists. So I ran into that, and I had a really kind of ugly discussion with her about it and I quit the gallery, you know, because she would say things to me like, "Oh, you look just Jewish, I bet they weren't married," I mean just the stuff, it's crazy stuff. So eventually I started showing, and I think this is because of a white feminist artist May Stevens at the Lerner-Heller Gallery [Heller Gallery, New York, New York] which was located, Benny Andrews was in it also, which was located across the street from the Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], but he in '81 [1981] committed suicide. There were problems in terms of money and whatever, but he went out of his way, you know to, he would, if you, he would get full time ads, not full time, full page ads for you, he just went out of his way to really promote his artists, and I think that's where I got a big boost because I would have full-page ads you know. He didn't ask the artist to pay for them, he'd pay for your framing, but then it was very hard to get your money from him when he sold something. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: You know, so I mean there were other kinds of problems with him, and I believe he had a Latino artist on view when he committed suicide. So he was trying, he was one of the first white galleries to take on the white feminists, or really to take on any women, 'cause I mean he also took me on and he started bringing in black artists, you know, he had Benny and myself, and then he had the Latino artist and I think he wanted to get Ana also, Ana Mendieta, but he was you know really at the forefront of integrating a white gallery, but he again was tricky with money, which didn't help. Story_ID: 373392 Speaker 1: Let's talk about galleries. In these, at this time it was just white galleries, there weren't any black galleries and then--. Speaker 2: There was one black had a like, I think it was Betty Parsons, had a, or it might have been another gallery that had a black head of the gallery, but yeah, most, the galleries were mostly white. Speaker 1: Well did black artists prefer to be in white galleries or? Speaker 2: It was hard to find a black gallery then. I'm sure there were some small, maybe private, maybe [HistoryMaker] Peg Alston, I think Peg Alston during the '70s [1970s] had her private, now she has a space but she was functioning as a private dealer. Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you, again when we're talking about galleries, when black galleries started opening up, and you know there were, say when there were quite a few now that were open, would an artist prefer to be in a black gallery or not? Speaker 2: That's something I think each individual artist would answer. I remember Ray Saunders [Raymond Saunders] was I think with either Martha Jackson or Betty Parsons, I think, oh what's his name? [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt I believe was showing with a gallery. I think Bearden [Romare Bearden] was with Ek- Cordier Ekstrom [Cordier and Ekstrom Gallery, New York, New York]. I think there were very few options, I mean the advantage the white galleries have is just the advantage of white privilege. I mean they just simply, the reviewers are more likely to show up there and review their space and more likely to have the cash to take out the full page ads which then induce the critics to show up, because a magazine will make sure you get reviewed. It, you're more likely to be, you know the curators were more likely to go that gallery if they're putting a show together then they would to a black gallery, I mean it's still true, even though I show with N'Namdi [HistoryMaker George N'Namdi], you don't necessarily see the curators going to him to look at work. Most of the curators really, if they can't find you in the art magazines--or very often, people if they can't find you in the art magazines, just don't bother. Speaker 1: I guess that's what I was trying to; to get at, that if you're in a white gallery you're kind of in the mainstream. Speaker 2: You're in the mainstream (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you can actually you know-- Speaker 2: Sometimes although again they might redline you in a sense like what Rosa Esmond was doing to me. She would show me, but she would only, she would not list if she had a listing in Art in America she wouldn't list my name, you know I was just sort of the back, what was a back door, back stockroom artist (laughter), you know. They did that to a lot of black artists. Story_ID: 373393 Speaker 1: Talk about your work 'cause we have some background, but talk about how you started to develop the work that you do and talk about what you consider your first piece as a developed artist? Speaker 2: Okay, I would say that the real development of the work came after I graduated from graduate school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], when I sort of had the tussle between my being a figurative painter and being non-figurative. I became very interested in the circle early on, you know with the mug, but I didn't know what to do with it. I mean it's all unconscious stuff too, but then I remember in graduate school there was a woman, Marada [ph.], what was her first name? She was a white woman married to a Japanese guy. Nancy Marada [ph.], she was really very nice, she was a nice person and I remember she was playing with circles, and I thought, "Huh, you know, that's interesting. Why am I attracted to a circle?" So I started making, well there was painter named Poons [Larry Poons], P-O-O-N-S, and he was in, I guess the color field school, but he was more systemic, he was more systemic painting than color field, and he used ellipsis and she was using circles, it was just sort of jogged something in my mind, so I went out and bought these templates you can buy, in the art supply store that have ellipses and circles and I started doing drawings that used a resist and a water base medium. So I would draw in a like wax crayon or sometimes if you put water over it would resist, and I would do this on graph paper. So you'd have the grid and then I would just put layers and layers of circles or ellipses, more than ellipses; and I got very intrigued by that. So I started just layering things and then I started using a hole punch. I don't know what triggered that. I took files, like you might file you know a document, manila files and I started punching holes in them and I saved all the holes and I started using spray paints and I would spray through and make these big paintings that were sort of the size of that wall like maybe twelve feet or thirteen feet by about nine feet high, where I would just spray this veil of color and then as you spray more and more layers they would start to accumulate in forms, but very kind of vague forms, and I did some of those on stretcher bars, but the stretchers were huge and you had to fold them up and you had to have a big space to store them. So then I took them off the stretcher, which came close to the time that I went to Africa and was looking at textiles, I took it off the stretcher and then someone came along, a dealer named Carl Solway from Cincinnati [Ohio], and saw all the spots on the painting and said, "Well, how many spots on the painting?" So I just took out my bag of little circles and started counting them by numbering them, then I transformed that into putting the numbering on graph paper, you know onto a flat. And then, from there, they became clustered where I just started using a spray adhesive and 3M. I called them up and said I needed something permanent that wouldn't turn brittle or turn yellow and so they recommended a spray adhesive and to this day, thirty years later, those pieces are fine. Also I would spray, I used a thread grid on--the Modern [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] would throw out, they'd cut 'em out in the frame shop and they'd throw out the center, so I would go to the frame shop and they would give me the centers that they were throwing in the garbage and I would just wrap thread around them and made a grid and then I would spray and pile these circles on top. So it was really, I'd say the breakthrough was around '71 [1971], '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then it progressed from there where I started putting the circles under paint and then I was in this car accident and started putting images back in the work, but through post cards, but the circles were still there and then I started driving nails into the piece. I mean it just sort of evolved. Story_ID: 373394 Speaker 1: The tally system, how, how did, why was math important in this whole thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, well the thing the math was really used more as drawing than as formal math. I mean I think the mathematics, and also the graph paper, came from seeing my father [Howard Pindell] write in odometer books, you know whenever we'd travel, he'd write numbers down for the, what I called the speedometer, and he would you know write it the graph paper. So here I would see like five, then you'd have the blue graph paper, so I think that's what drew me into using numbers, although he's using them as functional numbers and I'm using them really as a visual image and then just playing with them as a flat or clustered image. Speaker 1: This is interesting (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's just my mind, it was playfulness, but I think that time allowed me to be playful. First of all, I had a bigger and bigger studio spaces, even though I was working smaller and smaller and also very large. I was either working very small or very large, and there was a certain amount of freedom. I didn't have like now, I you know where I teach I've been out there twenty-something years. I have, if I take the train, it's four, no it's six to eight hours round trip each day on the train, you know between the subway and the train and the campus bus, it takes me a long time. Speaker 1: You're, you're talking about when you left the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: After I left the museum, I-- Speaker 1: After you left the museum then you went to teach at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]. Speaker 2: Teach at Stony Brook, yeah so I' mean I've gotten it down to four hours round trip. I've, I have a ride out now, and when my loft was on 20th [Street] and 7th [Avenue], I was walking distance from Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York], which made it easy. I could just walk, you know, easily to the train in a few minutes, but now that I'm way up, you know north of Harlem [New York, New York], there's a distance to come downtown and it just adds a lot more time to your trip. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 373395 Speaker 1: Let's talk about you leaving. First, before you leave the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] you're in a car accident, right? Speaker 2: It's after I leave. Speaker 1: It's after, it's right after you leave? Speaker 2: It's right after I leave. It's a car accident on the way to school. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me what happened at that point? Speaker 2: Well, my department head at the time Donald Kuspit was driving out to school [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and for that particular trip there was a woman named Margaret Sheffield, a critic who was going out to see a show of mine that was on view at the art gallery, and we were close to school, maybe twenty minutes away and a woman who was actually an ex-nun which was so funny, her husband was head of the fine arts center where I worked. He was an ex-priest. She drove in a heavy car across the, she had back medication, she drove against her light into incoming traffic by crossing the median strip and we were slowing down at the light and she was turning, so she hit us diagonally, I don't know whether that's broadside, and I was sitting the back seat, actually sleeping, and the other woman was upfront and Kuspit was at the wheel and I ended up, I ended up with a concussion and a hip injury, one leg was higher than the other because I was sitting sideways, thank God or else I would have broken my hips, but I was sitting sideways, so when the impact came it pulled my hip out so that my legs were pulled like this, so I had one let, one foot was here, and one foot was there. The neck injury cleared up in time, but, but the head injury, I have a dent right here in my head. My memory just became like a brick wall with bricks missing, and when it first happened, I could not read a watch, I could not read a newspaper, you know, I mean it just, I couldn't comprehend what the symbols meant; and within a day or two, I started to get back, you know, my cognitive abilities. But I was in the hospital about two weeks and then I was convalescing about a month, but I had to go back to teaching. They technically did not have a substitute. The state schools don't hire substitutes like the public schools. So different teachers were trying to teach my classes, and then when I went back I had to use a cane, and my parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell], my parents moved in with me in my loft and my father would drive me to school and take the train with me, but it was very hard for me to walk, I think partly 'cause the legs were uneven and also the head injury, I think it disturbed my inner ear, so I was always extremely dizzy, it was like vertigo. For years I was dizzy; I don't have that anymore thank God, but if I got under certain light conditions, like fluorescent light made me like almost pass out. There's something about the, the pulse of the light that was hard to deal with. So that was a very hard experience. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 373396 Speaker 1: So leaving the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York] and going to teach now at Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], the tradeoff to you was worth it even though you had to travel a long way (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, I loved, I loved my museum job and I liked some of the people there; I mean it was sort of like, almost like being with a family, you know because you were with these people five days a week, every week, year after year. But I had a boss from hell and apparently there was something on the, I think NPR [National Public Radio] where they said that 70 percent of people who quit, quit because they have a mean boss. I had a mean boss, and I was just tired you know, I was just tired of putting up with it so I decided I would try to find a teaching job, but I didn't first consider that I would have a lot of time. I have a lot of time now, I mean it gives you tremendous time compared to you know a job that's five days a week that may you know bleed over into six or seven days a week. Now, I mean, I basically teach two days a week. There are times that I have to go out for meetings, but I still have, you know, like a month between Christmas and school starting again, maybe even more than a month and then three months in the summer; and I'm on sabbatical now so I don't go back to the classroom until August 31st. So, I'm off this whole, I mean every six years you get a sabbatical. Speaker 1: So were you with the time that you have, did you, did your artwork become more? Did you start to produce more (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Different. Actually, you know what I did? I actually produced less (laughter) which doesn't make sense, but I did a lot of pieces that were not just process pieces, 'cause the other one I would just do them. Now it's like there's intellect and I, I do research. I'll read about because I did a piece ['Coup'] about Bush [President George Walker Bush] and there was certain reading and certain even history I had to be exposed to. Do I make it a thoughtful piece? I've done pieces about slavery, you know where I had to do certain kind of research about it for the piece to be an informative piece. So I want educational elements to be built into my work now, as opposed to it just being about process because when I working at the museum I was just generating pieces, you know I was just making them, it was a physical process and I'd just repeat that process and get different results and now it's like I do the reading, I use text in the piece. I might choose an image to be in the piece, I have to research it to find the image and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Also, I have more time to develop them. Story_ID: 373397 Speaker 1: --Talking about your pieces becoming more intellectual I guess you would say also, but I just wanted to step back a second because I really want to talk about how your work has developed to the point where it is now. But is it true that you really want black people to be able to collect art, and so therefore, you know, you create pieces that would fit their budget? Speaker 2: Well, that's one reason why I became involved with printmaking and also my smaller dot pieces although those are own are more expensive in a way that I expected them to be, but I started working with prints again back in the early I think around maybe 2000 to 2001, and those are in the range you can buy something for maybe eight hundred [dollars], maybe even six hundred [dollars] whatever, but what I do sometimes find is there's some younger collectors and I'll lower the price for them. The dealers hate me for it (laughter) the dealers hate me for it, but sometimes people will come to me privately you know and say you know this is how much money we have, or we really want a piece of yours, you know we're just starting out, and I will let them have it you know I'll give them a lower price. But one thing I as you know as I as my work developed I became a little annoyed at myself at what I call the imperial size. Like I personally like to work very big, but only museums that are extraordinarily wealthy people can afford it and I had to really think like, "What am I doing?" So I don't make as much big work as I used to and work more on you know just sizes this big, doing the dot pieces again. The big work with the social consciousness stuff, generally I need that scale for that; but I find that the pieces that seem to be very within the range of, of some budgets are those little dot things--and people like those better than the big ones, you know because it's more joy in it, I guess? And the other ones are just a little depressing that they don't want to live with it, but also I see it as an imperial size and feel it as a kind of, I wouldn't use the word handicap but I've been trained to do the imperial size; that's the Yale school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], it's huge, and that I have to stand back and see like what am I doing, you know, but I love that size when it comes to my--I do the research there's plenty of room for me to express the research. Story_ID: 373398 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the pieces that you have done that--? Speaker 2: Oh, the big ones? Speaker 1: Yeah, the ones that you have to do the research for that you enjoy doing now? Speaker 2: Well, I did a piece that was in my last show, it was called 'In My Lifetime' and what I have is like a strip of I think red at the bottom representing blood in terms of slavery and wars and stuff and then I have a section of water which somehow the Middle Passage comes back into my work, a lot I want to keep referring to that. Then above that is another strip of, of water but it's all done in camouflage patterns you would have on a military uniform and then on this field you have two screaming heads, my head at maybe '40s [1940s] and the other maybe in the '50s [1950s], so it's like it represents a passage of time and the top there is a strip of images from bomb tests in the Pacific [Pacific Ocean] as well as Nagasaki [Japan], I don't remember if I included Hiroshima [Japan], but I wanted to refer to in my lifetime these wars have happened, these holocausts have happened. And then I use a photo transfer process to show various atrocities. I had to do the research to even find the images. I mean some I got through the library which were the bombs, bomb images and then, and then I just used the photo realistic process to translate, then the image is like I have an Angolan child with no limbs, with no legs from when we were the ones that sponsored the, putting landmines in Angola, we have to have the largest amputation rate in the world. Then there are images from Iraq because I was really against the Iraq War from the beginning and then the embargo which starved, you know millions to death. I mean we're doing we're killing, you know it's all killing, so I look at image, well I found images of children in bomb shelters where we in Iraq, we had bombed and killed women and children, so I have images. It's a hard thing to look at, and then at the bottom of the painting, the painting is about the size of that wall, maybe twelve feet by about I think this one is about eight feet high, or seven feet, and then at the front of the painting I have like a tree stump, like you know like a tree surgeon would have given me. It's literally the from here to here and maybe about that big and round, and on it is a Bible, a large print Bible. At the top of the various pages are stamped with rubber stamps, different holocausts, including not only the Holocaust that the Jews went through, although I find so often the Jewish people see it as the, the only holocaust, but Rwanda and Angola, you know just so when you flip the Bible you have these different holocausts; mainly to express in, well there are two things: one is my usual struggle about God whether he exists or not, and culpability or responsibility (laughter). Okay, one thing is the Bible says throughout it that God will protect you, the meek will inherit the earth, and I'm saying like, "So where, where, when does this start?" You know, it hasn't happened and there's been all these wars and the other that there are various religions that say you know, you know, they claim to be good and yet they will foment wars, like what's happening with the Evangelical Christians seeing that pushing war, pushes what they feel is like the end times; you know it's terrifying that Bush [President George Walker Bush] would start a war in order to fulfill prophecy, or fulfill his friend's prophecy and also line his friends' pockets with you know, a lot of money--so you know just war profiteering. So it was all that sort of in one piece. Story_ID: 373399 Speaker 1: There's another one that I did where I have an oval like an egg shape, I have the Middle Passage at the bottom, and I painted the water from a photograph that I took when I was in Senegal of the water that we would have crossed, okay, it was the port or whatever, and then there is a strip that has chains that represent slavery; then and at the top, you have names of people who were enslaved, who've reached freedom, who found freedom and there is a shelf with books which give you their story. So if you look here on the painting, and it says like, Tamara Palmer, then you look in the book, well you on a panel above the shelf, and it says, Tamara Thomas such and such a book page so and so, and I have all the books on the shelf and you can then stand and read her story. Yeah, so that was another one that involved you know, I had to find the books and then select the names, and then on the ocean I have names of all the ports we were taken to and then the just the center, the gray area with the chain just says Middle Passage, so that one just requires effort on people's part to read the story. Trying to think what other? There's another one I did which I consider my (Unclear) history of slavery painting which looks like a DNA but on its side, and it shows African masks on the left with the names of the various groups and on the right you have African masks but the names of black inventors, and then I have the Middle Passage in the middle with the water and I have slave ships and skulls, 'cause a lot of us were thrown overboard for insurance or if we were pregnant and had a bad pregnancy they'd just throw you overboard. Then there's text on the chains listing the different countries in Europe that were involved with the slave trade and on the right it lists all the ports of call we were taken to plus the cities and sort of states that had slavery. I mean Vermont had slavery, Massachusetts, Canada had slavery and so forth, and then there's like this compressed map of the South and on it are images of: it's a Ku Klux Klan [KKK] reunion, which is totally weird with everybody in which with those peaked hats, and then there's an image of, the painting is called 'Slavery Memorial/Lash,' it's the image of an eye which represents my great-great-grandmother being blind in one eye from a slaver's whip, and then next to it is a box, a Plexiglas box, and in it are handouts that people can take which lists black inventors and what they invented, so you can match the name up with the name of the inventor on the list and then they're additional names. So it's just that sort of thing, it takes time (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what medium is this done in? Speaker 1: I have to use acrylic now because I'm allergic to oil. I've used lead white for so many years, and I just got allergic to the solvents for oil paint. So back in the '70s [1970s], I started working with acrylic; '60s [1960s] I was working with oil, but the, the early '70s [1970s] acrylic. Story_ID: 373400 Speaker 1: The painting 'Autobiography'-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, there, there're several in that series (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And all of them have that Middle Passage type thing in it? Speaker 2: Some of them. Speaker 1: Some of them? Speaker 2: Some of them do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, there's one, there's one that I'm sort of well known for that illustrated a lot, it's a big blue one. Speaker 1: Blue one, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, that the whole thing in a way all that blue represents the Middle Passage and there's a, there's also a section that shows ocean that would you know be more even more specific than 'In My Lifetime' has ocean; 'Slavery Memorial' ['Slavery Memorial/Lash']; 'Slave Narrative' [ph.] is the one I was telling you about, that has ocean; and the 'Slavery Memorial/Lash' also has the Middle Passage. Speaker 1: How many are in that series, how many paintings? Speaker 2: I never counted them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, there might be let's see, I'm trying to think. There might be three, there might be about seven or eight; because the others are more specific to my specific situation, the earlier ones--and then the other ones become more historical. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about the earlier ones that you said are more specific (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the earlier ones were in the late '80s [1980s] after '85 [1985]. There's one called 'Scapegoat' that the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] has and it was originally done for an exhibition that Judith Wilson was involved with which had to do with the rage of children and child abuse, but then the exhibition was shut down and restructured because the curator died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and so they just made it the local Florida (unclear), so that piece was dropped from the show, so I carried it a step further and made it about scapegoat issues in general. And in it they're like three images, or three figures where I cut my figure out. I lie down on the canvas, cut it out and sew it back in. So I have basically three of those figures, there's a big target and on it says race and gender and then a big smiley face, it reminds me of the American thing, you know with the, you know, "Have a nice day," and then we drop a bomb. Then there is a kind of picture of my childhood, actually I have it as one of the pictures I was gonna show you, with a little ball but it's sort of ironic because I'm like a three year old kid holding a circle, and then later the circle becomes interesting to me. It just talks about anger also, you know when someone is scapegoated off of and the person, or something that I've noticed quite often if I'm in a group of people and it's really hard to explain, but it's something that I've noticed for years, that if someone wants to, if someone wants to, or if there's something they're angry about they will not get angry at the white male, they might get a little angry at the white female, but they will get really mad at the black female, and then there's some people who become, like I have a graduate student who it's a--I really shouldn't put his story on tape, but the reaction to me was he was shrieking (laughter) in email, and yet the white fellow that drives me to work, he was telling him the same story and saying yes, he was to blame. "Oh, my God why did I make a mistake," but to me he's shrieking and yet blaming me, you know, I mean I've seen that so consistently, I mean we even have a secretary at work who's incredibly condescending to me, but she's not like that with the whites. You know so you see this kind of double consciousness, I mean it's called doubling of it. They have written, a man named Robert Lifton [Robert Jay Lifton] wrote about it literally and called it doubling where the Nazis would go home and pet the dog and have their family and then they'd come to a death camp and kill people, you know (laughter) so it's like they can be friendly on one hand and really manically evil on another hand. Story_ID: 373401 Speaker 1: You took a class in astronomy. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And some works came out of that also, tell me about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes that was interesting. That was actually another fluke. I always wanted to take an astronomy class, and I had signed up for a writing class because I felt that my, at The New School [The New School for Social Research, New York, New York], I felt my writing needed to be improved and no one else signed up for the class, so they canceled it. They still had my money, and they said, "Well, we'll either give you your money back, or choose another class." So it turned out that I chose a class which was being taught by an African American professor, which I didn't know, in beginning astronomy; he was one of the astronomers. He graduated from Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], which I didn't know; got his Ph.D. in astronomy there. And he was one of the astronomers at the Museum of Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: What did you say his name was? Speaker 2: I don't remember, but I think it was something Dawson [ph.], he was like a crazy teacher, he was really a nut, but I learned so much from him and the visual material he brought in, was, is it Darcy? It might have been William Darcy [ph.], something like that. He brought in such incredible images from the Hubble Telescope [Hubble Space Telescope] that it totally blew my mind. I'd never seen, I mean I had never thought about we're, I think he said the earth is moving at some enormous, I can't remember the exact figure but it was something like 600,000 miles, I mean some enormous figure. We don't feel any wind, the trees aren't falling off, you know we're not falling off the earth or being flung off the whole, you know this, the force of, what is it? Speaker 1: Gravity (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gravity. And then, just I mean just the whole hugeness, vastness of the cosmos. I had no sense of that, and he just really, just totally blew my mind completely. So I started doing a series of astronomy drawings, and I do them every now and then just as a, I mean I'm more focused on the dot pieces and the big sort of historical pieces, but I do them every now and then as a kind of peaceful drawing activity, where I look at star charts, not astrology star charts, but charts of the heavens for different times of the year, and I play around with them, you know so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are some of the pieces that came out of that class? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean of you know the fact that you took the class? Speaker 2: Well, there was a series of small pieces on papyrus where I was drawing star charts, then there was a larger papyrus and color papyrus that I was using so I you know just brought in a little Egypt, you know I love Egypt and then it was hard to draw on it because it's fibrous, so just sort of the struggle of drawing on it and also indicating where the planets are, using, I use some, oh, I can't remember the company. It's a water color that's part acrylic so it handles like water color, but it's water proof, like acrylic, and it has a nice almost matinous [ph.] like wash. Anyway I would use that to paint in the color representing different planets. They're really just formal drawings from my point of view compared to the others which are formal but also they get involved with some kind of intellect, and the title is the name of the star chart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know in other words, 'cause it says you know Northern Hemisphere, September, blah, blah, blah, and then it might say Mars or Cassiopeia or Taurus or whatever, but I just, I don't know it just opened my head completely about the enormity of the universe. Story_ID: 373402 Speaker 1: Let me talk about your writing since you said you wanted to take a writing class and it was canceled, but actually you published a study about lack of representation of artists of color. Speaker 2: Yes, I would say that is as a result of working in a museum, seeing how things are done on the inside and seeing how people are told to step back; it's about quality, it's more than about quality, it's about who you know, it's about who your dealer is, it's about who you your collectors are and your collectors being in a position to not only collect you personally, but also be an advocate. And left out of that, and it's very involved with socializing, and the left out that equation are most people of color. Speaker 1: What other papers did you, you wrote another paper? Speaker 2: Well, I have that one, that long paper and then I wrote something about censorship that was in the New Art Examiner, I think it was in a two-part article, and I was looking at it from the point of view of, remember when 'Piss Christ' happened? The photographer [Andres Serrano] where he had I think it was a cross with Christ on it and a thing of urine, and he took a photo? I can't remember the artist's name off hand right now, but there was a big uproar and then that's when they withdrew all the money that [U.S.] Congress did from art, visual artists, so they do not fund individual visual artists anymore, only other fields. So I brought up the whole thing about censorship, you know how the government was using this to make it so they could control the political content of your work, but it went into more than that. Just the galleries and then what I call the silent censorship of artists of color-- Speaker 1: Which is? Speaker 2: --and basically women, which is very prevalent; I mean it's just, it's there but it's not seen as censorship, it is called like the other was called quality, it's called curatorial choice. So we are chosen out of the system. Anyway, that, the first paper was the one that really made the art world mad, the white art world mad, because I named the game, you know I named the game they were playing, but they had already been able to get away with calling it about quality and I went using my father's [Howard Pindell] statistics, I, you know just using that process, I looked at Art in America, and Art in America has an issue that comes out every August that lists all the galleries that care to fill out the application or the form, and it lists the galleries and the galleries tell them who they are representing. It's not like I made it up, the galleries, it's in writing, tell Art in America, "I'm such and such a gallery and these are the people I represent." So then I took and did a statistic of the galleries and who they represented, who they claim they represented, not the closet people, the people who are you know, listed in their main list and I looked at museum exhibitions and how many people of color were in shows and then I listed, I made a statistical report which I myself published and sent around to the art world; and the museums were pissed (laughter), they were really, it's like, "You let 'em in and look what they do." They were really pissed, and the censorship thing sort of annoyed people too, 'cause I was saying, "This is censorship," you know it's just another form of it. Story_ID: 373403 Speaker 1: Well, talking about the galleries and artwork, there was another conference, a paper from a conference about the 20th century here in--what you were talking about in this paper was how black artists who wanna be in the main stream tend to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the Johannesburg paper [delivered at the 1997 Johannesburg Biennale, Johannesburg, South Africa]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, that got me in hot water too. Well I was jumping on the whole (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Let's talk about that, but it was a good paper. Speaker 2: Well, I was really mad. I was talking about the whole Kara Walker phenomena or we could even leave her name out, and just call it the whole racial stereotype phenomena. What I had found is, that white galleries will tend to take on black artist if they do something derogatory to their own group and this seemed to be a pattern. If you had a kind of minstrel, or pickaninny or Aunt Jemima image in your work, and it was specifically derogatory, then the galleries thought this was amusing and they were entertained by it. The thing that was even crucial to this was in this case, you had individual collectors bankrolling the artist that did this, and the two collectors that were bankrolling Kara Walker were Lewis Manilow, they both collect as well as pay for catalogues and books and stuff about her and arrange for shows and stuff because they knew there was a protest within some of the black community, and they wanted to counter it. Anyway, Peter Norton and Lewis Manilow arranged for, I think Manilow was the main arranger for a conference at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and arranged for a show of his private collections piece, and then they paid for a conference where they had people pro-Kara Walker talk, and they invited maybe two or three people who weren't pro-Kara Walker, but I mean it was all a set up job, it was like a big PR [public relations] job. So I mean this is something new, ever since NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] cut off funding, then individual collectors have stepped in and pushed, hawked, their own particular point of view, in this case I was most aware of the Kara Walker thing, you know because Manilow, I understand was even involved with her getting the MacArthur [MacArthur Fellowship], so you know it just, it just it stank, you know it really stank. But then there are some people within the black community who are pro-Kara Walker, who see it as you know, her right to show whatever she wants. I agree she has a right to show whatever she wants, but this situation where the system in the art world should be that, there are many voices, not just one, you know or a few that, you know Michael Ray Charles was also was pushed by Norton because he had very derogatory, you know caricatures; pickaninnies and so forth of black people. Speaker 1: But some of, some of the pieces were even disturbing, you know, like sexually (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, well yes, a child having intercourse with a horse, that was yeah, Kara Walker was into dismal, sort of masochistic-sado, really, sadistic images against children and so forth. Yeah, but they, Peter Norton apparently was quoted as saying he found, "Finds her amusing." I mean here we have a standard racist comment (laughter), you know and then he looks like he comes off smelling sweet because to whites he's helping black art, you know that he's, shall we say our, I'm trying to think of the equivalent, that he's promoting black art but he's not, he promoting, he's enabling racism. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know it's gross, it makes me furious. So I did that paper, and boy they, it got back to New York [New York] faster than I could, (laughter) I'll tell you, you know I had the nerve to blah, blah, and one woman called up and said, "What did you do? What did you say?" You know, a white critic, they were outraged, they were outraged. Speaker 1: But it was true. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was true, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 373404 Speaker 1: Anything else about, well let's talk about on the positive side, who are some of the artists that you admire? Speaker 2: I admire a bunch of artists. Let me see if I can make a kind of grouping? Speaker 1: Do you, do you know [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam? Speaker 2: Yes, oh he's wonderful, he's wonderful. I admire him for his advocacy, 'cause he's been very, you know he, because he's so well-known, he gets to be on various committees, and he's just been very supportive I think of, of black artists that many of us don't have that opportunity. I think his work is fantastic in that he's kept the momentum going for years, you know. I loved Al Levins [Albert Levins] work. I especially love the strips; you know he would tear canvas. I thought that was so exquisite, he lives right; his studio was right down the street for a while. Yeah, I think just even the fact that they were there, you know that we were all sort of struggling. Bill Williams [HistoryMaker William T. Williams], I went to school with Bill Williams. He was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and he's, he's almost maniacal about the studio, I mean just his work habits are incredible, so I mean I just, I respect his focus, you know his dedication. His work is beautiful. I saw some pieces of his in Flint, Michigan in the Mott Collection [Mott-Warsh Collection]. They had collected it was a triptych that was exquisite with a very think paint, the fact that he works with a thick paint. It's always a risk with thick paint, that'll crack if you freeze it, and some people don't know you don't freeze acrylic (laughter); but anyway; his pieces have natural crackling in it. They're, they're beautiful pieces. Let's see I'm trying to think, it's like my memory is really playing havoc with me right now. Speaker 1: Oh, that's fine, you'll, you'll think of some other (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There are some women that I like too, I'm just trying to think of which one that has the most--'cause I'm always, every time I see a piece, it's like, man, I wish I had done that, like the piece that was out there with the puzzle pieces, loved that! That is Susa [ph.] I think the name is, such beautiful work. I also like, oh, what's her name, the woman who makes the bead pieces from Baltimore [Maryland], Scott, Joyce Scott. I love her pieces. I just, I mean my eyeballs wouldn't hold up you know working with those tiny little seed beads, but her work for years, I was just, like, I just love the, I still love her work, and what makes me mad is you don't see her anywhere, you know here you have this fantastic work and like where is she? They don't give her the opportunities. They will give someone like a Kara Walker, you know, or a white artist who's doing much less you know important work. It's, it's really, it's like a very dirty system, put it that way. Speaker 1: It is. Story_ID: 373405 Speaker 1: You have traveled and lived a number of places? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I have. I hate flying now, so I don't go very (laughter) many places anymore. Speaker 1: Where did you live? Speaker 2: I lived in Japan for seven months, I've lived in India for three months, plus I think a total of three to four trips there. Speaker 1: What was it like living in Japan? Speaker 2: Awful (laughter), it was extremely hard I'll put it that way. Story_ID: 373406 Speaker 1: --Experience in Japan was awful because why--? Speaker 2: Well, well, people said when I wrote home I wrote hate letters (laughter), I was so upset. Well, I just, I mean now I think of them and feel bad, you know, because the pressure on the individual there is so intense to conform, you know to literally, although it's been, I haven't lived there since '81 [1981], '82 [1982] and it probably has changed, I don't know. But what hard was being different, looking different. At one point I remember there was a child that ran up to me to kick me and the mother was right there. I was in a little village--well I was in, God I can't remember, it was where the shrine is that has a lot of deer around it and I was going to a temple to see their, their--what they do is they, once a year they have something called mushi boshi, which means, shaking out the bugs, so the temple treasures are given a public viewing. So I wanted to go see the particular treasures, like screens and so forth, so I was walking up a country road and a woman came out with her child, the child was maybe about this big, and the child saw me, it's like I'm a foreigner, you attack the foreigner. So he ran up to me to kick me and thank God his shoe flew off, but you never knew when you would be attacked. I remember one of the fellows that was in the same grant program, he was a tall blond Jewish guy, and one of the ushers, he would go, he was in theater, he would go to kabuki practically every day and there was a teenager usher. They like steep stairs and she tried to push him down the stairs 'cause he looked different. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: You know, you would run into stuff like that, I mean it's mellowed since I left, you know, I'm not quite as angry about it but I never wanted to go back. I haven't gone back since. Story_ID: 373407 Speaker 1: You also lived in India, and tell me all the places that you have lived in or have visited? Speaker 2: Okay, I lived in India for three months. I was living on an ashram and visiting friends in Bombay [Mumbai, India]. I found India so complicated that I don't even quite understand it, although I've been there a number of times. I was totally accepted and apparently I look Indian, so I would just blend in and people would you know just leave me alone or see me as part of the family group I was traveling with. So I didn't have horrible experiences, but my friends who were darker skin did, because I mean, the prejudice there is pretty bad. Let's see I've been to Ghana, Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Mali by default and Uganda by default, and also Kenya and Egypt and South Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, well we said we were gonna talk about the Ugandan trip, you were there when Amin [Idi Amin] was there. Speaker 2: Well the thing is I didn't go to go, I was supposed to be going to Nairobi [Kenya]. Larry Simms [ph.] and I were traveling together and we picked up the plane in London [England], we flew to London and we waited a day or two then, why we had a plane to Nairobi, and apparently Amin while he was still--and Entebbe [Operation Entebbe] had just happened, Amin demanded that our flight go to Italy, we weren't supposed to go to Italy (laughter) and pick up Ugandan diplomats and then fly them to Entebbe [Uganda]. So I land, I mean my first place of landing was Uganda which is sort an irony with the DNA stuff, and of course we were all scared to death we wouldn't you know leave there, because he was pretty bad, but they did let the plane leave in a couple of hours and we ended up in Nairobi, but my intention was not to go Uganda. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I mean now I'm interested in going to Uganda (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To Uganda? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I've at the time Amin was such prominent figure that, and a scary one, that I won't have anything to do with Uganda (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Have you seen 'The Last King of Scotland'? Speaker 2: Oh, I haven't, I'm afraid to see it. I think it's gonna be so upsetting, oh. Speaker 1: They said it's a great film. Story_ID: 373408 Speaker 1: You also were talking about a panel that you were on and a spirituality theory, let's talk about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, this was, yes, it was at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York]. It was sponsored by, I think by there's a group that buys work for the Modern, buys African American work, I think it's Friends of the Modern something like that [The Friends of Education of The Museum of Modern Art]. What I wanted to do was look at what is particularly African American about all of our work and what I found, I was looking like Loving [Al Loving] and Bill [HistoryMaker William T. Williams] was sitting right next to me, Bill's work, just pretty much anybody's work had, who's African American, there was beauty as a component, and I saw that as a kind of spiritual process that was involved with a kind of prayer that when you do the work that we see it, not as a manifestation of ugliness, like a lot of the white artists want the work to look like a machine did it, no human hand, and we really like the hand process; plus the fact there's this spirituality component, which gives the work an aura of beauty, and I saw that as a, you know something that people haven't talked about if you look at a uniting component of all black artists, it seems to be that beauty component, but then when we get now into more contemporary things, like Kara Walker's work or like Michael Ray Charles, it seems as if it's gone the other way, that anti-beauty. Although the work is sort of antithetical to the black community itself, they're more aligned with the white artists and the whites who don't beauty in the work, 'cause white are against, at least when I've been around white art world, you know the top echelon appear to think that beauty is a detriment to the work, that we don't want that spirituality, we don't want, you know, they don't want this sense of handwork, you know or any kind of uplifting, 'cause I find when I look at African American work in general I feel uplifted, and I think that's the prayer component and the spiritual component, you know. Speaker 1: And, and I think that's shown in all work, even in abstract because-- Speaker 2: Yes, I agree (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) typically African Americans might not necessarily understand abstract and kind of wanna buy paintings that look like them or represent them, you know; more so than abstract. What do you think about that? Speaker 2: Well's that's interesting, I had never thought of it that way that we want, because we certainly are starving for that in the world at large. I mean when I look at--I mean I just got my new cell phone, and one of the images they called wallpaper you can put on the phone is a crowd of white faces. Now why would I put a crowd of white faces on my cell phone, but I mean that may be more comfortable with someone who's white, but it's just the very prejudice we have now, has to do with what is the omissions in our culture, the omissions in terms of visuals, you know if we're portrayed, we're portrayed on the edges, we're portrayed in the back, you know, like the central figure is usually a white male or a white female. Anyway, I'm sorry I got off on that tangent (laughter), ask me the question again. Story_ID: 373409 Speaker 1: Ask me the question again. Speaker 2: Oh, I was talking about how as African Americans, would normally purchase paintings-- Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: --that represent themselves, yes. Speaker 1: I think it becomes out of that omission factor 'cause we don't see ourselves represented around except in a negative kind of connotation. Anyway, it does get confused, I think with, confusing for people when they want to see themselves represented, but I think one of the things to say is, abstraction came out of Africa. If you look at the endeble [ph.] abstractions painted on buildings that abstraction is part of the Kuba raffia weaving. This is part of our culture too, and that we're also seeing ourselves, and the abstraction was partially taken from us by European culture, because I mean cubism really came through the abstraction route or the geometrizing of form, you know that in the masks and so forth that came in from Africa, but Picasso [Pablo Picasso] had an African mask and then he, you know took from them certain concepts. Anyway, I actually find it, some people find abstraction more, they can live with it more, the figuration might be okay but they like the beauty of it. I think again that's that spiritual component. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Also, I actually haven't run into that problem, where people will say, "Well, I'd rather have the figurative, I was opposed to the abstract," but maybe I'm being naive and sort of self-protective. I don't want them to reject (laughter) me, but anyway. Speaker 2: No, I don't think that's a point, I'm just, I was just, well it was a point that I was bringing up that I think this is probably something that is more contemporary. Speaker 1: Um-hm, it might be more contemporary, yeah, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just comes from not understanding about how you just explained where abstraction came from. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, yeah absolutely. Speaker 2: You know, but most of it like you said is very beautiful and because of the spirituality of it--. Speaker 1: Yes, uplifting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is uplifting. Speaker 1: And I don't find generally white work uplifting, frankly; I mean just 'cause the goal is not to have it uplifted. Speaker 2: Even in abstract work? Speaker 1: I mean if I look at a de Kooning [Willem de Kooning] it's usually a very distorted picture of a woman. If I look at Jackson Pollock, it's like, I mean it's just blurbs of paint. I mean if I'm being particularly derisive. I'm trying to think, I'm trying to think the only, the abstraction I like a lot of Philip Guston and, I mean he stopped doing that work and started doing the cartoon figures with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] images and all. I found his work somewhat uplifting, and some of the surrealist abstraction people, I find that work not uplifting like in the spiritual sense of African American work, but less down, you know it's doesn't pull me down. Speaker 2: Like who? Speaker 1: Oh, like Tangee [ph.] maybe, some of the Miro's [Joan Miro] you know where he used black and like black line and then different kinds of colors and it's isolated forms on a kind of formal background on a, not a figurative background but where there is a sense of background and foreground, yeah. I would say Miro, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 373410 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you, that we haven't talked about as far as-- Speaker 2: Oh, we've covered a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as far as your art? Speaker 2: We've covered a lot. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean is there anything about your process, what are you working on now? Speaker 2: Well, actually now I'm getting back to work, because my father [Howard Pindell] died this year and I've been like up to here with stuff I've had to do. I had to clean out his apartment and now I have so much of his stuff in my place. It's in my studio, I can't even get to the wall. Anyway, so now I'm just trying dig out and consolidate. I'm gonna start working with some new hole punch pieces. I have found and been given hole punches that area huge like this. So I'm gonna start working with real big circles and I'm going to be using like oil sticks and water color and acrylic and so forth, and punching them out and putting them on oval backgrounds, and then I have a piece I want to do about war. I don't want to use the word terrorism per se, but it's about terrorism when you think of Lebanon and what happened there, and then when we think of what is happening in Iraq and then the Oklahoma Bombing [Oklahoma City bombing] and 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and what I wanna do is merge ruins, so you don't know what the ruins are, and then around it I'm gonna have places of where words text for Tulsa, Oklahoma when we got burned out, Rosewood [Rosewood massacre] and various indigenous massacres and so forth. So I want to show it or Dorseman [ph.] or Dialo [ph.]. You know, show like terrorism it's not just this, but it's, this but I'm not trying to be pro-government, I just want people to see that you know we had terrorism here. We have policemen who are terrorists, you know in other words, it's something we need to look at beyond 9/11. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: That's a big one, that physically a big piece. Speaker 1: A big piece? Speaker 2: A big piece, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: So we'll probably see that in a museum (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know I might not even get that far it's just I'm not that crazy about political stuff. Story_ID: 373411 Speaker 1: If you had to say something to an aspiring artist, what would you tell them? Speaker 2: Don't give up. The art world is extremely small, think of it as real estate: it's a few blocks in Chelsea [New York, New York], a few a little pockets in SoHo [New York, New York] and a few pockets on Madison Avenue and maybe two blocks of 57th Street. We're, we're bigger than the real estate (laughter) as artists, all right, and the people backing the art world are basically people who want to buy art for investment. They basically invest in order for the work to accrue so that they, it's like gold, buying gold is better than gold, and that their values are not necessarily the values of the artist, and that these people often are on acquisition boards. So you might find that there's like this same fulfilling prophecy within the art world, so there are only a few pocket of artists being accepted. Never mind that, you know (laughter) or not, when I say never mind it, I protest it when I can, but just to keep working and do your work because there are people that will appreciate you, and I finding that, I mean, just when I get religious stories it's very helpful if I am around a group of people who've seen the work and they just, you know they'll tell me what they like about it and that's, that keeps me going, you know as opposed to if I look at an art magazine, like when I, my show was this summer Artforum [Artforum International Magazine] called and said, "Please send photographs over for the show." So the gallery quickly put everything together, sent it over to Artforum and the same day they sent them back and said, "No, we're not reviewing it," (laughter), I thought that was pretty interesting. I'm sure once they saw the political content they wouldn't touch it with a ten foot pole. But that can disturbing especially if you're a young artist starting out. Like I've had the rejection, you know, off and on for all these years, so I, you know I know what that's like, but for a new person that's terrible. Story_ID: 373412 Speaker 1: If you look back over your life, what stands out the most? Speaker 2: The accident, that was so hard, but it changed my work completely and it got better, so I mean (laughter) you know, on one hand it's a bad news accident, and then next minute you know I'm saying, oh, I'm doing better work so. I mean that, that change, that was like a real life change. I had left my old job, you know I quit my job and I had a new job and the whole thing was life changing, you know completely life changing. I could have died, that would've been really life changing, but it really changed my work. It changed the color I use, everything changed, you know. Speaker 1: Would you change anything in your life? Speaker 2: I sort of now that I'm old kind of wished I had had children, but I don't know how I would have managed to have children, and you know it probably would have been while I was at the museum [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], with a full time job I couldn't have done it. I don't see how I could possibly have done it. I wish that my mother [Mildred Lewis Pindell] had lived longer, because as I matured I would have been able to deal with her better. You know, we probably could have gotten closer and I wish I had not been such a screaming adolescent, you know because I would have done better in school you know, but I would have crushes on this person and that person, you know, it was just ridiculous, and just, and that was just totally, I mean it just totally wasted my time (laughter), 'cause I really you know I would always find either this young man or that young man attractive, and I just wish that weren't in my mind, you know so I could just get my work done. Story_ID: 373413 Speaker 1: I am so glad that you took the time to do this interview because we needed it so much for our history. Why is it, why is history important to you? Speaker 2: Without it we are dead, it's like the tree in the desert, if it falls over and no one is there to observe it, it just falls over and it didn't happen and it's one way that the mainstream culture has silenced us, is through there not being any document of our history or through refusing to document it themselves to even, I mean a lot of people don't know. Oh, I had something happen, I can't remember what it was, oh, I can't remember what it was and it was like a shock to the white person there because they never thought that could happen to anybody. Like a lot of people just don't know, you know just what could happen to someone through someone's bad attitude. You know, I mean you could die because of someone's bad attitude but they don't think, they feel more exempt because it hasn't happened to them or anyone in their family. Story_ID: 373414 Speaker 1: What are your concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well I am scared to death now that it's so negative, not the community per se, but I would say some of the young people have been so captivated, I mean just the images, 'cause I watch the hip hop and I watch rap, I like the sound of rap, but the words are terrible. So that it's all this negative conditioning and just showing the guys you know, the only thing that is important is a woman's booty, you know, or showing the girls that that's the only way they can be important, because I understand the statistics for molestation of young women is really high in the community, and that this has given us an excuse that the black rap music is extolling very low values. That discourages me. Also, 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], I was watching 'Oprah' at like one in the morning the other night and she said she started, no this was on the Anderson Cooper show that she started the academy for young women in Johannesburg [South Africa] because she was so tired in going around to the schools and hearing that the students only wanted an iPod or a sneaker, that this was, you know we've become so tied in with having possessions, that education has a very low, and remember when I grew up people would be put down if they wanted to be educated you know too, this was both before the rap and the iPod, but they said you were trying to be white if you were smart, and so I find that extremely discouraging and I find it so damaging that, that which gets projected out into a society at large as pop culture, is so negative to us, you know and that it is so one sided. I mean granted we have Nas, Nas is very pro values, Common, actually-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) also, so but then you have all of the negative rappers, like 50 Cent. I liked 'In the Club' ['In Da Club'] that was great, but if you see what his values are, the whole pimp and all that it's just so horrible, so negative and the whites want that who want to see the devaluation of the black community. So they just you know wanted more of it. I know there were some black radio people who were saying when they wanted to work for white stations, the white stations only wanted negative stuff. They did not want anything positive like a talk program, you know where people express their views, they just wanted negative stuff and that's terrible, that's terrible. Story_ID: 373415 Speaker 1: So what do you want to say to the future generations? Speaker 2: Oh, God, oh. Learn about the history first of all 'cause a lot of our kids, I think that's why we have Kara Walker, don't know our history. Learn about our history. Learn about it from slavery, even beyond slavery on back to our original origins. I would even encourage people to do the DNA stuff, because then they see, I mean I see my roots are in Uganda, period whether Amin [Idi Amin] was there or not. Just to see that deep history, and granted all people go back to Africa, I mean that's where the, you know sort of matriarchal and patriarchal DNA was first established. So, you know get your history and try to appreciate the people who've made positive contributions to society. You know, read about them, I suggest people read autobiographies, read or biographies about you know people like a [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, or a Rosa Parks, even, I mean Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] phenomenal, she's affected a huge group of people. I mean if she even reads a book it becomes one on the reading list. You know it's amazing, but she has such a positive take on things and also the way she looks at abuse and suffering, she, there's always a positive outcome through understanding what the process is and why, so much, not so much why it happened 'cause you can't account for the person who abused you, but what you do so you don't repeat it, and so you don't suffer because of it. You know or don't, you don't sort of put yourself in a negative position where you're harming yourself, harming yourself because of it. I mean I think she's one of the amazing people of the 20th century, absolutely amazing. Story_ID: 373416 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I was thinking about that the other night. I think I want my work to be remembered, my writing and my work. I mean 'cause I haven't left any two-legged memories on the planet, but I'd like, I was thinking the other night, I'd love to be remembered for the big work that is something you learn from, and that it be available to a wide group of people and not hidden in somebody's house. Again, I do the little ones for pleasure, I mean it's just, they're kind of a joy to do; but the big work just the lessons, the history lessons in the big work. I'd love to be remembered through that work and through the writing I've done, yeah. Speaker 1: Well we know your legacy is your work. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So is there anything that we have not talked that you'd like to say? Speaker 2: I think we've covered most of it. Speaker 1: You said most of it, is there anything we missed (laughter)? Speaker 2: I don't know, I can't imagine that we missed anything, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Well, if that's it, I want to thank you so much-- Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely. Speaker 1: --'cause this has been a wonderful experience. Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. Speaker 1: And I'm just elated to even meet you-- Speaker 2: Oh, bless your heart! Speaker 1: --so thank you so much for your time. Speaker 2: Oh, I consider myself a message in a bottle (laughter), I'll float up some day (laughter). Speaker 1: Well thank you so much. Speaker 2: You're more than welcome, you're more than welcome. Story_ID: 373417 Speaker 1: This is my book, 'Heart of the Question: The Writings and Paintings of Howardena Pindell' ['The Heart of the Question: The Writings and Paintings of Howardena Pindell,' Howardena Pindell]. It came out in 1997, and was published by Midmarch Arts Press [New York, New York]. It contains the statistical report and other essays that I've written about the art world, as well as some essays I've written specifically about the work. The cover image is the painting 'Scapegoat,' which I believe I brought up earlier in the interview which has three images of my face, the child with the round ball, and the target. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right, this is a portrait photograph that was taken by Victor Smythe [Victor N. Smythe] at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] in my new office. I was probably, oh my goodness, early twenties, my hair was long in those days and I was skinny, so it's another life, I'll put it that way, but it was during my first weeks at the Modern, Museum of Modern Art. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken on Penn Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where my parents [Mildred Lewis Pindell and Howard Pindell] had an apartment in the 1940s. I'd say this was probably around, I might have been seven or eight years old, it was probably around '49 [1949] or so. I'm with my friend Dorothea Tyree [ph.] who I also mentioned in the lecture and it's her birthday, near around I'd say eleven years old, maybe twelve years old in back of my father's car in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Here I am at the Skowhegan School for Painting and Sculpture [sic. Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture] in Skowhegan, Maine. I was faculty at the time teaching painting and drawing and they had a costume ball at the end of the season. It was like, it was like a five or six week program so I came as bride of--I can't remember whether I was bride of Frankenstein or bride of Dracula and I was an interdenominational bride if I--which one of the, it would be bride of Dracula because you hold up the cross. So I decided that I would be interdenominational and that way I won second prize. Speaker 2: The a--in my studio on West Street in New York City [New York, New York] around 1971 or '70 [1970]. I--those were the days when I wore a big afro and I'm sitting in front of a piece that is in a traveling show at the moment called 'High Times Hard Times' ['High Times, Hard Times: New York Painting 1967-1975'] that currently is in Washington, D.C. and will be coming to the national design museum [Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum] in New York in about a month in February. Speaker 1: Graduation picture from high school [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. As you can see the photographer kind of whited me out, I'm a little bit lighter than I really am and I look very, if you've seen the movie 'Pleasantville,' I look sort of 'Pleasantville,' 1950s. This would be around 1961. Speaker 2: This is me at graduate school. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is me at graduate school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. I'm standing next to a skeleton that I got of a real person, it's not a cast. A skeleton of a person that I got from a medical school and this is when I started doing a series of paintings during the Vietnam War about death. Speaker 1: The time that I also mentioned in the interview that top images are bombs including Nagasaki [Japan], atom testing and so forth, of the bottom strip is in red for blood, then we have the Middle Passage then the water which is camouflaged, the two heads, my head at different maybe '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and then images from various war atrocities including a child whose been vaporized at Hiroshima [Japan], a child from a bomb shelter we bombed in Iraq, and a child from Angola who has multiple amputations from the war against, well they wanted to actually establish independence. Speaker 2: That's a paper piece that I did after the accident. It's called 'Sorry it was an Accident' and if you look to the right, you'll see two hands and a skeleton, skeletal head. The head's really hard to see, it's the oval behind the hands. I'm still using punch-out paper which has been painted but I also started to use postcards, which you can see to the left. Speaker 1: This is my book 'Art Crow/Jim Crow' [Howardena Pindell], which I did after my statistical report. Apparently a white dealer who was listed in Art America [Art in America] as being a hundred percent white and a hundred percent male wanted to protest her inclusion in the book, or at least to the statistical report. So I made an artist book which would mean she'd have to sue me for a work of art...