 Story_ID: 133855 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I am Condace Levica Pressley. That's, C-O-N-D-A-C-E, L-E-V-I-C-A, P-R-E-S-S-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: All right. And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on October 10, 1964, in Marietta, Georgia. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am by trade a journalist. My current title is Manager of Programming Operations and Public Affairs for Cox Media Group, Atlanta Radio. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is--it's my mother's birthday--it is Wednesday, February 19, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Studio A at WSB-Television [Atlanta, Georgia] on the third floor of the building where I've worked for the last fifteen, sixteen years. Story_ID: 133856 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warmup-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughs). Do I have a favorite food? I love seafood. I often joke I'm on a seafood diet because when I see food I eat it. But, no, I do. I enjoy seafood. Lots of shrimp, lobster, crab; those sorts of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple is my favorite color. It's very royal. Very regal. I always have--today's not a purple day, so I'm in blue. But normally I would be in purple. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I especially enjoy the fall. I think it's probably because I was born in the fall, but it's the mildness of the temperatures; the weather; the changing of the leaves, it's so pretty. I really enjoy the fall part of the year. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: You know, there are beach people and there are mountain people. I am definitely a beach person. Our family actually likes to vacation down on the Florida Panhandle every summer. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or say. I'm often fond of saying, "It doesn't matter who gets the credit as long as you get the job done." I'm always about, you know, getting things done. But that's probably one. I'm especially fond of the serenity prayer. Not that I need the serenity prayer, but it is one that is also very close to my heart. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133857 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother is Mary Emma Bates Pressley. That's, M-A-R-Y, E-M-M-A; Bates, B-A-T-E-S; and then Pressley, P-R-E-S-S-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth? Speaker 2: Today is her birthday. I need to call her (laughs). February 19, 1942. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born at home in Marietta, Georgia, not too far from where I grew up. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: I have, through the use of Ancestry.com, have been able to trace my mother's family back as far as her great-grandmother. So my mother was Mary. Her mother was Irene Bates, and--that--my grandmother whom we called Big Mama, although she was a very thin woman. She was one of eight sisters. Her mother and father were Dora and Oscar Merritt [ph.], and that's--so that's--and then I get stuck on tracing her side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. So now it would be to your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. That would be to my grandmother--yeah. My great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about--that are handed down in the family about them living anyplace other than Marietta or any stories about Emancipation or the Reconstruction or, you know, life in the South in those days? Speaker 2: What I do know about my mother's side of the family, on her side of the family, I know that--again, as I say, my grandmother was one of eight, and then--and I know that my great-grandfather Oscar Merritt and I have the exact same birthday, which I thought was kind of interesting. We were out one summer. We were grave--tombstone rubbing, and I found his grave, and I was surprised to see that he too was born on October 10. There is Cherokee Indian blood in my mom's line of the family. So I think that's probably why in tracing that history back I get stuck. That and the census records are just so terrible. I remember, and I knew this. My mother told me that my grandmother's nickname was Dilsy, D-I-L-S-Y. And that's just what they called her. And I thought, well, why would they call her Dilsy. And, of course, you know, everybody had a nickname. And so when I went back and I looked through the census records, the census takers who would come through, that's what they--when they listed, you know, the head of the household--oh. Wait, wait, wait. I'm--but they would list, and they would list her as Dilsy. And I thought, well (unclear), you know, a child who lived in the house. And then beyond that, I did--I can go back one more generation. So it's Irene Bates, and then Dora Merritt, and then her mother was named Vester, V-E-S-T-E-R, B-A-T-E-S. So I can go back to grandmother, great mother--great-great-grandmother. This is as far back as I've been able to-- Speaker 1: So Vester Bates is great-great-grandmother. Okay. Okay. Is there a story behind the name Vester? Speaker 2: No. I haven't been able to find one. We were not always family-reunion people. We were--we tend more to gather at funerals than we did family reunions. That would be how we would get together. I mean Merritt. No. I did that wrong. I did that wrong because Vester and David Bates were my grandfather's parents. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So what did your ancestors do? Did they work in the town of Marietta or were they farmers? Speaker 2: They were farmers. Speaker 1: Farmers? Speaker 2: My grandmother was a domestic her entire life. And then before that our family--our family they were farmers. And I don't know that they actually picked cotton, but I mean it was a cotton farm in Marietta. My uncles, my great uncles I guess you'd call them, you know, as we got more into the early twentieth century, were by and large, you know, went--they went from being farmers to laborers. There was not a lot of education for them. We do have some members of the family who I guess were a part of the Great Migration. Of my grandmother's seven sisters and brothers, there was one aunt whom I never knew but I heard of. I've heard stories about her. Her name was Addy, A-d-d-y. And she left Georgia and went north to Chicago [Illinois]. And then we have others who left the South and went north to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 133858 Speaker 1: Now, did your family own its own land or they-- Speaker 2: Sharecroppers? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My sense is they were probably sharecroppers. I don't know that for fact. But seems how there hasn't been that much land passed down in the family, no. I did have an uncle, who was like my grandfather, who owned the property where my mother [Mary Bates Pressley] was born. And that was passed down, and that was also part of a farm. But other than that, some landowners, otherwise, were share--I guess they were sharecropping. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your mother--what did your mother's parents do? Speaker 2: My mother's mother, my grandmother [Irene Bates] was a domestic. And my grandfather, whom I never knew, worked at the McNeal Marble Company in Marietta [Georgia] where I assumed he was a laborer. He was a laborer there as well. But he died when my mom was a junior in high school. He had suffered a stroke and was in the hospital for a very long time. There was a black hospital in one part of Marietta, and then Kennestone [Hospital, Marietta, Georgia] was the other hospital. And he was there for a long time, and my mom says that once he was discharged from the hospital when she was a small child, 'cause he had a stroke when she was about five, he stayed with her and taught her everything that she knew. She knew how to read, she knew how to write, she learned how to sing and do all of those things. And he was there in the home for a while, and then at some point, I don't know if it was because they couldn't care for him or his needs were greater than what they could provide at the time, he left and went to stay with his brother down in Augusta [Georgia]. And he was in Augusta until he died in 1958. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, so, what did your mother say about growing up and going to school and all that? Did she--she grew up in the town of Marietta? Speaker 2: Yes. She grew in Marietta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, as I said, she was born at home. She and my mom--she and my grandma and her sister lived in one side of a duplex that my uncle Durow [ph.] owned. And uncle--his name was Durow Bates, and he was my grandfather's brother and ended up being really more like a grandfather to me, because he was the one whom I knew. And he had a duplex, and he and his wife, Mary Lee [ph.], lived on side of the house and then my mother and her sister and my grandmother lived on the other side of the house. You know, Mom went to segregated schools. She went to Lemon Street School [Marietta, Georgia] and then Lemon Street High School [Marietta, Georgia]. She had a very normal, typical upbringing for that time in our history. She was a very bright woman. She was the valedictorian of her senior class, and she went on to nursing school at Grady [Memorial Hospital] here in Atlanta [Georgia] and then went on to work--she went on to work as a nurse at Kennestone Hospital, where she worked in the segregated wing of the hospital. They called it G Section. She was the first black nurse to work an all-white floor at the main hospital. And-- Speaker 1: That's Kennestone? Speaker 2: Kennestone, yes. It would be WellStar Kennestone [Regional Medical Center] today, but in the early 1960s it was just Kennestone Hospital. Speaker 1: And that's back in Marietta? Speaker 2: And that's in Marietta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133859 Speaker 1: And she [mother, Mary Bates Pressley] again worked as the--she worked the floor in the G Section, which was the segregated wing of the hospital [Kennestone Hospital, Marietta, Georgia] where I was born, and then went on later to work as desegregation came--well, no. That actually was probably the beginning of pre-desegregation, but she went on to work as the first black nurse on an all-white floor where she cared for a patient. And my mom was always saying people are people; if you treat people the way you want to be treated, they'll treat you just as well. And she had this one patient on this floor who said to her that, you know, she was a nice lady, a nice young woman, and that if she ever wanted to leave the hospital he would help her get on as a nurse at Lockheed [Corporation, later Lockheed Martin]. And Mom didn't know at the time. She just, you know, he was just one of her patients. Well, apparently he turned out to be one of the vice presidents at Lockheed at the time, and it was a better opportunity. So she left. And she left Lock--she left Kennestone, and she hired in as a clerk, 'cause that's how you got on with the company at the time. And she hired on as a clerk at Lockheed in 1967, and within three months, transferred out of one department into their medical department, and she was the first black nurse. And she was in--and she worked as an industrial health nurse. She was a nurse at Lockheed. She got laid off twice. She got laid off for a few months in the early '70s [1970s], and then laid off again in 1973 after the big C-5 [Lockheed C-5 Galaxy] program wrapped up. She went to work in public health after that, and she was a public health nurse for a number of years. And then in 1981, she returned to Lockheed as a nurse, an industrial health nurse. All the same nurses who were her friends when she was there before in the '70s [1970s] were there a decade later, and there're many of them who haven't passed on, are still her friends today. And she retired from Lockheed in 2007. Speaker 2: Okay. She had a full career as a nurse. Speaker 1: Very much so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Good luck too treated--doing the right thing with the right thing with the vice president. Speaker 1: With the right people, yeah. She didn't know. He was just one of her patients, but-- Speaker 2: (Laughs). Right. Speaker 1: But he was a nice man and she cared for him just like she cared for any of her patients. And that turned into an opportunity, which for her was more money and it was a better opportunity. So we were talking about it, and I said, "Well, Mom, when you went to Lockheed and when you went down--," because this would have been the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], Deep South desegregation--I said, "Did you encounter any racism or did you encounter any--you know, how did people take you when you came to work?" And she said, "You know, there's something about nurses; that's we're like a sorority," she said. "And we look after, just as we look after people, we look after each other." And she never had any problems. I said, "Really?" I said, "In Marietta?" Said, "No." She said they never had any problems, much of the chaos and the turmoil. I wondered if it was partly because this is the birthplace of the [Civil Rights] Movement, and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was in Atlanta [Georgia]. But as things slowly changed, she said they slowly changed, and she was just fine. Story_ID: 133860 Speaker 1: Yeah. She [mother, Mary Bates Pressley] was right, she was--yeah. The Civil Rights generation, exactly. I mean, born early part of World War II [WWII]. She's the same age as a lot of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] activists who were down south (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. You know, I asked her, I said, "Well, did you protest or did you march or do anything like that?" And she said, "No." And I said, "Well, why not?" And she said, "Well, because I was grown," she said. She said, "I was grown. I was married. I had you, and I was working. I was about taking care of my family." And at that point, a lot of the protests and the demonstrations were college students. So those were that group that was five or six years younger than she was, who were actively (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: They were about the same age. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think what she's saying, that she had a job and responsibilities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --where a lot of them didn't. They were--almost at the same age, I mean that age that those born in '41 [1941], '42 [1942], that's that SNCC, young SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], the young people in SCLC; not the older. Speaker 2: She would--yes. She is about Congressman Lewis's [HistoryMaker John Lewis's] age. So she did tell me a story. She said that there was at one point when the, you know, the changes happened, and there was a drugstore on the square in Marietta [Georgia]. The Marietta Pizza Company is there now. But it was called McClellan's [ph.], and then, I guess 'cause Mr. McClellan owned it. And it was a lunch counter just like all of the lunch counters we read about in the [Civil Rights] Movement, and there was a time when the laws had changed and she could go into the drugstore and sit anywhere she wanted to on the lunch--at the lunch counter and be served and not have any problems. And she said my grandmother [Irene Bates] would say, she'd say, "Girl, you better be careful. You don't know what might happen to you if you go up in there." And she said--she said, "Mama, they said I could go in there and sit down. I'm going to go in and sit down." And she did, and she didn't have any problems. When she would take the bus back to--when she was in nursing school, she was in nursing school from '59 [1959] to '62 [1962]--and when she would take the bus back on--to school, she would, again, the law had changed, so she could sit not on the back of the bus, but in that front seat on the bus. And she said she'd get on the bus and there'd be a seat right up there behind the driver, and she'd sit right down. She said, sometimes people would get on the bus and they'd look and maybe glare at her. And, but, she knew she could sit right here on the bus. And she'd think about getting up and going to the back, and she said the bus driver said--looked at her and he said, "You stay right where you are." And I said--and I said, "Is the bus driver a black man or white?" It's "No." She was on a Greyhound Bus and it was a white man, and he said, "You stay put. You sit right where you are." And so, for as much as I've asked and probed about those kinds of stories, hers was a very, very positive experience, and it probably had a lot to do with how I've turned out. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Things were changing and I think the Civil Rights Movement was a signal for a lot of people that they could go in and change. Story_ID: 133861 Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father's side of the family. Then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Joe. Not Joseph, but Joe Tilman, T-I-L-M-A-N, Pressley, P-R-E-S-S-L-E-Y. He was born on May 18, 1939. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was born in Rydal, Georgia. R-Y-D-A-L. And that's where he's buried. Speaker 1: R-I-D (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: R-Y-D-A-L. Speaker 1: R-Y. Okay. Speaker 2: It's north of Cartersville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. It's north of what? Speaker 2: Cartersville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: C-A-R-T-E-R--Cartersville up in Bartow County. Speaker 1: Okay. So is that close to something that we would--I mean (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: It's north of Atlanta [Georgia], it's probably about forty-five minutes north of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. There we go. Speaker 2: Forty-five to fifty minutes north of Atlanta. Speaker 1: All right. So how far back can you trace his side? Speaker 2: My dad's side is a little bit more difficult to trace largely because my father had two brothers, Frank and Theo [ph.], and my dad was the oldest. When my grandmother, his mother married Theo Pressley Sr., my dad, I think, was already a little boy. He was here. And Grandfather Theo raised my dad as his own son. But I don't know--well, he didn't talk about--you know, men didn't talk about a lot of things then. And I don't know if they didn't get along as well or if he didn't feel right there, but he eventually went to live with an uncle of his. Uncle--we call him Uncle Bunny [ph.]. I don't know if that was B-U-N-N--I don't if that was B-U-N-N-Y or B-O-N-N-I-E. I just know that we called him Uncle Bunny. I remember him. As a matter of fact, I've got a picture of us at his wife's funeral. Why we took pictures at funerals, I don't know. But I do have one of those. And Uncle Bunny, by and large, raised my dad. I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well--okay. So--so, was Tilman your father's original last name? Speaker 2: No. He was--I'm told that my biological grandfather is a man by the name of Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Boyd, B-O-Y-D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had a brother named Ector, E-C-T-O-R, Boyd, B-O-Y-D, who I knew as a child, who lived in Marietta [Georgia]. And I think they all knew that Willy Boyd was my biological grandfather. But since Theo Pressley, you know, took on my dad, he just--he raised him as a Pressley. I don't know that there was ever any sort of a legal adoption or anything like that. And I don't think black people did that kind of stuff then. Speaker 1: Well, it didn't-- Speaker 2: It didn't. It didn't really matter. And the people who kept records weren't really keeping the records. So. And I know that the Boyds at some point trace back up to Sandusky, Ohio, 'cause I know I'm told that I've got relatives in Sandusky, Ohio, who are on that Boyd side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now. So Uncle Bunny, who raised him, was your--was his mother's brother or--? Speaker 2: It was--Uncle Bunny was his mother's uncle. Speaker 1: Mother's uncle. Okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 133862 Speaker 1: So my dad was Joe Tilman Pressley, and his mother was Rena, R-E-N-A, Thelma, T-H-E-L-M-A, Pressley, and she married Theo [ph.] Pressley, Sr. And her parents were Ida Wise, and then her father was Tilman Wise. So that must be where my father got his name, Tilman. Speaker 2: Okay. So your grandmother on your father's side, her maiden name was Wise. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She was a Wise. Speaker 2: All right. Okay. So did your father--well, okay. So he's raised by Uncle Bunny [ph.]. This is Thelma's brother, right? Speaker 1: (Nods head.) Speaker 2: And uncle, actually. Speaker 1: Yeah. He was her uncle. He was her uncle. Speaker 2: Okay. And was he a Wise or a-- Speaker 1: He was a Broughton, B-R-O-U-G-H-T-O-N. Speaker 2: Broughton. Speaker 1: So Uncle Bunny was Uncle Bunny Broughton. And then her dad was Tilman Wise. So he might have been--I would imagine he was her mother's brother. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Ida Wise's brother. So Ida Wise would have been Ida Broughton. Her brother was Bunny Broughton. She married Tilman Wise, and they had Joe Tilman Pressley. Speaker 2: Okay. That makes sense. That makes sense now. Okay. So did your father ever--so he kept in contact with his mother, I'm sure. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Oh, yeah. They had definitely stayed in contact. And I knew--I knew my grandmother. Granny Thelma, as I called her; and my Big Momma Irene [maternal grandmother] and then my Granny Thelma. And they--they were--he--they were together all in the same community. So while she might not have been in the same house--well, he might not have been in the same house with her and Frank and Peewee, as we called Uncle Theo, you know, they were always together, and I knew all of them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And did your father, you know, ever reunite with his biological father? Speaker 1: I think he knew who he was. And I--and I know that they had contact, but I think--I do know also that my dad probably had more contact with his uncle Ector, who was--who was Willie Boyd's brother, 'cause Willie Boyd eventually relocated to Ohio, and the rest of the Boyd family stayed in the Marietta [Georgia] area. Speaker 2: Okay. So that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Marietta-Rydel [Georgia] area. Yes. Speaker 2: --that went to Sandusky [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Sandusky. Right. Right. Right. Speaker 2: It's up near Cleveland [Ohio] up on the lake. Speaker 1: Oh. Is that where it is? Speaker 2: Yeah. Up on the lake. Yeah. Lake Erie. Story_ID: 133863 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Joe Tilman Pressley], now, what did he want to be when he was growing up, and what kind of stories did he tell about growing (unclear)? Speaker 2: My dad didn't talk a lot. He just didn't talk a lot. And to his day, I know he went to school. And I'm not really sure though that he graduated high school. I think he didn't graduate high school. He just--he went to work and eventually got his GED. He started out working for the Coca-Cola Company. He worked for the Coca-Cola bottling company in Marietta [Georgia] originally as a janitor. And then he got hired and went to work also at Lockheed [Corporation, later Lockheed Martin]. This would have been about the time, you know, towards the end of the Vietnam War when they were--or during the war when they were building the--the program was a C-5A [Galaxy], was the aircraft they were building at the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, C-5A. Is that a big cargo plane? Speaker 2: That's a huge cargo plane. I think it's the largest cargo plane they ever built. And at the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: --there were like thirty-three thousand employees at that plant in Marietta, 'cause you know Lockheed, the Lockheed Plant used to be the Bell [Aircraft] bomber plant in World War II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dad hired in as a janitor there at Lockheed. And then he went on to get--he got promoted or transferred into another department where he was a--what they called it? They called it a shopkeeper. And so, when there were places on the floor that need parts for the airplane, he kept up with all the parts and then made sure that they got to the right teams that were working to build the airplane. And he did that. And then he got an opportunity to go to work for the Ford Motor Company. And, of course, with the United Auto Workers and the union, there were some more money and more benefits. And so, he left Lockheed and went to work at Ford where he was a shopkeeper there as well just for the folks building cars. And he did that until his death in 1997. He was a shopkeeper there. Speaker 1: Well, that's great. But that's a--I mean, considering you get a GED, that's a good--that's a good job. Speaker 2: He did very, very well. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He did very, very well. Speaker 1: You have to have a lot of presence of mind to keep track of parts and things and, you know. And so, he, in a situation like Ford, he did well. He did well. So they had a Ford Plant in Marietta. Speaker 2: Well, it was in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then it eventually moved, you know. It was south of Atlanta and then it eventually moved--it was south of Atlanta, just south of the airport, and now it's down in McDonough [Georgia]. But, yes. And as I was--as I grew--as I was middle in high school and he was driving back forth to McDonough every day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my parents divorced. My parents separated when I was in elementary school. They divorced when I was in high school. And my dad and I were estranged for quite some time, but we reconciled and got right with each other before he passed away. Story_ID: 133864 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Joe Tilman Pressley and Mary Bates Pressley] met? Speaker 2: Actually there is. So my dad's family was, again, from Rydal, Georgia, in Cartersville, Bartow County, about an hour or so north of Atlanta [Georgia]. Now, they moved down to Marietta [Georgia], and my dad lived on the same street in the same apartment, I guess it was the projects, that my mom lived in. And my mother was in nursing school [Grady Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], and she would come home after class on Fridays, and she would--on the bus--and then she would take the bus back on Sunday. Well, my grandmother [Irene Bates] really didn't want my mother getting on the bus late on a Sunday to go back to school, so she was really working to try and find a way to get her back; back and forth to school. And she knew my dad, Joe, and he lived a couple of units down, and she talked my dad into being my mom's transportation. And so, as mother tells it, it just started out that he was just her ride. And on Sundays he had a car. I said, "What kind of car did he have?" She said he had a pink and white Chevrolet; 1955 Chevrolet. And he said it was clean, and he loved his car. And so he just basically drove her back and forth to school on the weekends. And from there they started keeping company. And then when my mom got out of school and went to work at the hospital, there were a couple of other young men who lived on the street. They lived on Cuthbert Street in Marietta. And this guy was an orderly, and he was--Mama said, "He was a good-looking man, too." And he said, "Okay. Now, you work at the hospital. I work at the hospital." Said, "I'm gonna, you know, I'll be your ride. I'll take you to work every day." And my dad was a little jealous of him. He was like, "I don't know about that." He had invested the time, and they were, you know--and he would--Mom said he would just kind of come over a lot, and it grew from him just being her ride back and forth to school, to him being her boyfriend. And Mother says that--she said he would come over, and he would come over and they just kind of got to the point where, you know, he didn't want to go back home, but Mama said that she said, "I'm not having sex with anybody because when you have sex, you get pregnant." And she said, "I'm going to school, and I'm doing this and I got things I'm going to do." So with that, he convinced her that they needed to get married. And they didn't tell anybody. And she said one Friday they, you know, in secret, they went and they got the marriage license and they had their blood test done and everything--and then this one Friday, December 20, 1963, they went to the courthouse and they got married. And they didn't--and then they spent the weekend together. And my grandmother, she was mad. She said, "Your Big Mama was mad." She said, "Girl, you didn't even get to have a real wedding. Why you go and do that? Why you go and marry that man?" (Laughs). And so--but, and as it would be, mother must have been very fertile, because they were married in December, she was pregnant in February. And then I was here in October. Story_ID: 133865 Speaker 1: So, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, their dispositions, how they looked, how they walked, how they talked, you know, their talents or their interests, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I inherited all of the great qualities of my mother [Mary Bates Pressley]. Probably a lot more like my mother. I wish I was even--every day that I'm more like my mother, I'm actually about that. And I think I probably inherited all the bad qualities from my dad [Joe Tilman Pressley]. I am interminably late. It is my greatest personal flaw. And in some things I'm just--I don't sometimes exercise the best judgment as I should. But, and when I think about the two of them, my mom had and still has no fear. And she would, as I said, they said she could sit at the lunch counter, she sat at the lunch counter. If she could sit in the front of the bus, she sat in the front of the bus. If she could, you know, get on a bus by herself and go back and forth to nursing school, because she knew it was important to have an education, she would do those things. And, my dad was--my dad was--again, he was a very quiet man. And I guess I kind of take after him in that way. And he liked his "me" time. And I like my "me" time. But, probably I take more after my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I probably look more like my mother. My brother looks a lot more like my dad, although people look at the two of us and say we look the same. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, tell us about your siblings, and, you know, kind of give us a chronology of who's first. Well, you're first. Speaker 2: I am the oldest. I'm the first born. Yes. Well, that's a real easy. That's very short and sweet. There are two of us. (Laughs). We are two. There is me and then there's my brother, Joseph. Joseph Jabaar Pressley. J-A-B-A-A-R. And we are ten years apart. He was born in February of '75 [1975]. I was born in October of '64 [1964]. And so we were very--he was going to first grade when I was going off to college. But as adults, we've turned out to be just, not only terrific siblings, but great, great friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Born in '75 [1975] when Kareem Abdul Jabbar (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. And as a little kid, we called him J.J. (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I know--I know an Alcindor in Chicago who was born when Kareem was Lew Alcindor [Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor, Jr.] (laughs). Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So, you know. A name that I'm sure they thought was going to live forever when they named him. Speaker 2: I know. But now he's just Joe. Story_ID: 133866 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory. When I was pre--well, before school. Early elementary school. I do remember my mother [Mary Bates Pressley] worked the evening shift at Lockheed [Corporation, later Lockheed Martin, Marietta, Georgia]. And when she would get off from work and she would come home and take a bath, get ready for bed, I'm already ready for bed, and she had bought me a set of encyclopedias, back in the day when we all had encyclopedias on bookshelves at home, and then there was the 'World Book Encyclopedia' and a series of 'Childcraft' books. And I can remember when my mom was taking a bath and getting ready for bed, every evening I would go and I would pull a book off the shelf and I would sit outside the bathroom door and I would read. I would read aloud, and we would tell stories, and we would sing, and that was just our time. My dad [Joe Tilman Pressley] must have been at work on another shift, 'cause I don't remember where he was at the time. But I do remember always reading with my mom. And, you know, I knew I--I knew how to read and speak reasonably well before I started school. Speaker 1: Okay. Well did your mother teach you or did you-- Speaker 2: My mom taught me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133867 Speaker 1: Now, did you live in the same place the whole time you were growing up or did you move? Speaker 2: Well--no. We did move. We moved. We were--when I was born, we lived in the projects. I don't really think about it that way, because--but it was nice then. Speaker 1: What was the name of the projects? Speaker 2: It was--well, let's see. I don't know the official name of the housing project, but it was in a neighborhood in Marietta [Georgia] that they called Baptist Town. But we would, of course, ebonically speaking, would run it together and just it Baptistown. But we lived on Cuthbert Street. It was Cuthbert Street and Avery Street, all right there in Marietta. And that's largely where one of the housing--one of the early housing projects was. And that's where my grandmother [Irene Bates] lived, my mother [Mary Bates Pressley] had lived over there as a young woman, and then we lived there when I was four. I remember we lived in one, oh--I don't remember, but I know that we lived at 101 Cuthbert Street, apartment three. And see, my mother had lived in an apartment on Cuthbert Street. My dad [Joe Tilman Pressley] had lived in an apartment on Cuthbert Street. So once they married, we lived in an apartment on Cuthbert Street. And we were there for two or three years, not very long. And then we moved out of the projects and into an apartment. And that's when we lived on what's called Lemon Street. In fact, the new Marietta Police Department sits on the property that was once this apartment complex. And we lived at 270 Lemon Street, apartment one. And we were there until I was in the third grade. And I remember we used to nickname--we nicknamed--I did say we nicknamed, but the adults there nicknamed this particular apartment complex in Marietta, "The Ponderosa." I said, "Why they call it the--why did they call it the 'Ponderosa'?" And Mom says, "It's because there was crime in the neighborhood and they called it the "Ponderosa" because a lot of folks got shot up in there. Speaker 1: Like the Wild West. Speaker 2: That's pretty much. Pretty much. So we stayed there until we moved. And my parents bought a lot and built a house on James Street [NW] in Marietta, which is just off the square. And we moved into that house in 19--May of 1973. So I would have been in the third--you know, at the end of my third-grade year. And that is really where--which is great, 'cause it was, you know, a house that a lot of folks couldn't build even today. It was four-sided brick, it was split-level, and front yard, backyard, nice driveway; and we were probably in the neighborhood the second or third house that went up on our street back in the early '70s [1970s]. And that's--that is still where my mother lives today. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, how old were you when you moved there? Speaker 2: I was--in '73 I would have been nine. I'll never forget the day we moved into that house, because my mom had these drapes, custom made for the den. They were orange. Now, remember, this is 1973; so we're talking two-toned shag carpet, wood paneling and all of the decor of the early '70s [1970s]. And my mother had these beautifully made custom drapes. And, again, we're the second or third house on this new street. So, there were all these other houses under construction. And there is red mud, George clay, everywhere. We pull up. We moving things out of the car into the house. The drapes--Mother had picked up the drapes. They were laying on the backseat of the car. Again, I'm nine years old, but I still just feel so terribly responsible. I took something out of the car and into the house. I left the car door open. Somebody in the neighborhood had a dog, a little dachshund. And, again, it had rained. There was red clay everywhere. This dog has somehow managed to get into or onto the backseat of the car with mud all over my mother's brand-new drapes that she had not even yet had an opportunity to hang in the house. She was so mad at me. And I felt so bad, 'cause I didn't close--I didn't think to close the door. But that was, you know, one of those childhood memories. We had a really good time, though. Lots of (unclear). And then as families moved into the other houses under construction on the street, you know, that ended up being my core neighborhood group of friends. And then we even stole some time to see each other, today. Speaker 1: Now, was there a name for the neighborhood? Speaker 2: It was--where we lived--the town, actually, if you look it up on a map or when you're doing severe weather, they called the town Elizabeth. It was before subdivisions started getting names. So, you know, most of the time in the early 1970s upwardly mobile black people were living either up on Liberty Hill, which is the name of another street that was a couple of--couple of roads over, several neighborhoods over, or they lived up on James Street. And that's one of those places where folks were building houses. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133868 Speaker 1: So having lived a couple places, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up. I remember being in the apartment on Lemon Street [Marietta, Georgia], and my mom [Mary Bates Pressley] putting me in front of the television and making me watch when man walked on the moon. I do remember that. Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty-nine. Speaker 2: Yes. And we were there then. And that was--that was pretty incredible. Speaker 1: You were five, I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --years old. Speaker 2: Yes. Five years old. And we had a TV. It wasn't a color TV, but we had a TV. And I remember that. And then, you know, talking about smells, my mother--my mother knew how to cook, because when her father was still living with them, he taught her how to cook; you know, some of the basic things. And so I could always--I always knew what day of the week it was by what we were having for dinner, 'cause we'd always have roast beef and greens and things on Sunday; we'd have leftovers on Monday. My dad's [Joe Tilman Pressley's] favorite meal was fried pork chops. And we'd have pork chops and pinto beans and cabbage on Tuesdays. Wednesday we would have chicken. Mother would fry chicken. Mother doesn't fry chicken any more. I miss that, 'cause it was buttermilk fried chicken; all the things that, you know, we know better than to eat now. Thursdays we would have--what would we have for dinner on Thursday? We had chicken on Wednesday, and we would have maybe spaghetti or some kind of a pasta dish on Thursday, and Friday we always had fish. I don't know why we always had fish. We weren't really Catholic. I was at some point baptized Catholic once I was in school, but we would always have some sort of fried fish or salmon on Sunday; I mean on Fridays. And we'd have--so you talk about the smells, I think of what's in my mom's kitchen and what she was cookin'. Story_ID: 133869 Speaker 1: What was a main street, you know, close to where you grew up? I mean, in--I guess on the--in the house, I guess, you know, when you moved to the house. What was the name--the nearest main street? Speaker 2: The nearest main street? Kennesaw Avenue [Marietta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, by and large, Kennesaw Avenue, our neighborhood is behind Kennestone Hospital. It's very close. So if you have Kennestone Hospital to the west [sic, east], Kennesaw Avenue is to the east [sic, west]; and then James Street [NW] and our subdivision was somewhere in the middle there off of Tower Road. Speaker 1: So it's Kennesaw Avenue-- Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: K-E--yes. Kennesaw, K-E-N-N-E-S-A-W, because it's just in the shadow of the Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park, where there was a very historic battle fought during the Civil War [Battle of Kennesaw Mountain, 1864]. Speaker 1: Right. Right. 'Cause even--we even had a--who's that? The baseball commissioner, Kenesaw Mountain Landis, his name was (laughs). Speaker 2: That's right (laughs). Speaker 1: Right. So, back in the--he was the commissioner back in the 30s [1930s] or something? Kenesaw Mountain Landis, I think, when Jackie Robinson became the-- Speaker 2: First player to cross color barrier. Speaker 1: Yes. Right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, at any rate, so Kennestone serving as a Kenna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Kenna-something, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So a lot of people say it's Kennestone and Kennesaw. Anything else? Speaker 2: Those are by and large were--you know, James Street, Tower Road, Kennesaw; Kennesaw Avenue, just behind Kennestone Hospital; and, of course, now that's the, you know, it's the North Loop; but, you know, that's--that was by and large the main drag beyond just the square around downtown Marietta. And Cherokee Street, and--there was Cherokee Street is another main, 'cause that's where all the churches were. And then Roswell Streets is another, you know, big main thoroughfare through Marietta. Lawrence Street, as a child, which is near the square, just off the square, was akin to what Auburn Avenue is in Atlanta, where most of the black businesses were; where there was a, you know, a black dry cleaners; there was a black dentist; there was a black doctor; there was a black restaurant; so that was Lawrence Street. Speaker 1: So that's the black strip, basically, of the business strip? Speaker 2: Was the business district, which was over near where I lived when I was living--it was just. Actually I could have walked to Lawrence Street from where I lived when we lived in the Ponderosa. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. The Ponderosa. That's something (laughs). Funny how these names come up. Speaker 2: I (unclear) 'Bonanza' was a big television program (unclear) Speaker 1: It was. It was the biggest, highest rated (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Big thing on TV. So yes. Speaker 1: --TV show. Right. Right. So. Yeah. It's just funny when I hear of these little--these names of the different neighborhoods, the names that people give them (laughs). Speaker 2: And they stick. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 133870 Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about school now. Where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started school at St. Joseph's Catholic School in Marietta [Georgia]. And I was there from kindergarten through the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your family is not Catholic, is it? Speaker 2: No. The family was not Catholic. My mother [Mary Bates Pressley] was raised a Baptist. My father [Joe Tilman Pressley] was raised a Baptist. But then sent me to a Cath--a private Catholic School, because in 1969 when I would have gone into kindergarten, because of desegregation, Mom tells me they wanted to bus me to a school essentially across town. I would have gone to Park Street Elementary School. And it was all in an effort to make sure that there was a balance of black and white kids in the school. And at the time, Park Street didn't have the best reputation. And Mom didn't want me to, and I guess my Dad didn't either want me to have any sort of disadvantage when it came to--to learning. And so she said--you know, we don't remember, 'cause I said, "Well, how did you know about St. Joseph's?" And she says--and I don't really remember how I knew about St. Joseph's, but I did. It was at 81 Lacy Street, and it's still there now. I actually went back and spoke to a group of kids there a couple of years ago. But she knew about St. Joseph's. It was a private school. And they applied for admission, and I was accepted. And I was one of--once I got into the elementary and through eighth grade--one of two black students in my class every year. There was--there was me and Amos Durr or--and he was the other--the other little black boy. But I was there for nine years. Speaker 1: Okay. So just one other black student? Speaker 2: In my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Amos Durr. Okay. Durr, D-U-R-R? Speaker 2: D-U-R-R. He lived on my--he lived in my neighborhood. He lived on the other side of--if you think of James Street as a big circle--well, actually if you were looking on Google Maps from a satellite down at my--at the neighborhood where I grew up, it looks like the letter Theta. So the circle, you know, it's a circle with a line coming through it. And the circle is James Street. So it was--it should have been James Circle, but it was James Street, I guess because they built it in sections. And then it was, you know, directly diagonally--not diagonally--you know, cutting across the circle was another street called Lee Drive. And so I lived on the back or the newest part of James Street. And then Amos's family, they lived on the front part of James Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But no, I went to St. Joseph's Elementary School. Speaker 1: What was it like? Is this the--was it newly integrated in terms of--or had black students been attending there for a while? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think so. Again, Mom doesn't even--you know, Mom says, we wanted me to go to school there. I had no trouble getting in. And I did very well while I was there. I remember many of my teachers. I'll never forget in the sixth grade, that's when we learned Mr. Romano [ph.] was my teacher, and that's when we learned some anatomy. And he made a game out of learning off of the bones in the body. And the more you knew and the faster you could--you could--you know, it was almost like jeopardy, and you could move and you'd win prizes. But it was--it was fun. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were well treated in school. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No troubles at all. Speaker 1: All right. Now, this is the--you start school the year after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is assassinated, and busing starts in Marietta. Right? Speaker 2: Yes, it does. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I was always partial to English. I did well in most subjects. I did well. I was a good student. But I always enjoyed English. I always enjoyed writing. I always enjoyed talking. I was always very nosy. I guess that's why I ended up with a career in journalism, because I was very curious. I did not do as well in the sciences as I got through school. But probably if I picked a favorite class, it would--English and social studies were two of the ones that I especially enjoyed. Story_ID: 133871 Speaker 1: Now, did you get, like, newspapers at home? And did you pay any attention to the newspapers and the radio and television and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. Yes. We got the Marietta Daily Journal. And we got the Atlanta Journal or the Atlanta Constitution. I remember, of course, [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated the year before I was born. And my parents [Joe Tilman Pressley and Mary Bates Pressley] recognizing the significance of that, my mom especially, kept all the newspapers from the week of his assassination and put them in a book for me that I still have today. When [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated and there was a--the funeral, somebody in our family went to the service. And I have a program from Dr. King's funeral service. So, you know, I think my mom always, you know, recognized the importance and the significance of life events. And, as I said, you know, I was sitting at home and watched man walk on the moon, you know. Speaker 1: So it seems like your mother is very aware (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of current events, very aware of what's going on, and someone who sought to chronic--I mean to save the memories of, you know, to preserve like a historical-- Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: --memory. Speaker 2: She did. And I--and that--she instilled that in herself and instilled it in me. I mean, I still have--she kept a lot of things. As I said, my mom was a valedictorian of her high school class, and she wrote her valedictory speech out in longhand. And she kept it, and I still have it. And it's--it's a great speech. And then the funny thing was I'm looking and--I didn't do as well as my mother in high school. She was a valedictorian. I was the salutatorian, but I still have my speech and I kept it. And even today I've saved it. I don't know what I'm going to do with it, but I've saved it (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did your mother ever talk about her own mentor in school? Who basically inspired her? Do you know? Speaker 2: You know, she talks a lot about Mr. Scott [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of what Mr. Scott's first name is, because he must have been a very, very young teacher, because--and he was her English teacher--because Mr. Scott is still living today, which means he must be upwards of ninety. And he is still very active. Goes to church every Sunday, and is a very dynamic personality. And he was someone who was very strong and encouraged her greatly to do whatever it was that she wanted to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. That's good. And so she kept in contact with Mr. Scott? Speaker 2: Well, Marietta's a very--we jokingly all ourselves old Marietta [Georgia], because as the city grew and expanded outward and more people moved into the community, and of course, everybody moved to Atlanta [Georgia] at some point, there's still people who have been in Marietta for quite some time still actually know one another and are very, very active in the community. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133872 Speaker 1: Now, when you go to high school, you go to high school in-- Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]; '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. Seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979]. You went to a public high school. Right? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And it was--what was the name of it? Speaker 2: Marietta High School [Marietta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Marietta High School. Now, your mother [Mary Bates Pressley] had gone to, like, Lemon Street High School [Marietta, Georgia]. Right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. Speaker 2: The black high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sometime in the '60s [1960s] when integration happened, Lemon Street High School closed, and the Lemon Street High School students integrated Marietta High School. And then by the time I got there, it was a totally different--it was a totally different experience from the one I had at St. Joseph's, because St. Joseph's [Catholic School, Marietta, Georgia] was a very closed environment; closed in a positive way though. I mean, there were twenty-five children, students, in my class every year. It was a very small class. So the one-on-one attention that you would get from your teachers--. You know, I remember my second-grade teacher, Sister Mary Carol or my fourth-grade teacher, Sister Kathleen; my sixth-grade teacher, Mr. Romano [ph.]; my eighth-grade teacher, Maureen Kane [ph.]. So it was a great--it was--I did well. I mean, I was a bright kid coming out of--when I'm coming out of St. Joseph's, but transitioning from a private elementary and middle school into a public high school was--it was an experience for me. It was, quite honestly, a little bit of culture shock, because I had been so sheltered and had been in a situation where I was one of only two black students in a class of twenty-five students, to go into a public high school where the diversity was majority--by and large, almost majority black. So clearly my new black friends didn't quite know what to do with me. Speaker 1: Okay. (unclear) Speaker 2: 'Cause I wasn't like them. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. You were used to Catholic discipline in a very small, you know-- Speaker 2: In a very small-- Speaker 1: --Catholic--the nuns in the Catholic-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --schools are known for their rigid-- Speaker 2: Discipline. Speaker 1: --discipline. Speaker 2: I was very structured. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 133873 Speaker 1: By the time you entered high school [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia], what were you interested in? What kind of activities were you engaged in? Were you playing a musical instrument? Or were you in dance? Or were you--what were you doing? Speaker 2: I took eight years of piano. And I wished I played better. And I took eight years of piano as a small child, but I wouldn't practice. And my mom [Mary Bates Pressley] got to the point where, "If you're not going to practice, I'm not going to pay for the lessons. So that's why I play just enough bad piano to play bad piano. I didn't do marching band. That wasn't for me. And I remember when I was in the sixth grade at St. Joseph's, because I was tall--I shot up really quickly, we thought, "Oh, well she's tall, she's black; she should play basketball." No. No. No. No. No. No. No. It was I couldn't do a lay-up to save my life, and--for my mom to describe me as loping up and down the basketball court, you knew that that was not what I was going to do. So we were going to just concentrate on being a smart kid. And so when I got to Marietta, I was interested in those kinds of activities. So I was--you know, I was in the Beta Club. And I got into the gifted program. I was on the yearbook staff. I was on the newspaper staff. I did those types of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. Now, are there any special mentors or teachers at Marietta High School? Speaker 2: Oh, there're two that I think of fondly. I think of Neil C. Bonds. Neil Carol Bonds. He was my eleventh-grade English teacher, and he would tease me and some of my friends mercilessly. And we couldn't understand why he would tease us so. And he said, if I didn't care anything about you, I wouldn't say anything to you. So that was his way of letting us know that he cared about us. And he was a great teacher. He was also the yearbook sponsor. So I had to spend a lot of time with him. My other favorite teacher was my other English teacher. Her name is Joan Harold [ph.], and she was my tenth-grade English teacher. She was also my senior English teacher, and I still know her today. It's funny, she (unclear), "Well, call me Joan." And I just can't, because she will always be Ms. Harold to me. But those are two special teachers to me at Marietta. Story_ID: 133874 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, a lot of events--I mean, Atlanta [Georgia] is growing by leaps and bounds when you're in grade school [St. Joseph's Catholic School, Marietta, Georgia] and high school [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia]. It's changing, you know, completely. Maynard Jackson's elected mayor of the city and--I mean, Jimmy Carter becomes the president of the United States. Speaker 2: Peanut farmer from Plains [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Former governor of Georgia. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Which shocked a lot of people around the nation because they saw, like, Lester Maddox as the face of Georgia. Speaker 2: And the Pickrick [Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia]. Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. And here's Jimmy Carter. A completely different man, and he's president when you go into high school, but then he loses the election to Ronald Reagan. But so CNN is starting here. The nation is focused on CNN and cable TV (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Ted Turner. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Ted Turner and Cable TV, you know. Speaker 2: Atlanta's a very much a New York South. It is so much more, and even more today in 2014 all of--because of the laws, are so beneficial to producers and people who are interested in entertainment. If you're not shooting in Hollywood [California] or Chicago [Illinois] or New York [New York City, New York], it's very advantageous to come south. And just look at what Tyler Perry has done with the Tyler Perry Studios and all of the--I mean, 'The Walking Dead' has done here. 'Drop Dead Diva' has done here. There's a new television program called 'Resurrection' that's gonna be--that starts soon--that shot here. I mean, it's very much Hollywood South. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For many years many things have happened. And when I was--when I was in elementary school, it was a long-distance telephone call to Atlanta. There was no such thing as ten-digit dialing. We would dial six and then seven more digits and you could call Atlanta, 'cause it was a long distance call. And now, we're just adding area codes left and right. Speaker 1: Right. Right. So was it exciting? I mean, were you excited about--did you have a sense that you were in the midst of a lot of activity? I mean, a place that was like almost becoming a center of national fame; a national center of activity? Speaker 2: I don't think as a junior high or a high school student you have that presence to know that where you are is a big thing or is going to be a big thing. We always talk about Marietta, and I've always talked about Atlanta as two of the biggest small towns you'll ever live in. In Marietta, people still know who all the Marietta people are. And here in Atlanta, the Atlanta people know--everybody still knows everybody. And the whole six degrees of separation really is only two or three degrees. Clearly, you know, I always was aware that it was a place of significant because of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; the Civil Rights Movement and the work that he did; but I don't think I was really that aware of the media potential of this city until I was coming out of college probably. Story_ID: 133875 Speaker 1: So in high school [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia], we were talking about some of your teachers. And as you--so how did--when did you know that you wanted to be involved in media? Speaker 2: I knew that I wanted to be involved in media early on maybe tenth, eleventh grade. I was a columnist for our student newspaper, The Pitchfork. Our school mascot was--we were the Marietta Blue Devils. We still are the Marietta Blue Devils. And our newspaper was The Pitchfork. And I would write a guest column for the paper several times a year. And I knew I was interested in media, also because I wanted to be on the yearbook staff. I was just interested in that. I guess I've always been interested in current events and or chronicling history. And I was a features editor on the yearbook staff my first year, 'cause you'd only be on the yearbook staff two years. And it was one of those classes, because it was sixth period every day. It was the last thing you did. Story_ID: 133876 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the Pitchfork. Speaker 2: Yes. Being interested in media, I wrote for the [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia] student newspaper; that was the Pitchfork. And then the yearbook was the Olympian. And it was sixth period every day. And you had to try out just--it was an activity just as any activity was. So kids tried out for the band, they tried out for football, they tried out for newspaper, they tried out for yearbook. I tried out for yearbook and got on. And I was a section editor my junior year, 'cause you could only--you had to be a junior or a senior to be on the yearbook staff, so I was a section editor as a junior year, and then was co-editor with my dear friend Beth Eberhart Ward [ph.] our senior year. And we did some very radical things with our yearbook. We put everything in lowercase just as a style thing, which people thought was very, very odd, but it was different and it stands out. Ours is the--our book is the--we call it the sweater cover, 'cause it's a textured cover of the yearbook and it feels like a nice wool sweater. And we retained the services of a local Marietta [Georgia] artist, a woman by the name of Meredith Rambo [ph.], and she did a--we commissioned her to do an ink drawing of one of the original buildings of the high school, and we put that on our cover. But that was--I tell you, that was great, great fun. And because of all the reasons why being on the yearbook staff would be fun, largely, you got to get a note on file in the office that said, "My child is on yearbook staff and they sell ads, so please excuse my child from class to go sell ads," which for us meant, "Please excuse my child from class to go uptown and have lunch or go goof off (laughs), or go to do this or and do that. Yeah. And to say that we took advantage of some of the privileges of being on yearbook staff, we did. But I, you know, I remember the day--we had to decide it--I don't know how we ended up it would be me. But at the time, there was a company called the Taylor Publishing House. And Taylor Publishing published our yearbook, and I don't--I haven't thought of this until just this very moment--and we had to decide, because it's--the yearbook is, in high school, is such a big deal, and it is a big secret when it arrives, and nobody's supposed to see it until the day they're distributed, and then you have, you know, you have yearbook day. And we decided--I had--our living room didn't have any furniture in it, and it was a big, empty room. So on the day that the yearbooks, we knew the yearbooks were coming, this huge, eighteen-wheeler from the Taylor Publishing Company pulls up my street, and they roll all of the yearbooks into our living room. And then the yearbook staff's at my house, and we're the first ones to get a look at it, and it was the coolest thing, 'cause it--we were the only ones who knew it was there. And then when it, you know, distribution day came, we moved everything from my house over to the school, and it's--it was always fun watching how students reacted to, you know, 'cause you're always looking for not only your picture in the class section, but in the candids, 'cause the candids were even more fun than that. But it was a lot of--I really got a lot out of that. That was so much fun. Story_ID: 133877 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of counseling did you get about college? What did they tell you about college? And where were you thinking about going to school? Speaker 2: I originally thought when I was junior high/early high school [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia], that I was going to be an attorney. I knew I would--without question, I was going to college. And the question was, what would my occupation be. So I thought I was going to go to law school. I'd go to college and then I'd go to law school. And then I started thinking about--as you get older, you think, I'm ready to start doing things, not just going to school. And my counselor was a woman by the name of Lonnie [C.] Austin. And she was very good about--and she was a black woman--she was very good about helping me to identify my strengths and my interests and putting together, you know, one of those lists of the pros and the cons; these are things that you enjoy doing, these are the things that you don't enjoy doing; these are the subjects where you are especially strong, these might be some of the opportunities for you. And there was a recruiter--I got all kind--I did well--I did well, I mean I wasn't perfect score level. I did okay. I was above average on my SAT. But there was a recruiter from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] who came to my high school, and he knew Ms. Austin. And the University of Georgia was working very hard to diversify the student population. And I remember he told me that if I would come to the University of Georgia, my parents wouldn't have to spend a penny. And that was the sort of language that spoke to me. And I thought, well. And I knew that I was interested in media. I knew I was going into journalism. I don't know that I had decided that I was going to be a broadcaster as opposed to being a magazine writer or a--other type of print journalist. But the thought of being able to go to school on a scholarship was really very exciting to me. I applied to all of the Ivy League schools. Made--I made the waiting list at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And then when I really thought about the opportunity to go there, moving that far away from home sort of like, "I don't know if I want to do that." And it turned out that Athens, Georgia, was just far enough away from home to be long distance by telephone; but if I wanted to come home, see my family, do my laundry, I could be home in an hour and a half. And the university offered to pay for it. So I applied for many of the scholarships that were available to minority students at the time, and--including the Foundation Fellowship, which was the full ride. And there's a woman here in Atlanta [Georgia], she is the headmaster now over at Westminster School [The Westminster Schools] in Atlanta, and she won--we were--she went to Northside High School [now North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]--and we applied for many of the same scholarships. And what ended up happening was, she won a Foundation Fellowship, which was the check full ride for four years. And then all the other scholarships that she was a strong candidate for came to me. So I won a Times Mirror Scholarship, which was--I remember it was fifteen hundred dollars a year, renewable for four years. And I remember having to write a letter every quarter to Tom Johnson, the former head of CNN, who at that time was in charge of the Times Mirror Foundation, thanking him for the scholarship and telling him what I was doing with their organization's money so that they knew it was well spent. I was a Josephine Wilkins Scholar during my four years at Georgia. I remember that was twelve hundred dollars a year, renewable for four years. I mean, every scholarship opportunity for which I was eligible, I won. And it was true my parents did not have to--I mean beyond incidentals--spend any money for me to go to school. And for that reason, because I was there on scholarship, I worked very hard to keep my grades up, 'cause I didn't want to lose my money. And I graduated in exactly four years. Story_ID: 133878 Speaker 1: Okay. So you weren't distracted in high school [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia]--when your parents [Joe Tilman Pressley and Mary Bates Pressley] split up? I mean, it didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I was distracted. But you just--you just get involved in other things. I mean, my dad had been out of the--out of our lives really since I'd been in about the fourth or fifth grade. I mean, he wasn't necessarily living at home with us a hundred percent of the time. And so he was around, but--and it was--by and large, it was my mom, my brother [Joseph Pressley], and me. And I just focused on other things and really tried not to--I mean, I'm sure it affected me, and I'm sure there're ways that it has, but I really tried not to focus on that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were way past that when you were at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Story_ID: 133879 Speaker 1: So who were some of the instructors and influences on you at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I think of my advisor. His name was George Abney. He was a very nice little man (laughs). He had white hair and he had a funny, sort of crooked smile, and he wore these little round glasses, and was looking out for me and making sure that I did the things that I should do. I remember also my advisor, once I got into the College of Journalism and Mass Communication, there was Bill Wells and then another man by the name of Al Wise. And they're the two men who really taught me everything that I know about media and how to do what it is that we do every day. They're probably the three greatest influences. You know, I think fondly of the dean of the college at the time. Thomas J. Russell [sic, J. Thomas Russell] was the dean of the journalism school when I was there. And as a--to go from being a student and his being the dean to being, you know, now a colleague and a friend, is something that I'm honored to say. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, while you were you school, from what I had heard, you took a job at WGAU. That's the college radio station? Speaker 2: No. That's actually--that was a commercial radio station. Speaker 1: Oh. Commercial. Okay. Speaker 2: I started, yes, I started working in the industry as soon as I could. My second year at Georgia, I went to the college radio station, and that was 90--WUOG, University of Georgia, 90.5 FM, Athens Classic Alternative. It was an alternative radio station when an alternative music format was exclusively for college radio. And I worked in the news department there. I started out doing some features reporting. And I know how many print journalists aspired to do features. And I--that was fun for me, but I didn't think that was going to get me a job by doing stories about the health fair. "Go do a story about the health fair out on the student center." And so while I was at the college radio station, instead, what I did was, I went to the Athens City Council meeting or the Clark County Commission [Clark County, Georgia] meeting and expressed an interest in covering government and the people who were making decisions about the city, because I was also--and this was the volunteer radio station--I would--I volunteered to get up early mornings, and it's not early morning now, but I--my first newscast was at 6:00 a.m., so I would get there by 5:00 or 5:30 and write a new--a five-minute newscast and deliver news at 6:00 and at 7:00 and at 8:00. And at the time, the college radio station was an affiliate of the Georgia Radio News Service; the Georgia Radio News Network. And there was a journalist, a reporter, at the network who would call the campus radio station every morning to see if there was any news out of Athens. And if there was any news out of Athens, we would feed it down the line, and it would show up on the network. That woman, her name was Theresa Cordell [ph.], and I will always remember her, because she was one of the people who just through this telephone relationship encouraged me to go to the City Council meeting and to go to the County Commission meeting, to go to the School Board meeting, because by telling audiences what happened at those gatherings, those were stories that would play on the network. And that was getting me experience. So by doing that at the college radio station, I then was able to audition for and get jobs at the two local radio stations in Athens. So I worked for H. Randolph Holder at WGAU, WNGC. It was the first time I ever heard AM-Stereo. Remember AM-Stereo was going to be a really big thing and it wasn't? And he had a 1980--I don't know--probably 1980 Cadillac. And I remember sitting in his big white Cadillac and we were listening to AM-Stereo, and it was the big thing in radio. And, of course, it never happened. And then I also later went to work at WRFC. And that was on Milledge Avenue [Athens, Georgia]. At 960-AM, the WRFC, and I covered news and sports for them. That was back in the day when you would--you had record obituaries. In small-town radio, you put the obituaries on the radio just like you put the obituaries in the newspaper. And instead of reading them on the air, we had gotten to where we would prerecord them on a card, and there was an obituary line. And people would call in and say, you know, it was sole sponsorship to a funeral home, and you know, "Services for will be on," and you do those things. But it was--that was all while I was in school. Story_ID: 133880 Speaker 1: Now, Georgia sports, was Herschel Walker in school [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] then? Was he there? Speaker 2: I just missed Hershel Walker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--you--if you were ever to talk to my mother [Mary Bates Pressley], she always say I fuss at her because, Hershel's last year in school, we went to the Sugar Bowl, and I wanted to go to the Sugar Bowl. And my mother wasn't having any of that. "You need to be in school. You need to be paying attention to your studies and your grades. You don't need to be going to New Orleans [Louisiana] to party at, you know, eighteen or nineteen." And so--and then after that, Herschel left school. So I did not get to--I saw him play, but I didn't go to the Sugar Bowl that year. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He was drafted by the NFL [National Football League] by then. Speaker 2: Yes. Exactly. But Dominique Wilkins was a student. I remember meeting him at a party up in Brumby Hall, and it was an interesting experience. He was a true athlete. Nice guy, but he was a true athlete. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: (Laughs). Okay. I don't know. I won't explore that. But, yes. He was a super basketball player. Speaker 2: Oh, he was a terrific basketball player. But, no, not to--I would just say that I remember I met him at a party, and I thought, "Oh, my gosh. This is Dominique Wilkins." And I'm eighteen. My brother is eight. He thinks he's the, you know, cool beans. And so I asked 'Nique if he would do an autograph for my brother. And he said, "Sure, what's his name?" And I said, "Joseph. Just make it out to Joseph." And he said, "Now, how do you spell that?" So that's what I meant when he was like kind of definitely an athlete. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: He was an athlete first, student second. Speaker 1: All right. Now, he didn't matriculate through the whole four years (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, he didn't. Nobody did. Speaker 1: He (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. He went right into the NBA. Speaker 1: --played maybe one or two years? Speaker 2: Mm-mm. You know, and I went to high [Marietta High School, Marietta, Georgia] school with Dale Ellis. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah? Speaker 2: Who played college ball at Tennessee and then played in the NBA for a while as well. He was two years ahead of me at Marietta. Speaker 1: Three-point shooting Dale Ellis. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. That's right. Speaker 1: Right, right. Played with Milwaukee Bucks and then-- Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Nice man. Story_ID: 133881 Speaker 1: So you're gaining experience both on the campus and off campus [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: And mostly in radio. Speaker 2: Definitely in radio. All the TV I did was classroom experience in the journalism school. My practical experience was in radio, on campus and off. Speaker 1: So is this by choice or just kind of happenstance? Speaker 2: I feel it's just kind of happenstance. It was where the opportunities were, and I took advantage of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Meanwhile, in Atlanta [Georgia] in 1983, [HM] Jocelyn Dorsey becomes Director of Editorials and Public Affairs of WSB-TV. Did you know about her? Speaker 2: I knew more about [HM] Monica [Kaufman] than I knew about Jocelyn. Speaker 1: Now this is Monica-- Speaker 2: She was Monica Kaufman at the time. She is Monica Pearson today. And it's amazing to me that I call her one of my dearest friends. I would have never thought in a million years that someone I aspired to be as a young person would be not only a colleague, but also a friend. Speaker 1: Okay. And what station was she associated with? Speaker 2: She was here. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Monica was here at WSB Television. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Jocelyn was here at WSB. The difference between Jocelyn and Monica was, Jocelyn was the new anchor. She anchored during the day. And Monica was the first African-American to anchor a primetime newscast in the South. And she and Jocelyn were here at the same time. And everyone thought that there was this big rivalry. They liked to think that black women are--we're competitive because we're competitive. It has nothing to do with gender or with ethnicity. And each one of them--and Jocelyn is still here. She just celebrated her fortieth anniversary here at the television station. And a friend of our family, Nick Piedrow [ph.], owned a part of a radio station in Marietta [Georgia], WFOM, 1230 AM. And it had been many, many formats over its history. And at this particular time in the '80s [1980s], it was a contemporary Christian radio station. And the reason that I knew Nick Piedrow, and he is now deceased, was because his mother-in-law, Bea Pope [ph.], and my mother, Mary [Bates] Pressley, were nurses at Lockheed [Corporation, later Lockheed Martin]. So they were friends, and our families became friends. And Nick and his wife, Jane, had a part ownership of this radio station, and because of that, Nick knew--and he had worked in education, in addition to his other interests--he knew Monica. And so my second year at Georgia, I'd expressed an interest of, you know, meeting her. And he said, "Well I know her. I can make that happen." And I--we came down to--he brought me down at, you know, not lunchtime, but early afternoon, 'cause I guess her day started at two or three o'clock in the afternoon; and he brought me to the TV station. And Monica--you'd think they had--TV anchors live these lavish lives and have these glorious offices, and she had a cube just like anybody else does. And at the time, you know, Monica has always been a woman for whom hair is an accessory. And at the time, she was wearing--her natural hair was, you know, a natural Afro, but she was wearing, appropriate for television in the early eighties, a wig at the time. And I remember being surprised when I first met her, because to my eye she was the person that I see on television every night, and I saw her before she was ready to go on camera. So she didn't have her hair on, and her face wasn't done and--but she was so kind. And she talked to me about being from Louisville [Kentucky], and she talked to me about the job opportunities that she had. And I will never forget, she said to me, "When I got into this business, there was need for people who looked like us to deliver the news. If you ever have an opportunity to be the person who decides the news, I encourage you to consider that." And so that's the--and this--I'm a sophomore at [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. And that stayed with me. And she tells the story and I told the story, and it's funny that we both tell this story, because when the opportunity came for me to move off of a (talent?) track at WSB Radio on to a management track in our organization, I did. The way she explained it to me was this: She said, "Part of the job is making public appearances. So you're going to dinners for this, you're going to dinners for that. And often, people will come to her table and speak and ask, "Why do you always tell these types of stories about black people?" And what Monica will say to them--what she told me she would say to them is: "My job is to deliver the news and the content as it is produced and decided by our managers." So at any given dinner, she'd say, "Okay. You see two tables over there? That's the news director. If you want to know why we tell some of the stories that we tell, he's the person that you need to talk to." And so with that, she said, "You know, you can either be the person who is on camera delivering the content as it's written and you're reading it off of the teleprompter, or you can be the person who's making the decision about what we're doing and talking to me in my IFB [interruptible foldback earpiece]. Who do you want to be?" And I thought about it. I said, well, do I want to be on the desk or do I want to be talking to the person who's on the desk? And I got to a point where I had an opportunity to be the person who's talking to somebody on the desk. And that's how I ended up in broadcasting and media management. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a good story. That's a (one of the most?) direct stories (laughs) of direction I've heard (unclear). Speaker 2: And that's pretty much how it happens. So I--when the opportunity came as working here to start using those organizational skills and those leadership skills that I had, that my mom has instilled in me, that's what I did. Story_ID: 133882 Speaker 1: When you were--you got your, what they call that, an A.B.J. degree, they call it? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a bach--it's--I know, I never understood why [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia] did it that way, but it's a bachelor of arts degree. So it's a B.A., but they call it an A.B.J. So, essentially, I have a bachelor of arts degree in journalism with a specialty in broadcast news. My minor was political science. I thought I was going to be a political reporter. Speaker 1: All right. But that's--well, that--it's still a good background (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were news director at the college radio station. Speaker 2: Yes, I was. And that year, we [WUOG] won the Associated Press Award for best overall newsroom operation for a Class-C radio station, which is the smallest radio station, according to market size, in the state; but, to be a college radio station that beat out other--I say, real professional radio stations--I thought was a really big deal. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about--now, you were involved in something called the University Union Film Organization, too. Right? Speaker 2: Well, the University of U--the University Union at the University of Georgia was a big umbrella organization for all kinds of activities. And so it was whatever you were interested in, you could do. And one of the things that I did, I've always been a film and a movie buff. So I was a part of what they called the University Union Cinematic Arts. It was a club. And basically we were the movie club. And we had a theatre, and it was our job to pick and choose the movies that came in and played at the theatre on campus. And one of the things that I do, 'cause I had taken a graphic arts class as a student in high school--that was my vocational education--I learned how to type, and I took a graphics class. What I did was, I made the posters. I mean, obviously the posters and flyers with Desktop Publishing are uber-sophisticated now. But back in the--back then, you know, you typeset copy and you cut-and-paste and lay things out. And I made the movie posters that hung up around campus. And I got to see movies for free. So there's nothing wrong with that. Speaker 1: No, it's not. Now, and you were on the student--oh, well. No. You're in something called "Gamma Sigma Sigma?" What is that? Speaker 2: Yes. Gamma Sigma Sigma was a service sorority. I was a non-Greek. I thought about being Greek [National Pan-Hellenic Council fraternities and sororities]. I probably should have been Greek, but from what I knew of the other women at Georgia who either go online with AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or the Sigmas [Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority]. I just--I was worried about my grades. And I didn't want to do something that would jeopardize my grade point average, because I--you know, going to Georgia was a means to an end. I mean, it was a very conscious decision I made to go to the state university as opposed to going to an HBCU [historically black college or university]. My sense, at the time, was that if I did well and earned the degree from the state university, I felt like I was going to be guaranteed a job opportunity upon coming out. And so I didn't want to--I just--I didn't want to risk the time commitment to--then I'd end up probably lost and missed out on a great social experience and a sisterhood opportunity. But I did graduate and go to work within three months after graduation. So I think my plan worked out. Story_ID: 133883 Speaker 1: Oh, did they have a--were you involved in any way in a--did they have like a black student organization on campus [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. There were probably about five thousand black students on the University of Georgia campus when I was there. And the student enrollment was somewhere between twenty-seven and twenty-eight thousand kids. And there were a number of black student organizations. So I was a member of an organization called the Abne Fooku honor society, which was the black honor society. Speaker 1: It's called the--now do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Abne Fooku, A-B-N-E, F-O-O-K-U. But that was the black honor society. I was active in the--I was somewhat active in the black student union, but really more active in the university union. And then the precursor of the University of Georgia's NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] chapter was called JAM. It was the Journalism Association for Minorities. And I was very active in that as well. I was very happy we were able to convert that into a student chapter of NABJ as a professional. But I was active in that. As I said, I didn't do the Greek organizations [National Pan-Hellenic Council fraternities and sororities], the black Greek organizations. And the one thing that I really wanted to do while I was a student--two things that I really wanted to do while I was a student at the University of Georgia that I did not do. One, I wanted to be an orientation leader. Weekend before you go as a freshman, there are, I think there were ten, maybe sixteen; you know, eight guys, eight girls, who would--or you know, do--lead orientation for the incoming freshman class. And out of the orientation leaders there were at least two black orientation leaders. And so, essentially, I'm trying out for that one spot, for the one black female. And I didn't get it. And I was really bombed that I didn't get it. And I figured out later as an adult why I didn't get it. And that was because my experience as a young black person to that point was, quite honestly, not like the ones for other black students that were going to be matriculated in the University of Georgia who had come out of high schools that were majority black, which was not my experience. I mean, I'd gone to a private school, and I'd--it was, I don't want to say not black enough, but I wasn't black enough to be the black orientation leader. It probably would have been great for all the other kids, but that just wasn't just how the system worked at that time. That's one thing that I wanted to do that I didn't have the opportunity to do. And then the other thing that I wanted to do, that I just fooled around and didn't try out and shame on me, because I still really want to do it now--was I could have been a Student Peabody Judge. The pinnacle award in broadcasting is the George Foster Peabody Award. And the George Foster Peabody Award is presented by my alma mater, the University of Georgia. And when I could've have been a student judge, I didn't do it, and now I'm desperate to get invited back to be a professional judge for the Peabodys. And, you know, we'll work on that as we go. Story_ID: 133884 Speaker 1: In '86 [1986], I guess the summer before your senior year that you were an intern at Lockheed Martin [then, the Lockheed Corporation, Marietta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: No, I interned at Lockheed Martin the summer after my senior year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I see, okay. (unclear). Speaker 2: I did--I did three internships in between my freshman and sophomore year. I came back home [Marietta, Georgia] and I interned at WFOM. It had been originally a top-forty station; top forty AM station back in the day. It was a contemporary Christian station then. And so in between freshman and sophomore, I did that internship. In between my sophomore and junior years, I interned at the Georgia Radio News Service. Remember, I told you Theresa Cordell talked to me about that. And I ended up going there and being an intern. And then after my junior--in between my junior and senior year--after my senior year, I went back to work--that's right. I didn't do anything freshman and sophomore, I just came home. I think I had my wisdom teeth out. And then in between my sophomore and junior years, I was at WFOM. In between my junior and senior years, I was at the Georgia Radio News Service. And then after I graduated, I went back to work part time at the Georgia Radio News Service. And I did an internship at Lockheed. And that was that summer of '86 [1986]. And by October of '86 [1986], I'd gotten hired to work here at WSB Radio. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me just go back for a second. You're saying that you graduated magna cum laude with high honors. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, catching up to where you just (laughs) took us real fast--okay. So, this is in the fall of '86 [1986] you are--you took us there just now, and I--okay. Oh, you're at Meredith Corporation. Right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was Georgia Radio News Service at the time was owned by the Meredith Corporation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The people who publish Better Homes and Gardens. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. So what was your role there? Speaker 2: I went back to a role similar to the one that I had as an intern. I was working at the state Radio News Service as essentially a board operator and as a newsperson. I would gather news by phone, I would produce stories via phone interviews, and then we would put them on the state network to broadcast. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And you did a little anchoring, too. Is that true? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. But you were--you had a plan by this point, right, not to be just an anchor. You wanted to be the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no. I knew--I knew that I--what I wanted to do. I wasn't exactly sure how I was going to get there. But I was a board-op and an anchor, 'cause at the network it was--you were really a one-man band. We had--there was the morning person, the midday person, the night person, and then the weekend person. And I was, for a time, the night and the weekend person. And I was responsible for sending the newsfeed down the line to the affiliate radio stations. I would write and deliver the top of the hour newscast. And if we were preempted because there was a statewide broadcast that was happening, I would, essentially, engineer that. Now, you don't want me anywhere a board today, but that's what I did then. And I knew that I was going to be in media. I knew I was going to work in radio. I thought I was going to work in radio. But I didn't quite know how it was all going to shake out. Story_ID: 133885 Speaker 1: So. Now, so, you weren't there [Georgia Radio News Service] very long. Right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. How long do you think? Speaker 2: I was there for about three months. I was there--what happened was I graduated [from University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] in June, and I had already applied for and won the internship at Lockheed [Corporation, later, Lockheed Martin], which was a nine-to-five, Monday-through-Friday opportunity in their public relations department. And because my mother [Mary Bates Pressley] was an employee and had helped me to get the internship, I was committed to that. Now, I turned down a full-time job in television when I graduated from school, because I was driving a 1976 [Chevrolet] Camero and something in me said, "If I drive this car to South Georgia, I may not get out." I had an opportunity to go to work as a reporter anchor at WALB-TV, Channel 10 in Albany [Georgia]. All Been Nee, as they call it. And I remember talking it over with my mother, and she's encouraging me. She said, "Now, you--this is your decision, but think about it. You may not want to take the very first thing that's offered you, because once you accept, you will be committed. And what if something better comes along and then you can't do it? You've already committed to this internship, so why don't you go ahead and do that and see where you are in three months." She was very concerned about me racking up a tremendous amount of debt straight out of college, 'cause I'd been so good about not doing it, having been a scholarship student. So she said, "You can go ahead and come back home, stay here, get a car, pay it down, and figure out what your next steps are going to be." So I graduated. I went back home. I did the internship at Lockheed. I turned down the job at the TV station in Albany. And about a month into the internship, there was a part-time opening at the Georgia Radio News Service, where I had been an intern the summer before. It was a paying job. Part-time, but it was a paying job. So I'm like, "Ah-ha." So I, for a time the rest of that summer I, essentially, worked seven days. I worked five days a week at the internship. It was a paid internship. I got like five hundred dollars that summer. And then I worked Saturday and Sunday, two, eight-hour shifts at the network. And I was doing that, and I--well--so I'm in. I got my foot in the door some place. And at the end of internship, I'm working part time, part time, part time at the network, and on Saturdays as the board operator, this was when network broadcasting was not as simple as it is today. So the University of Georgia football game would originate at Sanford Stadium in Athens [Georgia]. And then they would beam the signal here to WSB Radio in Atlanta [Georgia], and then WSB Radio in Atlanta would beam the signal to me at the Georgia Radio News Service, and then from there as the board operator, I would beam the game out to all of the affiliate radio stations across the state. So it was the third game of the season in the fall of '86 [1986]. Georgia was playing Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina]. And I'm running the board, and there's a problem with the broadcast. Now, I'm in the studio, I'm listening to the program feed, which is as clear as our conversation. But the phone begins to ring, and I'm getting telephone calls from affiliates complaining about why the sound is distorted, of the broadcast. And I couldn't figure out what it was, 'cause what I was listening to was fine. And what I ended up doing was we didn't have a lot of phone numbers on--as we should on the board so you knew who to call. I figured out by my own wiles, how to call the booth in Athens. I got to the engineer in the booth and I said, "Hi, this is Condace Pressley. I'm at the network. I'm getting a lot of calls from affiliates. They're complaining about the signal, and I hear it and it sounds fine to me. I don't know what to do." So the engineer is a man, his name is Rick Shaw. He said, "Well, let me hear what you're sending out." And I flip a switch, and I play the signal for him. He says, "Yeah. It sounds just fine. It sounds like it's a problem with the telephone company. So if anybody else calls, tell them that it's a problem with the telephone company." And I said, "Okay." And then he says, "And by the way," he was sitting there with a man I had worked with at WRFC in Athens, because that was--in the link of the chain, it went from the stadium to WRFC to WSB to me, then to all of the affiliates; he says, "By the way, there's a full-time job opening over at WSB if you think you're interested. Hugh Christian thinks a lot of you, and he's the man who owned the radio station where I worked. I think I can get you in to see the news director. So call me on Monday if you might like to do this." And I said, "Thank you very much, Mr. Shaw. Okay." I'm hanging up the phone. I'm like all happy and giddy. I blame the phone company for all the rest of the problems with the game. I call him on Monday. He gets me in to see the news director, at the time a man by the name of Bill Bolger [ph.]. And I see him on Thursday and interview. And then within two weeks, they have offered me a full-time job at WSB Radio in October of 1986 as a reporter and as a news anchor. And I did what really never happens. Nobody comes out of school and immediately goes to work in Atlanta. And Atlanta, at the time, was a top-twenty market. Speaker 1: Right. So this is a homerun (laughs). Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Mother was right Story_ID: 133886 Speaker 1: WSB [Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], Cox Media Group, Cox Enterprises. Alright, so, this is--radio is, from what--I've a note here--it says radio was really big in Atlanta and still is because of the drive time. Speaker 2: Yes. We are a commuter town. People love their cars, and we have terrible traffic. So that makes radio a very valuable commodity (laughs) in this city. Speaker 1: Yes. I--you know, I never really thought about it like that before. But it's true in the cities that have like a lot or big (go-slows?) and traffic jams, radio is a big thing; drive-time radio to and from work. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And the average commute in the city is usually thirty-six minutes. And for most people, it's more than that. If I come in at traffic on a normal day, I could be in my car fifty minutes. Speaker 1: Right. That's a lot of time to sell products to people, advertising, and get ideas across. So, what was your first role at WSB Radio? Speaker 2: I hired in as a reporter and as a news anchor. I worked Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. Thursday and Friday were my days off. And I was a news anchor on Saturday and Sunday mornings. I was new--anchoring news from six in the morning until noon. Hugh "Baby" Jarrett [Hugh Thomas Jarrett], one of the Jordanaires who have sang backup for Elvis [Presley], was actually a board-op here at the time at the end of his career, and he was my board-op in the morn--on Saturday mornings. And so I would write and deliver the news on Saturday and Sunday mornings. And then the rest of the week, I was a reporter covering city hall when former mayor, Bill Campbell, was a member of the Atlanta City Council. From there, I went from working as an anchor and as a reporter to being exclusively an anchor in the evenings. And about that time, there was an uprising at the Atlanta Federal Prison. There was what--what was called the Cuban Uprising at the Atlanta Federal Prison. And it was a breaking news story that went on for, I think, eleven days. And out of that, my role became--I was the person who sat in our truck in front of the prison at night watching the prison in case anything happened. And lucky for me the story broke on my watch, and it resolved itself peaceably. And from there, I managed to talk my way into morning drive. And I worked as a producer on our morning news program, because at the time, talk radio wasn't what it is in 2014. It was still very much--we were still very much a full-service radio station with two big personalities on in the morning, and then we had these two news anchors who were on the radio thirty minutes out of every hour. And it seemed to me that if the phone rang, if something happened, breaking news downtown, and those guys were on the air, Sam and Dave, there was nobody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughs). (Unclear) Speaker 2: It was Sam and Dave, the news brothers. We couldn't-- Speaker 1: The news brothers (laughs). Speaker 2: We couldn't--we jokingly we call them the news brothers. Sam Hall and Dave Foulk. Sam Hall is actually on the radio now in New York [New York City, New York]. Dave is on the radio now still in Knoxville, Tennessee. But I talked my way into being just an extra set of hands at the radio station in the morning. And that evolved into being a producer, into being a reporter, into being a news assignment editor; that moment where I had a chance to jump on the management track. And then from there. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--this is news radio, basically. Speaker 2: Well, we were playing music when I started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, we had a full-service morning show when I started here in 1986. Bobby Harper and Kathy Fishman were the morning show co-hosts. Skinny Bobby Harper, as he was known on the air, a legend in Atlanta radio; and is the real radio DJ on whom the character Dr. Johnny Fever was based on the television show 'WKRP in Cincinnati.' Speaker 1: Is this the same Bob--was he ever in Dayton [Ohio]? WING in Dayton [sic, WSAI in Cincinnati, Ohio]? Speaker 2: I don't know if I was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There was a Bob Harper who was really (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I think that's a different Bob Harper, but this was a skinny (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This was a different one. Okay. Speaker 2: --man. This was a skinny--a guy named Skinny Bobby Harber. Speaker 1: Mm-mm. Speaker 2: And he was the--yeah. He was the inspiration for Dr. Johnny Fever. Speaker 1: Did he do characters at all? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He did characters. He did everything. He was--he was a great guy. I--and he was a very, very good friend. But worked with him--and when he was here, we were--as I say, we were still playing mostly music in the morning. And as we evolved into a news and talk radio station, that happened in 1991 with the start of the Gulf War. Story_ID: 133887 Speaker 1: I remember February 17, 1991, when the air war started [Gulf War], that was the moment at which our program director morphed our station [WSB Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] from being a full-service radio station into a news talk radio station. We went to all news in the morning, talk throughout the day, news--heavy news presence in the afternoon. And that has evolved in the twenty-plus years since. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So. So you became the morning show producer in '87 [1987], is that? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. And this is [Skinny] Bobby Harper is on in the morning? Speaker 1: Yes. He was with us until--Bobby left--Bobby and Kathy [Fishman] left--they left in '91 [1991], 'cause I remember that I was here. The [Atlanta] Braves went worst to first. I got to cover the World Series that year. That was a lot of fun. And then, as I say, when the Gulf War started, me at the radio--the one thing that is certain about working in radio is the uncertainty of working in radio. And so the program director then, they blew up the radio station, and Bobby and Kathy left. And we put on--we pull our guy out of the helicopter, the traffic reporter, and made him the host of our morning show. His name is Scott Slade, and he's still hosting our morning show today. But, yes. I went from being a nighttime anchor to being a producer and a reporter, a morning reporter, and then I was the news assignment editor, and then I was the assistant news director--the assistant program director, and now the manager of programming operations and community affairs. Speaker 2: Wow. So you covered the Democratic National Convention [DNC] in '88 [1988]? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. Speaker 2: Here in Atlanta? Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. I think I've covered every political convention since '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Yeah. [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson was a big feature in that. Speaker 1: And that was that eternally-long Bill Clinton speech. Yes. (laughs). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Well, yeah. Jesse was here for that one as well. Speaker 2: And Michael Dukakis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --was the nominee of the Democratic Party. Speaker 1: Yes. He was. He was--that was--I actually have--I've had great--covering politics, I've great experience covering politics and presidents. I covered the DNC in '88 [1988], and I've covered the DNC and the RNC [Republican National Convention] since. We used to do what we call ascertainment interviews. And we would invite in community leaders when--before deregulation of the industry. And we would sit in the big boardroom and have lunch and discuss issues of community interest. And once President [Jimmy] Carter came, and I had to sit next--in the big boardroom in our old building, I sat next to Jimmy Carter, and we had lunch, and we talked, and he was the nice--he is the nicest man. He is a true WYSIWYG, "what you see is what you get." And I remember asking him, I was like, you know, what was, as he looked back on his presidency, you know, what was the thing that's really troubled him the most. And he talked to me about, you know, staying up at night during the Iran Contra hype--hostage situation [Iran Hostage Crisis 1979 - 1981] and not being able to resolve that, because, you know, it was his failure to resolve that, the hostage crises that led to [Ronald] Reagan's election, and what happened after that. But I got to cover Reagan. That was back in the day when the White House would do regional media visits. And this was very early in my career, and it was in the early term of the Reagan presidency. And they would invite regional media to come up and participate in a White House news conference. And I knew that President Reagan's favorite color was red, because Helen Thomas would always be sitting on the front row with her red suit, and I got to go and I put on my red suit and got to stand up and go, "Mr. President, Mr. President." And it was-- Speaker 2: So you did your homework. Speaker 1: I did. I did my homework. And the only thing was I still messed up though, because there was another regional reporter there who managed to get President Reagan to say, "You know, when I am in Nashville [Tennessee], I listen to W dot dot dot." And she got it, she fed it down the line, and the radio station in Nashville turned it into a promo on a company hour I.D., and they said, "Why didn't you get him to do that? 'Cause he's not supposed to do that." And they got--it ran, maybe, three or four hours before--of course, they got a cease and desist from the White House that says the President doesn't do promos. So, but I did. I got to ask--I asked Reagan a question. I was--actually rode in a presidential motorcade. I was pool reporter when Bush Forty-One [George H.W. Bush] came to Atlanta for the first observation of the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] federal holiday. And we went out. We met Air Force One up at Dobbins [Air Reserve Base]. I've never driven that fast, and there's never been as little traffic on the Atlanta interstates as when there's a presidential motorcade riding through the city; and did that; came to the King Center, met Bill Clinton through my work with the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. And really, the only president I haven't either interviewed or met is [HM] President [Barack] Obama. But I think I've got a few more years to perhaps make that happen. Story_ID: 133888 Speaker 1: Let's see. You were around when Maynard Jackson was elected for his third term. Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He was a tremendous mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]. And he was very much active in his business, Jackson Securities. When I was the president of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] in 2001 and 2002, we wanted to take our scholarship foundation account and invest it with a minority-owned business. And I'll never forget. We made the decision after interviewing several firms to move this money and have the folks over at Maynard Jackson's firm, Jackson Securities, manage it. And it was a sizable portfolio at the time. And I remember being in the building at my desk and my phone rang. And I picked up the phone and, you know, "Condace Pressley." And at the other end of the phone it was Maynard Jackson. I was like, wow, why are you calling me. And he called me to thank me for the business. And I thought that was a very--I was--it surprised me. Story_ID: 133889 Speaker 1: Now, by 1990, now this is--you're really early in your career. You're named the Radio Newswoman of the Year by the American Women in Radio and Television here in Atlanta [Georgia]. You know, this is--you hadn't been here long. Speaker 2: No. I hadn't. I had not. But I liked--I like telling stories, and I guess I was good at doing it. It was--it's always been fun. Speaker 1: Was it--were there any particular story that year you think that made a difference? Speaker 2: I think probably so. There were a couple of stories. One, again, '91 [1991] was the year that the Atlanta Braves went from worst to first. And I was the reporter who'd covered a lot of the momentum and activity in the city. And there were Braves fans who camped out at Atlanta Fulton County Stadium for days in advance before the tickets went on sale. And I was out there camped with them. And I interviewed the first woman in line after the single ticket sold out. And she was not happy. And she let go a tirade as I'm interviewing her. And I said--I says, "So what happened?" And she said, "I have been out here camped out all this time 'cause they say they had tickets. I was going to get me some tickets to go to the Braves game. I finally get to the window and the lady look at me and she say they ain't got no tickets. I say 'What you mean?' She say they ain't got no tickets. And you know that makes me mad. That makes me..." and she used an expletive--"mad." And she says "I am (makes sound) really...". And I guess the perturbed would be the polite way of saying it. And it was just a terrific sound bite. And I ran it by the editors here at the radio station and said, "Is that okay for air?" And she didn't swear. I mean, she said the word "damn," and they said that's okay. And they said--so I ran that story, and that was one that was really--I think that helped. And a second story, I was out on the interstate one morning, because a tractor-trailer rig carrying cattle to Alabama was on the Perimeter [Interstate 285] and a car cut it off, and the truck buckled. And the back end of the truck got caught underneath a bridge and ripped off the back door. So as--you imagine a semi rolling at seventy or eighty miles an hour, gets buckled and caught under a bridge, the door rips off and out flying the back of the truck are cows. And they were--unfortunately, you know, there were a number that were hit by other cars. It was--it was--for a traffic city, you know, it was a traffic mess. Great story. Traffic mess. And so I'm out there on the side of the interstate with the folks from the [Georgia] Department of Natural Resources as they're trying to stop lanes of traffic and retrieve injured cattle out of the interstate, and some of them that, you know, were not going to make it, and they had to put them down. And natural sound is really what works in radio. And one of the things that I used particularly in that story was the sound of, you know, of the gun going off, and then of the (mooing sound). And it was emotion--it was emotional. And I--and those things probably helped. Speaker 1: Yeah. These are--yeah. Who--yeah. Who would guess? Some of these--you know, some of these stories are surprising. You know, they (unclear). Well, that's what news is about, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. It's the odd and the interesting stuff that goes on. Story_ID: 133890 Speaker 1: So you were president of the Atlanta Association of Black Journalists in 1993 [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: So, you've been involved in one way or another since college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]. Speaker 2: I've been involved in the Journalism Association of Minorities [JAM], which as I said, was the precursor of a student chapter of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. And then when I came to work at WSB [Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], one of my colleagues, the morning news anchor, a man by the name of Vic Carter; he is the six and eleven o'clock anchor now at WJZ Television in Baltimore [Maryland], he's the one encouraged me to get involved in NABJ and I did. And see, he said, "Oh, you get involved in NABJ. You'll find a husband real quick." And I got involved in NABJ, I'm still not married, but I forgave him for that. And so out of that I ended up getting involved in the activities of the organization. I started out on the scholarship committee reading scholarship applications. I was very interested in that, having gone to school on scholarships. And then from there, got involved in the leadership, became an officer, and was president of the local chapter the year of UNITY, which was the very first convention of minority journalists, where it was the African American journalists, the Hispanic journalists, the Native American journalists, and the Asian American journalists. We had more than ten thousand journalists of color in our city back in 1994. And I think to this day, that still remains the largest gathering of journalists of color to talk about any of the work that we do and the diversity of that is still very necessary in the industry. Speaker 1: Okay. That is a big story. Did Atlanta have a local version of UNITY? Speaker 2: No. And that's what made that a really big job for us, because Atlanta's the hub of the South, and Atlanta has always been very much very black-white city. So while there was a local NABJ chapter here in Atlanta, we did not have an NAHJ [National Association of Hispanic Journalists] chapter or an AAJA [Asian American Journalists Association] chapter or a NAJA [Native American Journalists Association] chapter. So by and large, it was the Atlanta black journalists reaching out to the Asians and the Hispanics and the Native Americans who, and not very many, who were here, but really serving as that host committee for that big meeting. And that's how I ended up going into the leadership of the NABJ. Speaker 1: Now, Atlanta has gained quite a few (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes. It's a very--today, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it's remarkably diverse. But even in the middle '90s [1990s] it was not as much. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Right. So, you were president for how long? Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years? Okay. Story_ID: 133891 Speaker 1: So you were covering the news when Bill Campbell, you know, won the [1994] election for Mayor of the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Against Michael Lomax (unclear)? Speaker 2: That was one of the big early stories between Lomax and Mayor Campbell. And (unclear) history looks back and you think about, you know, at the time one of the big stories and also was, you know, substance abuse problem; well, I'm thinking about [HM] Julian Bond now. But there was a Julian Bond substance abuse problem, and the battle between Michael Lomax and Bill Campbell to be the next mayor, and sort of the hierarchy of how all that goes. It was a pretty exciting time to cover politics. Story_ID: 133892 Speaker 1: All right. So you were--so we were talking about the Bill Campbell, Michael Lomax runoff election in '93 [1993]. You covered that. And you said that there's the [HM] Julian Bond substance abuse case, too. Now, I'd forgotten all--I, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. There's so much. There is so--Atlanta [Georgia] is a city that is so rich in history. There are so many stories that we forget. Speaker 1: Did that story make him vulnerable to [HM] John Lewis taking that seat? You know (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think--absolute. It absolute--it was absolutely the deciding factor there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what a wonderful--what a wonderful congressman Representative Lewis has been, and how it was great that [HM] Julian Bond was able to go on, recover from that, and go on to lead the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. But I will tell you, there was a--on the fifty--I've had an opportunity to interview Congressman Lewis a number of times, and he's a wonderful, wonderful man. And most recently--the most recent time we sat down was on the fiftieth anniversary of the [1961] Freedom Riders. And, you know, he was one of the Freedom Riders among the many things that he did. And so I'm at his office with a reporter and a photographer from the newspaper, couple of other television reporters, and we're getting all organized and set up for the interview. And he has already received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Obama [HM Barack Obama], and so he's going to wear this during the interview. And so we--he gets up, and we walk into an outer office and he opens a drawer and pulls out the box where it is. And he opens it, and he takes it out and he hands it to me, and he says, "Will you help me put this on?" And I thought, "Okay." (laughs). Wow. And so he turns, and I put the, you know, we put the medal on him, positioned it nicely over his tie. And he said, and he told just amazing stories about that time in the [Civil Rights] Movement and then the history. But, you know, he's been a personal favorite; one of the--one of my favorite interviews. I had a chance to sit down a length and talk with Coretta Scott King. And, you know, she rarely gave interviews unless she really had to. And I interviewed her in the late '90s [1990s], probably--gosh. I--1993. I looked at the tape the other day. And we sat at--in her office over at the King Center [Atlanta, Georgia]. And I remember being taken by--she would lean back and reflect on her life experiences. Of course, to everyone in the world, her husband was the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther, Jr.; and she would rock (?) back, and she'd say, "And then Martin would say...". And I was like, "Oh, my gosh. This is so cool." So. It was, you know, from time to time you still get--I'm still impressed by some of the people I've had an opportunity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So many (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --visit. And Atlanta is so rich. And I remember sitting once with Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. And we were sitting on a park bench outside his office. And I asked him to tell me about April 4, 1968. And he sat there and he told me the story, and to hear him say it, it's just as if, you know, he's exchanging a memory and telling a story just as we're talking now, and he said--he said, you know, "James Orange and I were downstairs in the parking lot just kind of horsing around, and Martin and some of the others were up on the balcony at the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee]," and all of sudden, you know, he heard this (claps hands). And he said, "And then Martin fell." And then they all ran up and, of course, we all know what happened after that. But just to sit there and to think, he was there. And I was--it was quite remarkable. And it was--and it has been quite remarkable. But the great, rich history that lives in the city. And to have been or to be someone who has a part of sharing those stories with audience. I've always said what I do is one of the greatest jobs in the world, because I get to go places people ordinarily don't get to go. I get to be a first-person eyewitness to history. And then I'm paid to tell everybody else what I saw and what I heard? I mean, how cool is that? That's a great job. Story_ID: 133893 Speaker 1: You're assistant news director [at WSB Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] by '94 [1994]. Oh, the Summer Olympics in '96 [1996, in Atlanta, Georgia]. There's got to be some Olympic stories. Right? Speaker 2: Oh, that was the best seventeen days in the history of our city. There was no traffic those two weeks. We successfully--because we knew that it--Atlanta's a pedestrian--not a pedestrian--Atlanta is a car town. People always drive. We strongly encouraged everyone to use MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], and they did. And so for those of us who were working the games, it was great. We were free to come and go as we pleased. And I remember as it was because, A, you're covering it; so we're credentialed to cover various aspects of the games; and then B, you get to go and participate. I would have never thought I would have been as into pin trading as I was. I was quite addictive. All of the various Olympic pins; and, you know, the Varsity, which is an iconic restaurant in Atlanta, had a french-fry pin, but it was illegal and bootleg and not sanctioned by the Olympic committee. And so, of course, it was a high priority of things to get. But obviously the most significant event from the Atlanta games was the bombing at Centennial Olympic Park. And during the games, most of the employees on our team, we were on twelve-hour shifts; we were twelve on and twelve off. And when this happened, I was on my twelve hours off. And I was at home, and I remember I was--and I building a house at the time. I had moved out of my apart--I'd moved out of my apartment because--my apartment complex 'cause I was really close to or online to the airport--they jacked up my rent. And I knew they were just jacking up my rent because of the Olympics. And I was ready for a home anyway. So I went back home again and lived at home for eighteen months while my house was under construction. So I'm staying with my mom [Mary Bates Pressley], and she comes and she wakes me up, and she's like, "Connie, you might need to turn on the TV," 'cause I was knocked out. I was asleep. She says, "You know, that something is happening at the park." And I wake up and looked to see what's going on, and they're talking about a bombing at the park. And I'm thinking, "We--I was--I was just there three hours ago and everything was fine and everybody's having a good time. Surely there must be some mistake or whatever." And, no. And just as I'm sort of clearing up, 'cause I was in a deep sleep, my phone rings and it's the desk, and, yes, there has been a bombing at the park, and it's all hands on deck. And you get back up and you go back in. And it was different covering the game from that moment on. And Richard Jewell was identified as the suspect; though it turned out he was incorrectly identified as the suspect. And it was difficult from that moment forward. And there was the criticism of the mayor and the flea market aspect of all of the vendors and things like that. But we had good games. We really did have good games. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a highlight--I mean, are there--I guess, everybody remembers it for the bombing it seems. Speaker 2: Well, it does remember that. But I think, you know that's the one thing everybody remembers about the Atlanta games. But the one thing that I remember, personally, was attending the opening ceremonies. One of my dearest friends, her family, they were big-time Olympic fans; and so when it was time, years before the game, 'cause you had to preorder your tickets years in advance; and they ordered all of the most expensive tickets thinking that they would get bumped up into the cheap seats. But for some of those things they got the good seats. And her brother and sister-in-law had gotten tickets for the opening ceremonies, but they couldn't afford to have the cost of those opening ceremonies tickets on their credit card for however long; so, they're like, "Melinda, can you take these off of our hands?" And she's--thought, "Well?" And to this day, it's still the most expensive ticket I've ever bought for--that ticket was $685. And--but, I was at the opening ceremonies. I can find myself on a map or a picture. I've got one in my office. And when Muhammad Ali came out and he lit the torch, that had to be one of the most magical moments ever. It was just phenomenal. Speaker 1: Okay. That's true. That's true. That is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That was a great moment. Speaker 1: --highlight that everybody remembers. Speaker 2: That was a great, great moment. And it was fun too to be able to hang out with my family and to be able to take--because we were--I was in the media, you know, having access to some tickets; so I remember, took my dad [Joe Tilman Pressley] to some boxing events; my mom and I went to some swimming events; my brother [Joseph Pressley] and his fiancee--wife went to--yeah, fiancee at the time--they were--well, no; they went to--we went to see some basketball. It was the Dream Team. It was great. And not everybody gets to do that in your own hometown. Story_ID: 133894 Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, I forgot to ask about Marvin Hagler. He was a resident of Atlanta [Georgia], you know, when he was champ. He still lives here, I guess. Right? Speaker 2: You mean Evander Holyfield? Speaker 1: Evander Holyfield (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Evander--he's--Evander's had some struggles. But, yeah, he's still here. Speaker 1: Okay. He had a huge estate at one point (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That just got sold, I think, to Red Cross. Just bought it, 'cause it went into--he's had some struggles. Story_ID: 133895 Speaker 1: Now, do you have a--we always ask people--what is your journalistic philosophy? Speaker 2: What is my journalistic philosophy? That's that old trick where you repeat the question while you think about the answer. My philosophy as always is to, in a breaking-news situation, is to deliver the facts. To make sure that the content we present is delivered fast, accurately in a concise manner, and is always true. So that's by and large how I operate. And to the degree that I have an opportunity to spend time and do more long-form interviews, it's very important to me to listen. I am terribly frustrated when I watch people, interviewers especially, sit with a guest, and because a producer has handed them a stack of questions to ask, the interviewer is so focused on the cards in their hand and the next question that they're prepared to ask, that they're not listening to the person they're talking to. And invariably, the person you're taking to is gonna say something out of one of those questions that is way more interesting than you would have ever asked, and then will prompt you to ask another question. So I always sit down in any interview and am--and while I'm prepared, I'm always open to having the guest take it in another direction, because that's an opportunity for them, depending upon how comfortable he or she feels with you, to reveal even more than you even thought you were going to be able to get. Story_ID: 133896 Speaker 1: Tell us about your radio show, 'Minority Perspectives' [later 'Perspectives,' WSB Radio, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes. I have done--I was doing math, and I have probably, over twenty-five years, produced more than twelve hundred episodes of 'Minority Perspective.' And, again, before deregulation back in the day when it was important to have--and it's still important for there to be a diversity of points of view represented on these airwaves to which we are--to which we are privileged to operate, you know, through the FCC, we had a program that was called 'Minority Perspective.' And it was a program that is--presents topics and guests of, in particular, interest to the minority community. And I remember I started hosting that show right after Hurricane Hugo hit in South Carolina. Well, as we hit the turn of the last century into the 2000s, and increasingly in city after city, where there is greater diversity, and the minority then becomes in some cases the majority, we talked, and we decided that we were going to change the name of the program from 'Minority Perspective' to just 'Perspectives.' And as I open each show every week, I say, you know, "This is Perspectives, the show where an examination of our many differences often shows us how much we have in common." And that way, I believe I am able to continue to serve that interest of providing content that is of interest to the minority community, but to the majority community at large and still spend thirty minutes every week talking to someone about something that is interesting to me. Speaker 1: What have been some of your favorite shows? Speaker 2: Favorite shows. Well, obviously, sitting there with Coretta Scott King was a really big deal. And sitting down and talking to Congressman John Lewis [HM John Lewis] (clears throat). Excuse me. Sitting down and talking to Coretta Scott King was a big deal. Talking to Congressman Lewis was one of my favorite shows. I remember interviewing the author [HM] Terry McMillan. She was--she wrote the book, 'Waiting to Exhale.' She's been on my show several times. I really very much enjoy her. There have been so many out--I was thinking--I was looking through and those were--at least that really stands out. I've interviewed, you know, great civil rights leaders. Just this year, I sat down with the [HM] Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian, who was one of the lieutenants of the Civil Rights Movement, and in 2014 was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Obama [HM Barack Obama]. And he told me about how he was one of Obama's early supporters; how he was out there in Iowa working when nobody even knew who Senator Barack Obama was or thought he ever had a chance at becoming President of the United States. So, it's been quite exciting. I interview--and then from time to time I'll bring in some of the celebrity types. Once I sat down with one of the "Real Housewives of Atlanta," NeNe Leakes. And she's another WYSIWYG: what you see is what she--what you get. She's loud and interesting. I've talked to Wendy Williams. She's in the Radio Hall of Fame. Lots of fun people. I enjoy that. I enjoy talking to people. Speaker 1: When does your radio program air? Speaker 2: It is in the--It's a Sunday Public Affairs program. I'm happy that it clears on all four of our radio stations here. It runs twice on WSB. It runs at six in the morning and again at midnight, as well as running on our music stations, and remains the most-listened to spoken format program--spoken word format program in Atlanta on Sunday mornings. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. An institution. Speaker 2: I will--I guess. I never--would have never thought of it that way, but yes. There was a period of time when somebody in our sales department decided to sell a paid infomercial in my time slot, and it ran, I think for three weeks, and there were complaints, and I got my show back. So maybe it is an institution. Story_ID: 133897 Speaker 1: So by 1999--I mean 1997--yeah, '99 [1999], you're assistant program manager here, and also a year when Atlanta [Georgia] is revealed to be the fastest growing urban area in the United States aside from Los Angeles [California], I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (unclear). Tell us your--the 911 story, I think. Oh. I didn't--oh. Let's get the Super Bowl. Tell us the Super Bowl story. Speaker 2: Super Bowl story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I've been to two Super Bowls. The first one [Super Bowl XXVIII, 1994] in Atlanta, I remember it was the Dallas Cowboys and the Buffalo Bills. And I got--and Troy Aikman was the quarterback. And I remember sitting in the Georgia Dome--you go to a game at the Georgia Dome, I can see why Atlanta wants a new station. because if you're sitting way up in the cheap seats, and granted, I was a working journalist, so I was definitely in the cheap seats 'cause I didn't pay for anything. I was sitting next to Chris Berman [ph.], and the angle at the Dome is so steep. And I have a thing about heights. That you're sitting and leaning like this, and you're afraid that, you know, if you're a little top-heavy, you might just tilt and just tumble on down into the--but nobody does. But it's still--it's just uncomfortable. That was fun. And then 2000 when the Super Bowl [XXXIV] was in Atlanta, again, that was the year that Ray Lewis was here [sic] and, of course, there was an ice storm that year, and there was a homicide, and there was a trial, and all--and there is no lacking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What happened (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --of good news that comes out of this city-- Speaker 1: --versus somebody. Speaker 2: Ray was versus St. Louis, it was the [St. Louis] Rams. I think it was the [Baltimore] Ravens [sic, Tennessee Titans] and the Rams, 'cause I remember I sat in the end zone, that game. There's nothing like it. It is a spectacle. Story_ID: 133898 Speaker 1: Now, how do these big events affect the city [Atlanta, Georgia], I mean--? Speaker 2: Oh, they're--big events (laughs)--big events can affect Atlanta in either a very positive or a very negative way. Take, for example, recent ice storms in Atlanta in 2014. One that struck in the middle of the day where everybody goes home at once, and the city is paralyzed by traffic. Obviously, on a national scale, doesn't favor us very well. But you bring the [1996] Olympics to Atlanta, by and large, it will great on TV. And a big story happened out of the games. A lot of records were set. It's a great advertisement. Atlanta has a reputation for the being the city too busy to hate. There's a reason why there are more people here than ever before. I, for a long time career wise, I'd always thought I would never work in a top-ten market. And I'd gotten to--once you get to the point where you have a house, you have roots, you have.... In the community, you really think long and hard about moving. And then Atlan---after Hurricane Katrina in 2005, half of New Orleans [Louisiana] went to Houston [Texas] and stayed. The other half of New Orleans came to Atlanta and stayed. And Atlanta went from being the eleventh largest media market to the tenth, to the ninth, to the eighth; and then I think we went as high as seven. And now we're the ninth largest media market. But there's a reason why so many people relocate here. The weather is great, except for when it snows, 'cause we don't do well with snow or ice. Speaker 1: But that's rare, you know. Yeah, it is. Story_ID: 133899 Speaker 1: Nine one one [September 11, 2001]. I guess you have a 9/11 story. Right? Speaker 2: I do, I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the summer of 2011--in the summer of 2001, I'd been elected--I was president of the NABJ from 2001 to 2003. And as a result of being the president of the National Association of Black Journalists, I then also held a seat on the board of directors for the Radio, Television, News Director Association [RTNDA]. And those are all your radio and television news managers. And in 2001, the Radio Television News Director Association still held an annual convention of two to three thousand news managers. Stations would have meetings, group company meetings, etcetera, in various cities across the United States. 2001, that meeting was in Nashville, Tennessee, and we were standing out at, essentially, near the Grand Ole Opry. That morning, September 11, 2001, I got on an airplane to go to--a short flight, short hop flight; it was--you know, here to Nashville is forty-five minutes, even with time change; beautiful, blue sunny day. Zip right up and then it comes--it's time to land. And that had to have been the hardest, most unpleasant landing I'd ever had on an airplane. I remember getting off the airplane and coming through the jetway. And then in the area, there was a snack bar and there were all these people who were gathered around a television--you know, around two television sets. And I remember Peter Jennings was on one, and 'The Today Show' was on the other, and you could see that one of the towers [World Trade Center, New York City, New York] was burning and that there had--something had clearly happened. And they had said a plane--and I could only hear a little bit, 'cause it wasn't very loud--and they said a plane had flown into one of the towers. Well I was thinking about the story of that Russian [sic, German] kid, Mathias Rust, who was in a little plane, and he flew into a building in Moscow [Russia]. And I thought it--and I thought, well, maybe it's--it was something like that. And even at that moment, I didn't realize the magnitude and the significance of really what was happening, that it was, indeed, a terrorist attack. And so I called the newsroom, and they're very busy. And they still don't have very many questions answered. And I told the news director, "Okay. Yeah, I know you're busy. Let me get settled. I call you back later." And I go and I get into a cab. Power of radio. And the cab is taking me to the hotel. And the top of the hour newscast comes on and it's a CBS Radio newscast. And the news anchor lays it all out. And I thought, oh, my--you know, oh, my God. America has been attacked. And I realized that I haven't talked to anybody other than the news director at the radio station. So I immediately thought I need to call my family. And I called my mom's [Mary Bates Pressley] office and the lady answers the phone, and I asked to speak to my mother, and she's like, "Connie, is that you? Are you okay?" And I said, "Yeah. I'm fine." She said, "Do you know what's happened?" I said, "Yes. That's--I'd just real--I'd just found out what happened. I need to let you guys know that I'm okay." And then my mother, who was, you know, panicking because at the time that I was landing, that's when the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] was, you know, grounding all the planes, making everybody land. And for a minute then nobody knew where I was. And I was stuck in Nashville for most of the day. The RTNDA ended up canceling their convention that year. And it was not funny, but odd in that you had all of these Type-A news managers, news directors from television stations and radio stations missing the story of our careers because we're in Nashville kind of gathering for a convention. So I was friends with a man by the name of Robert Garcia. He was running CNN Radio at the time. And CNN Radio was headquartered in Atlanta [Georgia]. And there were four of us who piled into his Honda Prelude, with each of us with a week's worth of clothes in a big suitcase. And we all sat like this, and then did the four-hour ride back into Atlanta. We decided to wait until after rush hour, because we knew that the city was going to empty out. And he drove me back. What I remember was we came through the city coming back. All of the overhead signs on the interstate said, "Airport closed. National emergency." And it was as eerie and quiet and as desolate as I have ever seen Atlanta. And Atlanta is never eerie, quiet or desolate. Story_ID: 133900 Speaker 1: And my car was at the air--was at the Atlanta [Georgia] airport. And we get to the airport and, of course, we can't go in because the airport is closed. So we get to the closest exit, so to speak, where he [Pressley's cab driver] could put me out with my bag. And if you travel frequently, you're used to, "I go in this way. I park my car here. I go to the gate. I come out this way. I know where my car is." And it's very--but I was discombobulated because I was going into the airport in the wrong way. And I don't think I really thought to remember where I parked my car, 'cause I would have probably just naturally walked to the same area coming out of the airport as I normally do. And so I'm dragging this great big suitcase through the airport trying to figure out where it is that I parked my car. And I find my car. And we don't know anything at the time. And I remember being very, very afraid because, you know, a parking garage, it's nothing but concrete. Atlanta is a very big city. It had hosted the [1996] Olympics. We've got the world's busiest airport. What if we're on the list. All I could think about was trying to get out of that concrete garage before something hit us and I got crushed in concrete and nobody would ever know where I was. But I found my car and got home and in time to see President [George W.] Bush address the nation. And then I became the next twelve-hour on shift at the radio station covering the event as it unfolded. And that's the one time the radio station has--we have--at the time we had five radio stations in our cluster here. And it's the one time where we flipped a switch, and we put the news and information signal across all of the stations; the music formats, everybody broke format because there had been a terrorist attack. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. That's an interesting story. I don't think any--I've never heard that all the news directors were at this, meeting together. That's interesting. I, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: And were able to see--you know, they was, again, it was all of the--you know, annually all the news managers would get together. It was the Annual News Managers Convention [Nashville, Tennessee], and we were there, and here's this big story. And I, you know, I was lucky that we only had four hours to get home. There were other news managers and nationals who had to get to the West Coast and had to, you know--they were trying to rent a car, you couldn't fly, and you--everybody had to get home. And there were much longer stories than mine, but it was still--it was quite an experience. Story_ID: 133901 Speaker 1: Tell me about your presidency of the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. What were your aims and objectives? What were you able to do as president? Speaker 2: I took over the NABJ at a pretty difficult time in the organization's history. NABJ was founded in 1970--December of '75 [1975] by forty-four very brave black journalists, because at the time, we were integrating newsrooms when there were journalists working in those mainstream newsrooms who didn't think that we were qualified or belonged there. And NABJ was very small from the start. It was forty-four to several hundred The first convention that was in Atlanta [Georgia] way before I was even thinking about becoming a journalists was in the late '80s [1980s], when Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], again, made his "smartass white boy" comment, and that made national news. He was just speaking to a group of black journalists and became a big national story. And so we grew, and then in the '90s [1990s]--now, we're a small growth from '70 [1970] to the mid-'80s [1980s], and then the mid-'80s [1980s] to the mid-'90s [1980s], NABJ had this exponential growth to where we went from hundreds of members to thousands of members. And we, as an organization, really, I guess, didn't manage our growth as well as we could have. So we were very big with a lot going on. And there was a need to put things into straight rows. And so when I ran for president, a very simple three-point platform; I was going to bring--it was all about stability. I was going to bring stability to our programs, to our finances, and to our operations, because we had some programs that were working well, some others that needed to be sunset. We were an organization that was really on the brink of bankruptcy at the time that I won that election. We were almost a million dollars in the hole. And we had--because, as you know from this opportunity today, you know, as African Americans, we're very oral people. And so much of our history and our practices and our policies was passed from leadership team to leadership team in a conversation. We didn't write anything down. And we needed to write stuff down. And so the membership chose me, and I was very honored to serve. And over that two-year period, we went from being almost a million dollars in the red to being a quarter of a million dollars in the black. We codified and cleaned up our constitution and our bylaws. We wrote down and saved all of the information that we needed about our policies and our procedures, making a point to save minutes of meetings and notes of other things, and a central location where people could look back long after we were gone and understand why we made the decisions that we did. It was my experience, in the leadership of the NABJ, that many of our board members had not served on a nonprofit board of directors before. They maybe had been active in a Greek organization or in the church or something at home, but insofar as really nonprofit board service, many of us had not done that before. And for that reason, I had an opportunity to bring a concept called "Knowledge-Based Governance" to the board. And I required that we all go through training so that our board members knew and understood the responsibility of the assignment that they had accepted of being on the board. And when we made motions and made decisions for the membership, we had a very clear motions process with lots of "whereas"-es and "therefore be it resolved," so that decades from now when somebody says, "Well, why did the NABJ in 2001 decide to do this?" they can go back and look at a motion that clearly explains the reasons why this decision was, you know, this decision was suggested, the reason why it was accepted, what the fiscal impact was on the organization, and what the resolutions were. And to that end, I feel very good about that presidency. We did really well. And I went on to serve on that board--I guess I was a board member for ten years. I was a regional director for four years. I had two terms as a regional director, one term as the vice president-broadcast, one term as the president, and then one term as the immediate past president. And then since then, have continued to serve them as a financial advisor. Story_ID: 133902 Speaker 1: In 2002, the--there was a survey taken by the Ball State University [Muncie, Indiana] under the auspices of the Radio Television News Directors Association [RTNDA] that showed that the percentage of African Americans in broadcast newsrooms was 9.3 percent; and the percentage of news directors was only 2 percent. But the percentage of reporters was 12.3 percent, which is actually, you know, on par with the black population [12.2 to 12.6 percent, 2010], basically the reporters; but news directors was only 2 percent. Speaker 2: True. Speaker 1: So, what progress, you know--well, since that time, as we sit here today in 2014, what progress has been made in terms of the percentages of black people involved as news directors? Speaker 2: I have a couple of thoughts on that. Really, I do. There can--I'm of the opinion, strongly, that there can never be enough of us in the room at the table participating in conversations that decide news coverage. I just--I honest--I believe that to my core. We need to be there, because that's why you have people like [HM] Monica Pearson pointing to the news directors saying, "You have concerns about the coverage on our station, talk to the news director," who oftentimes is a white male. I think that great progress has been made. But there's never enough progress. Sometimes I 2014 I think because of the negative feelings that exist toward the President of the United States [HistoryMaker Barack Obama], that there may be African Americans who are not advancing in some areas as quickly as we should. Only time will tell how that is. But the other thought that I have had, and having been president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], having been active in RTNDA [National Radio and Television News Directors Association] and the Atlanta Press Club [Atlanta, Georgia], and other news organizations, and having been a reporter--I always will be a reporter--but having trained as a reporter and now working in news management, there're some people who quite understand that, being a news manager or being the boss is a headache. It--managing people is work. It's challenging. And I think back to my reporting days when all I had to worry about was the one story that I was doing that day; make sure that I told the story about the accident on the interstate well; make sure that I told the story about the woman who didn't get tickets to the playoffs well; if you're a columnists, being able to write what you want to write, when you want to write it, about the things that are interesting to you. There is a certain, I think, comfort and salary and satisfaction that comes with being the storyteller that I think there are probably many black journalists who, while they might would like to be in management or like being the talent better. Now that still doesn't say that there is--I mean--and I just--I think that, you know, they may like being the talent better--there is still a need for more journalists of color to step up and to take on these leadership roles in the organization; if nothing else, to mentor the next generation of journalists who are coming up, and to let those folks know that there are opportunities and that there are benefits and great rewards to being part of the decision-making team. Two percent is not good enough for any--only thing two percent is really good for is milk. It's certainly not good enough for representation in any organization. Story_ID: 133903 Speaker 1: I would guess there are a few issues or conundrums that black aspiring news directors would have to deal with on some level. First, that--and you raised one just now; it's easier to just read the news. Just do as somebody tells you to do rather than to decide what's it going to be. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And if you're going to decide what it's going to be, you have to have a perspective, you know. You have to really call them into perspective about what you think the news is. You know, Max Robinson used to get in trouble with ABC News for changing-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: And Max Robinson was one of the founding members of the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was one of the original forty-four. And they took a lot of heat for wanting to change how we tell the stories that we tell. I mean, today when you have--you know, when you ask the question, is there a need for more journalists of color in news management and telling the--as well as telling the stories, all you have to do is to look the [George] Zimmerman trial. All you have to do is to look to the [Michael David] Dunn trial in the last couple of years to see, A, why there is a--there's still a need to continue to education the population about the differences between us, because they're really not that great. And in order to do that and do that well, you have to--we have to spend more time together. But it's always been the case that people hire people that they're comfortable with. They hire people who are like themselves. So if the leadership in a news organization is a leadership that is largely white, is largely male, who are they going to be comfortable with? Those people are probably going to be comfortable with others who are largely white, largely male. And it's a bit of a stretch to bring on somebody who is not like you; not somebody that you would hang out with on the weekends or go play golf or go play tennis or do this or do that. Speaker 1: I think we--at one time we did have some black-owned television stations, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: We did. The last group was sold in 2014. Speaker 1: Right. Right. And so, now--. So we--you either deal--as a news director, you're dealing with a station that you don't own, you know, if you're a black news director. Speaker 2: True. And there's something to be said there. With deregulation in the industry, one of the biggest changes that has happened in the news industry over my career was the, again, with deregulation and the decision that the news division, is also a profit center. You think back to the days of Edward R. Murrow and the original networks. News was delivered as a public interest. It was essentially a loss leader. We did it because it is the right thing to do. But when corporations began to own the news organizations, and we begin to look overall at the bottom line-- Story_ID: 133904 Speaker 1: So when news organizations owned news organizations, we didn't--. When news organizations owned news organizations, we delivered news in the public interest, and we are the fourth estate, and we have a responsibility to the communities that we serve to tell the stories about the people in the communities that we serve, to hold our leaders and decision makers accountable to the community, et cetera. When corporations began to own news organizations, news became more of a profit center. Not only are we doing what it is that we have always been tasked to do, but we must do that and also generate income for the company's bottom line. And it's fair to say I believe that that certainly influences the kind of news that we see on television, and that we hear on the radio today. I don't think you're gonna see the Camel News Caravan or some of the programs that Edward R. Murrow did back in the days. You don't see as much documentary programming on television or even hear it on the radio as much as you used to. There was a time when, even on this very radio station that I work for now, there was a fifteen-minute newscast at six o'clock every night that was fifteen minutes of news. Now, we do a two-hour newscast in the afternoon on the radio station that I manage now. But in that two hours, there's really only about one hour of content, and if I dissect that even further, it's maybe--if you actually do the story count--maybe ten to twelve minutes of actual news content. We have to (unclear)--you know, I blame MTV for many things. MTV turned us into a generation of adults who have the attention span of a gnat, and so if it hasn't happened right now and really quickly, I'm not likely to pay attention or stay with it. So we've obviously had to change what we do in order to meet the needs of the audiences that we serve. But it's a very, very different beast today than it was fifty years ago. Story_ID: 133905 Speaker 1: Now, you wrote two--at least two important articles--we have them cited here--in 2003. One is in the Federal Communications Law Journal entitled "A Diversity of Voices in a Vast Wasteland." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what was that about? Speaker 2: That was about what we've been talking about; the fact that, in mainstream media today, as some media has gone on to label the primary networks that deliver news and information, there just is a lack of voices discussing substantive issues. There are many things that are going on in the world, that's it's very hard to get mainstream news organizations to tell the story. I am thrilled that we--it's wonderful that a program like 'Sixty Minutes' continues to thrive in 2014. But so many of the other news magazine programs, they tell more human interest stories. They--we tell more people stories. It's not as much of the accountability that the accountability journalism--the watchdog journalism--that was presented to audiences that get ABC, CBS, and NBC. Much of that kind of work has been relegated to the cable news networks. And now through the cable news business, it would seem you sort of have to take a side. I mean, there's a definite point of view that you get from the Fox News Channel. There's a definite point of view that you get from MSNBC. And there's a news point of view--I think CNN is, under its new leadership, is still figuring out what that point of view is going to be, because it would seem now to tell those kind of stories you've got to tell them in a way that's going to appeal to the target demographic, because we're so well researched. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So, do you think that of those three that you mentioned that CNN is the least biased? Speaker 2: Yeah. I--yeah. I would think so. Yes. I'm a consumer of all types of media, but as a consumer of the Fox News Channel, a consumer of CNN, and a consumer of MSNBC, I think it's pretty fair to say that the Fox viewer has a more conservative point of view. The MSNBC viewer has a more progressive point of view. I think the CNN viewer has a--is just interested in the news. But right now, CNN is trying to figure out what it's going to do. I love CNN when CNN tells stories. But people aren't tuning in to watch people tell stories. What those--what Fox did, to Rupert Murdoch's credit, and to Roger Ailes's credit, what they did and have made millions doing, is they have taken talk radio and put it on television. And they took those larger-than-life personalities and Bill O'Reilly and Sean Hannity and others whom they've added, and they've basically done what do in the news talk radio arena and put it on television and made it about the personalities. So then here comes MSNBC, and they do the same thing with their larger-than-life personalities, with Rachel Maddow and others. But they have a distinct point of view. And right now, CNN is try--beyond Anderson Cooper, whom I see as a terrific newsman; he's a journalist; and Larry King, who was a terrific interviewer. I always enjoyed those interviews that he did. They're still trying to find their way. Story_ID: 133906 Speaker 1: Is there any--what program today do you think comes closer to representing the interests of the African American community? Speaker 2: (Pause). I think to the extent that there are those who want to put the African American community in one box, there probably is not one program. Because in 2014, I don't think that the color is necessarily black or white, or brown or white. The color is, and for many years now, has always been green. So you are going to have your church-going conservative African-Americans who are going to gravitate to the likes of a Herman Cain and other personalities on the Fox News Channel. Then you are going to have more progressive African-Americans who are going to gravitate to the message of [HM] the Reverend Jesse Jackson or [HM] Reverend Al Sharpton on MSNBC. And then you're going to have, yet, another group of African Americans who believe that I can make an opinion on my own; I don't need to have your opinion to tell me what to think. And they're gonna read and choose CNN and do some of those other things and just gather the information and make decisions for themselves. We got a lot of great black journalists out there, and many of them are my friends. I love [HM] Roland Martin and what he's doing over at TV One. I love [HM] Tavis Smiley. He's a terrific interviewer. I love what he's doing over at PBS. But, again, even in that arena they still each bring a certain point of view and a certain amount of their personality to the journalism that they do in order to attract, again, a very well-researched audience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very niche now, I think it is. Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm going to raise a contradiction here. This is something that--I think that the only place where you see a balance of black conservatives and black liberals is on television, 'cause you don't see it in real life. You don't see half black people conservative and half progressive or--you know, you just don't see that in real life. Even conservative black church-goers tend to not be really supporters of the conservatives--you know, of the conservative mindset, even though they have Herman Cain or (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Maybe on some issues. Not on all of the issues, but certainly on some issues. I can see that. Speaker 1: Yeah. It seems like the media has more of them gathered than they, you know, represent--than are represented in terms of votes and that sort of thing in the real world. But, would you (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, there's a reason why President Obama [HM President Barack Obama] has a 89 to a 90 percent approval rating among African Americans. I mean, clearly, African Americans are--you know, I don't want to say that we--I don't think we as a people, you know, vote in the lockstep. I think there is certainly a certain significance, the fact that, that he's the President of the United States, that he--a reelected President of the United States for a second term, which means the first term was not an accident as some people perhaps would like to say. But I think to the extent that some people might suggest, especially people who are not black, that all black people think alike. I think that's definitely not true. Story_ID: 133907 Speaker 1: And then to the point of where you can see conservatives and progressives on television, and if you ask the question why don't we hear that on the radio, that actually speaks to the question of formats. And I get this question all the time in the community. They'll say, "Well, why is everybody on your radio station thinking," in the talk programming, anyway, "Why is it Herman Cain and Sean Hannity and Rush Limbaugh and Erick Erickson, why don't you have a more progressive person on your radio station and offer more balance?" And the answer to the question is--and when I answer the question this way, it's the format. Unfortunately, a talk radio station featuring largely progressive radio hosts, and that's how Rachel Maddow got started; because there are so many options for a progressive listener, there is no real opportunity to coalesce a large audience, or to find that niche audience and keep them a hundred percent of the time. But the analogy that tends to make the most sense with people is, if you're listening--(coughs) excuse me. If you're listening to a country radio station and they're playing Garth Brooks and Trisha Yearwood and Travis Tritt and Brad Paisley; and then all of a sudden you hear a song by Pharrell, you're going to be, like, what happened? 'Cause hip-hop music does not belong on a country radio station. So in the world of radio formats, you could argue that a progressive talker is not going to be a fit on a station that has largely conservative listeners. Now, I do--I think, hope, and pray that there's going to be a day when a station like the one where I am now has an opportunity to offer as many points of view as really would merit a thoughtful, thorough discussion of the issues of today. Absolutely. Are we there yet? Unfortunately, no. Speaker 2: Okay. I know, when you drive--often drive Dayton [Ohio] to Chicago [Illinois], and, you know, scan the stations, and every other station is playing Rush Limbaugh (laughs). Speaker 1: He's-- Speaker 2: So this is the popular--he's popular out in (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: He is the most popular radio talk show host in the United States of America. Twenty million listeners a week. And you can't argue with six hundred radio stations and twenty million listeners a week. Speaker 2: So, there's an appeal to a segment of the population. He has in--apparently is--I mean, he's sang what people want to hear (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: And the--it's funny. Rush came to our radio station a couple of years ago. He was on a competing radio station in this market. And I had never really listened to his show. I really never listened to his show until he was on our radio station. And whether you agree or disagree with his politics and his point of view, at the end of the day, as a professional radio listener, which I am, he delivers a very good show. It's entertaining. It's topical. Yes, he's opining about what's going on in Washington [D.C.], and he's talking about his point of view on those things, but he is also as comfortable talking about the Super Bowl, about pop culture, and all these--all the things that most people are talking about. And he does it in a very entertaining way. And, again, as I say, agree or disagree with his politics. If you listen to the program as his listeners do, and they're very, very loyal; we preempt his show, my phone rings off the hook. They're very, very loyal, and they very much enjoy what it is that he's--what he's talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah. I would say that his listenership is--probably mirrors the support of [HM President] Barack Obama among black Americans, about 90 percent are white, you know. I don't--there aren't too many black people that listen to Rush Limbaugh. Speaker 1: No. Probably not. I think that is a fair assessment. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's an occupational requirement for me. Story_ID: 133908 Speaker 1: Yeah. So does that--does it give you any dis- ease to be--to have to--you know, to be in a position where you're programmer for, you know, that kind of message every day? Speaker 2: Sometimes, yeah. Yeah. I wouldn't be human if I didn't admit and--I wouldn't be human if I didn't admit that I and some of my other colleagues of color in our organization will from time to time talk about feeling bad that this is how we are making our way in the world. Everybody's got to do something. But it's not my fault, and I have tried in ways and had opportunities to do so, to bring forth the kind of programming that people say they want to hear, but when you provide it, they don't--the audience isn't there. But, yeah, there is a certain conflict from time to time about the entertainment programming that's on the radio station as opposed to the news programming that's on the radio station, and understanding that for many listeners, what they hear are Rush [Limbaugh] or Sean [Hannity] or Herman [Cain] talking about on their show at any given day, you know, that is news to them. Now, where I come from, there's a very clear line between when our newscast starts on the hour and it ends at six minutes past the hour, or it starts again on the half hour and ends at thirty-five minutes past the hour, that that's the news. And there is no bias. There is--the news is the news. And we deliver that as we should. But to the extent that, yes, there is very much a blurred line, it--sometimes it can be troubling. Yeah. I'll own that. Speaker 1: Yeah. I don't think that it should be fair to hold you to the responsibility of trying to turn around an aircraft carrier (laughs)-- Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: --in mid ocean. As you said, the station's format is what it is. And if something else different appeared on it, it would be--would constitute almost a major shift in (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: It would. Speaker 1: There was annual April Fool's gag that was done in Chicago [Illinois] where, I think Bob Wall, who had the sole station morning show on WGCI would wake people up in the morning playing country and western and talking with a country and western accent (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Laughs.) Speaker 1: And the listeners were calling and saying, "What's going on? You know, this is--where's the Temptations? Where is...." (Laughs). Speaker 2: (Unclear.) Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Your format changed. April Fool. Yes. Yeah, that would--that would truly be an April Fool's joke on our audience if we were to (do?) nine o'clock one morning instead of hearing Herman Cain; you heard [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, or we heard [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton. That would totally cause people to flip out. It would. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But we're in the Deep South. It's the Bible Belt, and it's largely a very--it's a red state. It's very conservative. Story_ID: 133909 Speaker 1: Now you've served on the Board of [Henry W.] Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]. Right? Speaker 2: I have. Speaker 1: You've been involved with the Y [YWCA], you know, a lot of civic involvement and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. From the time I started my career, I've been involved in the community. I think one of the first groups I got involved with in the community was Girls Incorporated, which is very, very active here. I've gone and I've served a period of time on the board of the YWCA, the--of Northwest Georgia, whose mission is to eradicate domestic violence in our community. I was very active as a student at the University of Georgia; went on and served--not--I went from being active in student government to being on the committee that formally launched the official University of Georgia Alumni Association. I'm a founding member and a life member there. And went on to also serve as a member of the Advisory Board for the Henry W. Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication, of which I am an alum; and was honored to win the Distinguished Young Alum Award when I was, gosh, less than five years out of school, I think. I won the Drury Award. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a lot--and we were talking [HM] Xernona Clayton earlier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when I came in. We weren't on camera, but she's like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She's an icon. She is an icon in this community. And I've interviewed her twice. The first time I interviewed her was when she had written her book, 'I've Been Marching all the Time,' where she detailed her experiences in the Civil Rights Movement in the way that she was able to contribute. Now, was she always out there on the frontlines locking arms with the Reverend Hosea Williams and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] and all of--Ralph Abernathy--and all those, not always. She might have been back with Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King or looking after the kids. But the story that she told me during that first interview that stood with--stayed with me the most was after Dr. King's assassination and they're at the funeral home. And she's look at Dr. King in the casket, and she says to me, you know, "His coloring is not right. He didn't look like himself." And she asked Mrs. King for her compact, and she went to her purse and got her own, and then using the pad, you know, she mixed the two pressed powders. And she describes for me how she took the pressed powder and how she fixed Dr. King's face so that he looked more like himself before the funeral. And I was like, (makes sound). Again, I'm getting chills hearing a story like this. And then we sat down, again, twenty years later on the twentieth anniversary of the Trumpet Awards, which she founded through her work at Turner Broadcasting, and honored me, actually, as one of the hot ladies who was honored for distinguished achievement at the High Tea and High Heels event, and how she through that has gone on as a career to recognized distinguished service in the African American community, especially in those arenas where you don't see as many high-profile people. So she looks to law and government and education, in addition to entertainment and sports. Story_ID: 133910 Speaker 1: What do you want to do next? I know you--are you--what would be your dream next step? Not that I'm trying to get you out of (laughs) (unclear)--what is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Of course not. Speaker 1: What would you--if you could do anything you wanted to do, what would you do? Speaker 2: Oh, if I could do anything that I wanted to do, I would be independently wealthy, and I would travel the world, and I would speak to people about journalism and storytelling, and the need for diversity of voices in any community. Now, that would be a dream opportunity. A more practical one would be to continue to lead in this industry, and to represent our voices well among the leaders who make decisions about the stories that we tell every day. Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, are you--is there anything major that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: It's funny that you ask me that question. I was talking to my mother [Mary Bates Pressley] recently. And I was asking her about my aunt, Dorothy, who was three years older than my mom, and who my moms describes as a free spirit. She just did what she wanted to do. And one day while my mother was in nursing school [Grady Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], she called and told my mom that she was moving to New York [New York City, New York], she'd be back in about ten years, and for her to look after, you know, their mother [Irene Bates]. And that's--they called her Dot--and that's what she did. She went--she moved to Staten Island. She was a nanny for a family, did this, that, and the other; and didn't come back to Georgia. And I didn't meet her until I was probably four or five years old. Well, when I ask my mom about the decisions and the choices that she made--she just had her fiftieth anniversary of her nursing school class a couple of years ago, and one of the women that she went to nursing school with was--ended up going career military; and there was a time when my mom thought that they were going to go to Staten Island, they were going to get an additional nursing degree, and then she was going to go on in the military and probably travel. And she could have done that, and then--but she said she felt a real responsibility for her mother, my grandmother, because my grandmother was not formally educated in school. She could sort of read and write, but not really. I mean, she could tell you to go to the store and pick up a box of detergent, and she knew which brand she wanted. And so, Mom said, she knows she just felt real responsibility to look after her mother. And that's part of the reason why she didn't go into the military. And I think probably, innately, I have that same sense of responsibility for my mom. Not that she's--she's achieved so much more than her mother did, and I guess I've probably achieved more than my mother did, but I just--I'm--we're real close. I mean, I talk to her every day. And so I--to the extent that there perhaps have been opportunities to take other jobs in other communities. One of them was a new--newly created job, and my instincts told me that--my instincts told me that, last one in, first one out if it didn't work out; so I didn't do it. And then I had another great opportunity to go to work at minority-owned media. But I didn't think that I was going to be given all the tools and resources that I would need in order to be successful. And so I didn't. And thus far, everything that has come to me here has been more than I would have ever imagined years ago. Story_ID: 133911 Speaker 1: I have to ask you about the [HM Barack] Obama campaigns, I guess. News, news converse--you got like a--the station [WSB Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] has this conservative talk show lineup, be it, you're the news director. So, like, how do--these two things--how did you, how were they balanced? I mean, just--I think I know the answer already, but, what was that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, of course, I'm going to flex my influence where I have it in the news content in making sure that the coverage of the campaign and the candidates is as balanced and fair as we can deliver, understanding that the talk or the entertainment programming is going to come from a different point of view, and it's going to deliver a different set of ideas. Because WSB is a legendary radio station in the Atlanta market, having been on the air since March 15, 1922, we certainly have an obligation to be the news organ of record in this community. So to that end, when it came time to cover the campaign, and to cover the inauguration, and to cover the re-election, and the second inauguration; of course, we were there, very much so. It was--it's funny you'd ask that. After the first election of the president in 2008, of course, you're--I remember we were working that night, and we're all in the newsroom, and we have an urban radio--in our cluster we have an urban radio station, a rock and roll radio station, a news talk radio station, and then just a regular contemporary hits radio station. And the urban station--now, a lot of black folks--that's where most of the African Americans in the building are; and so, we're all working that night, and Obama gets elected and people are, like, okay, we're not--we're journalists, so we don't have opinion and we don't show emotion, etcetera, etcetera; but I will tell you, after they called the election for the president, I and one of the program directors for the urban station and the news anchor for the urban station, we kind of gathered quietly in the control room for the urban radio station, and we just had a private praise party. And we cried and we danced and we just thought--we thought we would never see something like that in our--I honestly never thought I'd see it in my lifetime, and then for it to happen. So, with that, I knew that my congressman, whom I've known all my life, 'cause I'm old Marietta [Georgia], and his daughter and my brother graduated high school the same year; and so, I knew that Congressman [Phil] Gingrey really wasn't gonna have that much use for his inauguration tickets, because his guy didn't win. So I was one of the first ones. I played every card I had. I said, "You know, Congressman, Gingray, remember me? I'm Condace, and Joe and Phyllis went to school; blah, blah, blah. I know you're going to have great demand for your tickets; blah, blah, blah. But if at all possible, I sure would like to go to the inauguration." And sure enough, I got an email back, and it was terrific. So I, as a constituent, I attended the inaugurate--the first inauguration of President Obama. And then, in 2013, upon his re-election, we registered for credentials and covered the event. I covered the event as a credentialed journalist on the--not even on the grass--I was--it was--I was so close, it was weird. It was quite exciting. I mean, I've got this thing. You talk about having a bucket list. My bucket list is--all deals with being a first-person eyewitness to history. And so, if there's a chance that I can figure out a way to get there and tell a story about it, I'm definitely going to go. Story_ID: 133912 Speaker 1: You had a couple of interesting shows on--I mean, one show included a--just last, I think it was week--well, yeah. A couple of weeks ago, it was about Liz Tuff [sic]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Antoinette Tuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Antoinette Tuff was the bookkeeper at McNair Discovery Learning Academy in DeKalb County, Georgia. And in August of 2013, she was confronted by an armed gunman in the school. She was covering for somebody who was on break. And this young man admittedly was off his medication, and he was going to kill people. He fired the weapon, and she was able to talk him into surrendering. And nobody was hurt. And, you know, we have this phrase now, "Shelter in place." And I hate that phrase, because--and there are so many negative connotations associated with it. And I can remember watching as the children were being quietly ushered out of the back of the building while she is trying to keep this man calm until the authorities can get there. And she--I asked her, "Did you think you were going to die that day?" And she said--she said, "I didn't think about it. I knew--" She said, "I knew I couldn't die that day because I had a son that was--had special needs and I needed to look after him, and I didn't know what the Lord had planned for me that morning, but I'm definitely--" she said. And then she--she said, "I'm definitely, you know, not ready to go." And the other thing that she said that was so interesting, I asked her about the tapes, because we played back the 911 tapes, and she said that, "I--everybody kept telling me how calm I was, and that I was very even-tempered, and I thought to myself," she said, "Who is that woman?" And she said, "I had to go back and listen to those 911 tapes myself." And I mean, she is a woman of tremendous faith. And she said, "That just had to been the Lord working through me." And she lives her life as a witness and a testimony to that, and probably one of the most remarkable people I've ever met. Story_ID: 133913 Speaker 1: Oprah [Winfrey] is often criticized for creating her school for girls [Oprah Winfrey Leadership Academy for Girls, Henley on Klip, South Africa] in Africa. And people would ask her why didn't you create a school for girls or boys in Chicago [Illinois] or anyplace else that you have a home. Well, truth be told, Oprah has put more men through Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], black men through Morehouse College than any other benefactor to that school. And the opportunity is for education. And her argument is, and I don't disagree with her, being born, whatever your station in the United States of America, is winning the birth lottery. There are so many more terrible places in this world where you could come up. So to grow up in a place where you really have an opportunity to be educated and to do whatever it is that you want to do, if you're willing to do the work and put your mind to it, I can kind of--I support that. And in my mind, that's what my parents [Joe and Mary Bates Pressley] always told me. You can be whatever you want to be. There was a caveat my mother always said, but just remember, you've got to be a little bit better, because you are black. So I think even now, 2014, going forward, we're still going to tell our children that; you can be whatever you want to be. I believe that my six-year-old niece can be whatever she wants to be. And probably for her, her being black isn't going to have anything to do with it. But I think that education and taking advantage of those opportunities is a great, grave concern for not only the city in which I live [Atlanta, Georgia], but nationally. Because it's the key to everything. And beyond that, you know, opportunity. I do worry because there has been--there's such gridlock in Washington [D.C.] where nothing is getting done, largely because if we are to believe it, one political party says, I want this president to fail, and though some people won't say it out loud, there being a perception that what you hear is, "I don't dislike the man because he's black. I disagree with his policies." I think amongst members of the black community, many will agree that they don't like the man because he's black, but it's just not politically correct or appropriate to say so. So through action, things are not done. And so I think--and my mom and I talk about this a lot. I talk about this with my friends as well. There's been a certain change where white America harkens back to a day that--was really in the best interest of black America or brown America or Asian America, when there was a majority; things were done a certain way; people hold all the same controls; and there was not that diversity of voices. And I think for a nation where vastly in 20-whatever, the Hispanic community is even going to eclipse in population the African American community. So you're going to have more black and brown people combined than you have white people in America. That's kind of put us at a really interesting place in history. And it'll be interesting as I age, and I hope I do live to see that, how that--that's probably one of the most interesting things I'm looking to see play out. Story_ID: 133914 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your family, right. I mean, what--you were saying earlier, you never got married, and you don't have any children. Right? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Well, I--well, 'cause I was-you know, I was a studious girl. See--see--(laughs). My mother [Mary Bates Pressley] said no to my daddy [Joe Tilman Pressley] until she got married, and then all of a sudden she, you know, and they had the family. But it's--I was so career focused coming up with hours that were not conducive to dating. So, when I first started, I worked weekends. And then I worked nights. And then I worked overnights. And so times when most people were actually being social and meeting partners and making life decisions like that, I was pursuing my career. That doesn't say I've given up hope, 'cause I haven't. What does [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] say? "Keep hope alive?" I think eventually--you know, what God has for me, it is for me. And when he's ready for me to meet that right guy, I'm sure I will. I've a--my dearest cousin, she didn't marry until she was well after fifty, so. I, you know, I think--I pray and hope that that is still in the cards for me. But my father's deceased. He passed away in 1997. He suffered a heart attack at the age of fifty-eight. My mother is in her seventies and is retired and looks after her grand; that's my niece, Carson, who really is my heart. She's the closest thing to a daughter that I'm going to ever have. And I love it because she is so much like me. My brother [Joseph Pressley], he's a banker. He's very--I just said it. He's a banker. My sister-in-law, she is a computer programmer. So they're not the most verbose people. They're very quiet and focused and studious. And my niece, she is loud, and she asks questions, and I can remember before she started to talk, we'd say, "Well, what's she going to sound like when she starts to talk?" And now she talks and she doesn't stop. And my brother looks at me and says, "Where did that come from?" And we all know it's me. So she's the talker. She's got that big personality. I would have never thought of myself or described myself as someone with a big personality. But it would seem that must be the case. And that's wheat we are, close family. Speaker 1: Okay. Quiet, but big personality (laughs). Story_ID: 133915 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (Pause) It's been pretty comprehensive. (Pause) No. What you got? Speaker 1: Okay. Well, last question is a combination of two questions, really, but what today would you consider to be your legacy? And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. The legacy and the 'membrance question. Well, I think there are two things that largely contribute to my professional legacy, and one deals with my work here at the radio station [WSB, Atlanta, Georgia]. More than a decade, I was leader on a team that created a fundraising event for our communities that we called the Care-A-Thon. And we raised money every year to cure pediatric cancer in children, patients over at the Aflac Cancer Center at Children's Healthcare of Atlanta. And in the last eleven years, we've raised more than twelve million dollars. And we average about a million a year. And I'm one of the original architects of that. And they've been able to come back to us year after year and tell us about the increasing survival rates in certain cancers, because of the research they're able to do because of the money we raise. So that is probably of everything I've had an opportunity to do in my career at WSB is the one that I think--really stands out as something of which I am most proud. Professionally also I never sought to be the president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], but I was. And I was our president at a critical time in our history, and I was successful. And I think that being able to turn that organization around at that time and put it on a path to where it's headed, you know, now, is also something that I'm very, very proud of-- Story_ID: 133916 Speaker 1: Of course, when I think about how I would like to be remembered, clearly I want to be remembered as someone who loved the Lord, and loved her family; someone who loved her community and gave 110 percent to anything to which I affixed my name or my talent. Story_ID: 133917 Speaker 1: Okay, so this first picture right here is from the 1996 [Summer] Olympic Games [Atlanta, Georgia]. And it's me and my mom [Mary Bates Pressley] to my right; my brother, Joe [Pressley], and my sister-in-law, Cheryl. And we were actually in the main Olympic Stadium, which was later converted to Turner Field. And it is--we were there for a track and field event. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Great. Next. Speaker 1: I had an opportunity to cover the Presidential Inauguration of [HM] Barack Obama in 2013. And these are my credentials and my platform pass, because I was as close as you could be of the swearing in and the Inaugural Address from 2013, January. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Hold on a second. I'm just talking to Larry here. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. 'Cause of the glare I know, 'cause it's-- Speaker 2: The camera's been a little quirky on this trip (Pause.) Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Let's move on. Do that one later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's got a reflection. That's part of it. Speaker 2: My mother wanted to make sure that we put this picture into the collection. It is me at about five or six months old when we lived at 101 Cuthbert Street in the projects of Baptist Town in Marietta, Georgia. I'm out on our front porch.(Pause) Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Next. Speaker 2: One of the happiest days of my life. June 14, 1986, I graduated with a degree in broadcast news from the Henry W. Grady School of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. I am behind the hedges. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Next. Speaker 2: I'm probably about four or five years--no. I'm three or four years old in this picture. This is when we lived on Lemon Street in the "Ponderosa" in Marietta. That's my mother, Mary; me and my dad, Joe Pressley. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: This is the very first picture of me ever. This is at a baby shower that Gene, the man to the left, gave for my mom, and my mom Mary is in the center; my dad is to the right; and she is pregnant with me, in May of 1964. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: You don't want that upright? My mother was the valedictorian of her graduating high school class. And this is my mother Mary Pressley as she delivered the valedictorian address in May of 1959 at Lemon Street High School [Marietta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Next. Speaker 2: My mother had an older sister. Her name was Dorothy McMikken [ph.]. And she was the free spirit of the family. And this is my Aunt Dot when she was living in New York, Staten Island, around 1966, 1967. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture from 2012. It's [HM] Malcolm-Jamal Warner, me, and Tenisha Bell, who is the president of the Atlanta Association of Black Journalists. In 2012, AABJ honored me as the pioneer black journalist in the city [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: Here we have a couple of former NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] presidents, although I don't think I wasn't NABJ president at this time. This is the late [HM] Vernon Jarrett. He was the second president of the NABJ. I was the fourteenth president of the NABJ. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: My brother had gone to high school with Congressman Phil Gingray's daughter Phyllis. So I played on that relationship to try and finagle tickets to the inauguration of President Obama in 2009. And I got them, and that's right after I picked them up at the Capitol [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: I hate surprises, but in--no, no, two-thousand, 36, 36, 36, 36 36, 36, '64 [1964], '74 [1974], 84 [1984], '94 [1994]. (Unclear) Oh, so that'll be 2000. So this is part of the year 2000. My brother, my mother, and my sister-in-law Cheryl all conspired to throw me a surprise birthday party in the year 2000. It's the only surprise birthday party I've ever had. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: It's hard to do that, too. Speaker 1: It really is. I thought he'd bought a new car. Speaker 2: This is in the driveway of my mother's home. This is my father, Joe. Joe T. Pressley. He died in September of 1997, and this picture is probably one of the last one's we have with him, probably in that summer of that year. We were estranged for a very long time, but reconciled before his death. And that's very comforting to me. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my baby brother, Joe. This is his eighth-grade trip to Washington, D.C. or New York City [New York], one. I'm already working at WSB [Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], but took time off to go on the trip. And we're standing in front of some statue. And this would have been--he would have been in the eighth grade in '80--. Oh, what year would he have been in? Let's see. If he was born in '75 [1975], you're in eighth grade, you're like thirteen? Speaker 1: Mm-mm. Speaker 2: So '75 [1975] and thirteen is what, '83 [1983], '88 [1988]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Eight-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: From later in life, this is me, my mom Mary and then that is my grandmother, her mother Irene Bates, who lived to be almost ninety years old. We lost her in December of 1989. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: This is Mother's Day, 2008; and it's the Mother's Day in front of my brother's first Father's Day. We were all out for my mom and for my sister-in-law Cheryl, and my new niece Carson, who had come just that April. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: And next. Speaker 2: This little face is my heart and the closest thing to a daughter I will ever have. This is my niece Carson Rachel Pressley. This picture was taken in 2009. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: One of the opportunities of being the president of the NABJ is to speak to and introduce a number of very high-profile people. President Bill Clinton spoke to us in Detroit [Michigan] in 1997. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: This is one of the few high school pictures of me that I like. It's my senior portrait, and it would have been taken in 1982. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Good. Speaker 2: Having attended a private Catholic School at St. Joseph's [Catholic School, Marietta, Georgia], I always had to wear a uniform. I was lucky it was a Brownie day for my second-day class picture, and I got to wear my [Girl Scout] Brownie uniform, although I guess you can say I'm a lifelong Brownie. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Next. Speaker 2: This is another picture of my brother Joe. He was a quarterback at Marietta High School [Marietta, Georgia], and then he was a walk-on at the University of Georgia. This is his exclamation at throwing a winning touchdown against Clarke Central High School [Athens, Georgia] in the playoffs. And this would have been in 1992. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: While I wasn't an orientation leader at the University of Georgia, I was an exemplary representation of minority life at the school. And in 1984, I was invited to be on a brochure for Minority Life at UGA. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: I ran for president of the National Association of Black Journalist in 2001. My campaign slogan was "It's the organization that matters." Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Next. Speaker 2: As an active journalist and active member of the Radio Television News Directors Association, I was honored to be on the cover the Communicator, the RTNDA magazine, in July of 1999. Part of an article that minority journalists making a difference. Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Okay. Speaker 2: On the thirtieth anniversary of the NABJ, I was profiled in the second edition of a book called, 'Committed to the Cause,' which is a salute and a chronicling of all of our leaders. And I'm in the center of all of our presidents. Speaker 1: And the last one. Speaker 2: This is still in the same envelope that it was mailed to the house. But these are my very first baby pictures that they shot in black and white, and then went in and added the color. And so I am probably about a month old in those pictures. So those would have been in November, December of 1964. Speaker 1: Very thoughtful baby there (unclear). (Unclear) considering. Speaker 2: (Laughs.) "Hmm, what are we gonna do here? Hmm." Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE: Do you want to describe this? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yes, yes, yes. Having attended the first Obama inauguration as a citizen, as a guest of my congressman, I was privileged to cover the second inauguration of Barack Obama in 2013 as a credentialed member of the media with credentials for the West Front of the Capitol...