 Story_ID: 533246 Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, and I'm the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and there are no observers. Sir may I get you to please state and spell your name? Speaker 2: My name is Herbert, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Randall, R-A-N-D-A-L-L [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall]. And I'm a junior, but I very rarely use that junior or Eugene, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What is your date of birth and where were you born? Speaker 2: My date of birth is December 16th, 1936, and I was born in Riverhead, Long Island [New York], which is approximately fifteen miles from here and whe- we happen to be in Southampton [New York]. Speaker 1: And where are we today? Speaker 2: We're in Southampton, you're on the Shinnecock Indian [Native American] reservation. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September 28th, 2007, I believe (laughter). Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is doing whatever the hell I wanna do (laughter). Speaker 1: Very good. Story_ID: 533247 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start off with our five People magazine questions. Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I'm just gonna ask the question and you just say, respond with-- Speaker 2: All righty. Speaker 1: --whatever comes to mind. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, fantastic. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't, food to me has always been a kind of, you know, something that you, you need to do, or something. I don't--there are, there are some things that I of course like better than others, but what--my favorite? I, I don't know, I just e- eat it because I need to eat and, you know, and it kind of slows you down and you gotta move. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Time of year? Fall. This time of year actually, really this time of year, this is my favorite. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: No, I don't know. Whatever is in, whatever strikes me at the time. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I can but I'd wou- I don't really wish to repeat them now. I mean it's one of the, one of the m- one of my favorite phrases is that it's a little, a little bit hard here, but, my mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] was cremated okay. And, so during the burial service, my cousin asked if he could take some of the flowers from the, from the gravesite to, you know, to, to a home where, you know, they would help the people or whatever. And I said, of course. And so my mother's, the hole where the thing was going down in was right near my mother--my grandmother's [Isabel Yearwood] gravestone, so they were very close together. So I was walking across to get, to help him with the flowers, and I tripped and, you know, on the, on some wood or something and I said, "Oh shit." And then I, I said, oh my god, you know this might, you know, this is a burial service and here's my grandmother's grave and my mother's grave and then I thought it was very funny because that's where I got that (laughter) that expression from. Anyhow, I'm sorry for going on, but no, shit is one, (laughter) but, you know. And there's some others, but we don't need to go into those now. Speaker 1: Fantastic. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 533248 Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your parents [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul and Herbert Randall, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And let's start with your mom. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was her name and where was she born? Speaker 2: My mom's n- maiden name is, was, is--well my mother's name is Jane Marguerita Paul. Sorry, that was her married name, Hunter was her maiden name. H-U-- Speaker 1: H-U-N-T-E-R (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) H-U-N-T-E-R [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul]. Yeah. Speaker 1: Just-- Speaker 2: And she was--I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Please continue. Speaker 2: She was born in Greenport, Long Island [New York], which is on the other end of the island from Southampton [New York]. Speaker 1: And, did you ever learn from your mother anything about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about it? Speaker 2: Oh sure. My mother, oh goodness, I forget how many brothers and sisters she had, but there's like eight or nine, pardon me. And my grandfather [Benjamin Hunter] died I think when my m- in 1917, my mother was born. My grandfather died at a very, you know, early, early age, and so my grandmother [Isabel Yearwood] had to take care of eight kids and this was, you know, de- depressed, well they were depressed. And so they had hard lives, they had hard lives. I mean, you know, they used to tell stories about that, they used to have to go into a butcher st- well they had butcher stores then, and they used to have to ask the man for bones and the bones still had meat on them, you know, and so my, you know, my grandmother would make stew and things like that. So, they had, had, they had difficult times. And, and basically those are the stories she used to tell me. And, she never--I think some people never get over hard times because when, as an adult, or in her later years she wasn't a wealthy woman, but she had money but it--those things never left her, I mean, she was always--. I was in a, I was in a--we were trying to spend her money because she was, she was not, you know, physically doing well and so we just wanted to get rid of some of her money because it was gonna go, and spend it on her. And so we were in a stove store, to he- you know, a wood stove store. And, so my mother, I, I don't remember what the wood stove cost, it was thousands of dollars and so we were just trying to spend. And so my mother, there were some apples in the store, you know, for people to eat an apple (laughter) if you wanted an apple, and my mother's putting apples in her pocket book, and I'm saying, "Ma, you probably could buy this store," (laughter) "why are you taking those, those apples?" That was just things you never, you never get over I suppose. But basically I just remember this story, I'm sure she's told me many others but it, it was hard times, but you know she had a loving brothers and sisters and a large family and that was, you know, fine, but it was hard times. Story_ID: 533249 Speaker 1: Do you know your mother's mothers name, so your grandmother? Speaker 2: Oh, Isabel Yearwood. How you sp- how that's spelled? I don't, Isabel Yearwood, my moth- mother's mother was from Montserrat, the island, and she came here as a teenager I believe and met my grandfather and, who is from the Shinnecock reservation [Southampton, New York], and they were married. Speaker 1: And do you know what your grandmother did? Do you know anything about her life? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just, other than smacking me in my head or something, but. Speaker 1: Was she a disciplinarian? Speaker 2: She--no, (laughter) was she a discipli- of course she was, everybody during that period was a disciplinarian. She, she basically had to take care of her kids, she had eight kids you know, or, it was eight kids she had to take care of. And so she didn't have much of a, of a life other than taking care of her kids. And when, when her children got to be adults, she took care of her grandchildren (laughter) and they used to say, "Ma," you know when, when, when the, when her kids were adults, "Ma, we'll, we'll, we'll take you back to Monserrat, wouldn't you like to go back for a trip?" My grandmother said, "No," (laughter) "why would I want to go back there?" Which I always found interesting. But, anyhow, she, she was just a, a house lady, you know, and took care of everything. She was your grandmother, you know, she ran everything (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of why she didn't wanna go back home? Speaker 2: My mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] and my aunt, my aunt went to Monserrat just to, to see. (Laughter) And they said, "Well we can kind of understand why, why she never wanted to go back." I didn't get too far involved in that conversation, but I remember them saying, "Well we can kind of understand why she didn't wanna go back." Speaker 1: Not so pleasant? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what does your mom do? Did she work outside the home? Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. She, she worked at different jobs, what jobs? Well I remember when g- I was, god I couldn't have been any more than four, four or five years old. My mother used to work in a, in a, in a diner I guess it was, and then she used to work for, as we used to say, white folks, you know, 'cause that's the only job she could get, and, and she works at all kinds of jobs I guess 'cause you know things were, things were tight and so, when she could. Speaker 1: You said that her father died early in her life? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, I'm making the assumption that you haven't met him? Do y- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he died, I think in 1917? Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: What was his name? Do you know? Speaker 2: Benjamin Hunter. Speaker 1: And do you know what he did here at the reservation? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, okay, I, I, I asked my aunt once, one of my aunts once. I said, "What did your father do?" And my aunt thought a while and then she said, "Well you could call Ben--," she used to call him Ben, "You could call Ben a horse trader." (Shakes head) So I, I, I don't know (laughter) what Ben did, what my grandfather did. Speaker 1: And you said he was from the Shinnecock reservation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And how many generations before him were here? Speaker 2: Oh god, y- fifteen thousand years, I don't know (laughter). Try that. Story_ID: 533250 Speaker 1: If you had to describe your mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] to someone else-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how would you describe her? Speaker 2: That would be difficult. That would be difficult. I don't know. You know, other than the, the usual things, kind, humorous, big sense of humor. And, for instance, a, pardon me, a cousin of mine called me last night about what, you know, about whatever he called me about, and he's, he's younger than I, and I came home once, I was a teenager I guess and was living in the Bronx [New York], we were living in the Bronx at the time, so I said, "Ma, where, where's my, you know, do you know where my coat is? My, my winter coat?" Because it was getting toward that that time, you know, when you needed a winter coat. And she says, "Oh!" (Laughter) She had given it, given it to my cousin 'cause he needed a coat. So I said, "Ma, that's fine but, you know, what am I gonna do?" So that was my mother, well that was a good deal my mother. We used to have people come to our house because they, you know, they didn't pay, they couldn't pay the rent or something, so they stayed with us and, and that was my mother. Story_ID: 533251 Speaker 1: So tell us about your father? Speaker 2: No sense of humor, or a very little sense of humor (laughter). And he was a hardworking man, he, he was a hardworking man, he, you know, he put a roof over your head, and he fed you, which was a lot, which was a lot, a lot (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a welder, he was a welder and, and as a younger person, he did whatever kind of work which was available; worked on duck farms in this, in this area, Long Island [New York]. And duck farm, farm work, and, but basically he was a welder and made a life. Speaker 1: Was he from the reservation? Speaker 2: No he was from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was your father from? Speaker 2: I'm s- Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: He, if I'm a junior, he's Herbert Eugene Randall, S- well he would be a senior [Herbert Randall, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And he was from Virginia, and I forget what town. He was born in g- in Virginia, but it was near Richmond [Virginia], not the outskirts but near Richmond, the town was a, quite probably a Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] stop or whatever, but yeah. So, my dad was a, he was an interesting man, he was an activist, he was in politics, and he tried to make things better for a lot of people. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about his activism and his political work. Speaker 2: Well, he ran, I forget the year, he ran on the, the American Labor Party for, I think it was congressman, the American Labor Party, pe- probably people are not too familiar with, but it, he ran, I don't recall the year. But I, I remember being in grade school [P.S. 23, Bronx, New York], it may have been the fifth, fifth grade perhaps and, I was--I was ri- I w- we lived in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] for a number of years and, and the community that I lived in was black, most part, and the teachers in the school were all white. And so, I was in the fifth grade I suppose, and so the teachers, there was a project that we had to, to name the congressmen, or whatever, who's running for office or whatever. And so, you know, my father was running for office (laughter) and so I put my father's name down there and so she thought I was being funny and stuff and, and whatever and I got into a lot of trouble. But, yeah, yeah, but, that was handled (laughter). So, my father was, he was always involved in, in, in, in the--people who were thrown out of their houses illegally and things like that, housing problems and whatever he was involved with that, you know, after doing a day's work, you know, to support us, he would go out and, and deal with a lot of, a lot of different issues. Story_ID: 533252 Speaker 1: Did he ever tell you anything about his youth in Virginia? Speaker 2: Oh god. Not really, they (laughter), here we go again, hard times and my gr- my grandfather died at a, when they were young, and so they came from Virginia to, to Long Island [New York] because Long Island, you know, they thought had better work, you know, you could get jobs, you know on farms and-- Speaker 1: Opportunity-- Speaker 2: --things like that. Opportunities, thank you. And, so they came when my father I think had just gone into high school, and so they came north to Long Island. And I remember the story that my father used to say, to, to tell, is when my grandmother saw Long Island, she just broke down in tears (laughter) 'cause she just thought it was so horrible compared to, to Virginia, where she came from. Speaker 1: Probably was less lush. Speaker 2: Oh god, yes. It was kind of-- Speaker 1: And less green-- Speaker 2: --dump, damp and whatever, but, she, she just cried. So, he didn't, he never really told me a lot about his early childhood. I know that when he came here he, he was, he was a good student, he wanted, he was in- he was really interested in education. But the thing is, is that, he had to leave school in high s- maybe freshman or whatever year to, to work. I mean there was, there were mouths to feed, you know, for his family his brothers and si- and sister. Speaker 1: Did he, oh so he had one of each? Unlike your mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] who had-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Unlike your mom who had eight brother and sisters, he had two? Speaker 2: He had, no. He had, let's see, there was Jim [ph.], Charlie [ph.], my f- three, two brothers and a sister and himself, so they were, well people had to work, I mean, you know, and so, he was always a little sad about that. But then, at the age of, oh god, how old was daddy, in his sixties I think early sixties, he went back and finished college (laughter). So-- Speaker 1: Where'd he go? Speaker 2: Oh god, I don't remember, god, I don't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he study? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Or does, he got-- Speaker 2: I don't--I don't even-- Speaker 1: --a B.A.? Speaker 2: --remember that. I'm sorry? Speaker 1: He got his B.A.? Speaker 2: Yes. So, but, that, that was a sad, you know, was just sad, you know, that somebody who's interested in education, you know, can't get one, or you know, for obvious reasons, his family has to eat, he had to eat, yeah. Speaker 1: What was his father's name? Speaker 2: Oh, Charles, Charles, Charles Bernard Randall [Charles Randall], he was a, he went to, to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], my, my granddaddy. And what years? I don't remember, but which was some doing (laughter) at the time, so he went to Hampton and he finished Hampton, and he used to teach schools and he used to do the census in that area and things like that, yeah. But I don't really know that much about him. Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother, your father's mother? Speaker 2: My father's mother, I don't really know too much about her early (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well first what's her name? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Pearl [Pearl Banks]. Speaker 1: And, so go ahead, you said you don't know a lot. Speaker 2: I don't know too much about-- Speaker 1: But just tell us whatever occurs. Speaker 2: Yeah. She, she was a, she was a great cook (laughter) and she, she was a hardworking lady, I mean, she'd get up at 4:30 in (laughter), and to, to, to put the wood, start the wood fire in the wood stove and you know, make breakfast, these huge breakfasts. And then she'd wash clothes by hand, you know and wring 'em out by the, you know, with a wringer or something and hang 'em out and she was constantly working. And when she sat down to relax, she'd darn socks, or darn pants that were ripped or whatever, so I just remember her as working hard. Story_ID: 533253 Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Growing up, growing up. Speaker 1: So, just--or, maybe that's the wrong sentence for you, what's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Ooh. I remember I was born in Riverhead [New York], and I just remember, I just remembered being very happy, you know, and, and we had a large family, large family and, everything was, you know, very safe and very, you know, god-- Speaker 1: You said large family? I'm assuming that includes your siblings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aunts and uncles, cousins-- Speaker 1: --and your extended family? Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause I only had the, you know, sister at the time, one sister at the time. But, you know, aunts, uncles, cousins, they all lived, lived there, and so I would--. And so when my mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] used to go to work, sometimes if she could get work, then I would stay with my aunts and my cousins and whatever for the day or whatever and then--. But it's like a mi- you know, big, big community or something of family members, so I just remember feeling very safe. Speaker 1: And this is in Riverhead? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And where--what kind of community did you live in? Like where physically were you living? Speaker 2: Black community and, in Riverhead. And, yeah. Speaker 1: What, what were the most important holidays for your family? Speaker 2: I don't know. The most important holidays? Birthdays, I suppose, but that's not a holiday-- Speaker 1: That counts. Speaker 2: Birthdays, Christmas and yeah, I'm sorry, yeah, holi- Christmas, Christmas probably, Christmas would, would be a big thing because then we would all get together, or, I mean yeah, a house full of people, kids sleeping on the floors and, and whatever. Christmas was I suppose a big thing and then of course, the adults would be talking or whatever and we'd have to go to bed and stuff. But, I suppose Christmas, Christmas was a big thing, because-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --we could get, not so much as I recall, or I wasn't that much interested in Christmas, it was just everybody getting together, you get presents or whatever and it was just good times, you know? Speaker 1: And was there big cooking at that time? Speaker 2: Oh, always big cooking. My grandmother wa- didn't cook very well, my, my, my mother's mother [Isabel Yearwood] didn't cook very well, but my aunts would cook (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But Pearl [Pearl Banks] could cook it. Speaker 2: No, Pearl could cook. Speaker 1: And your, what would they make? Speaker 2: What? The-- Speaker 1: Tell us about the spread? Speaker 2: For the Christmas? Well the thing is that, that side of the family, which I'll refer to as the Hunter side, that wasn't the greatest, I don't remember the food too much, but it would be the other side that would, you know, they'd, all of them would, they, all of those were excellent cooks. I don't even really remember the food in, you know, around that time for, you know, for the Hunters and that's where we usually, you know, celebrated our Christmases, with the Hunters in Riverhead. Speaker 1: So you said you had a sister, is she your only sibling? Speaker 2: No, I have a younger sister, Kim [ph.], Kim is, god, in her forties, I guess, early, early forties. And my sister, my oth- my, my other sister is about a year older than I, yeah, Barbara [Barbara Randall]. Story_ID: 533254 Speaker 1: What street did you live on? Speaker 2: Which time, in the Bronx [New York]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: This is wa- now you said you lived in River-- Speaker 2: Riverhead [New York]. Speaker 1: --head? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's in Long Island [New York], I'm not terribly familiar with, I know where the Bronx is. On the other hand, haven't been to Riverhead. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: So, so maybe first you should tell us the trajectory of your moves. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were born in Riverhead, and then what happened? Speaker 2: Okay. I was born in Riverhead, and when I was approximately four or five, I don't know which, we moved to the Bronx, the Bronx, we lived in, the address was, well, I lived on Tinton Avenue, T-I-N-T-O-N, Tinton Avenue and 166th Street in the Bronx. And, the Bronx then, the whites were, had fled out of the Bronx, and black folks were moving into the, into that area. And, so yeah, and yeah. Speaker 1: So, this is like about 1940? Speaker 2: Yes, something like that, in that time. Speaker 1: And do you live in a building, you live in a--? Speaker 2: Lived in an apartment and I think we lived on the, let's see, one, two, three, about the fourth floor, 'cause I remember we had enough time, it was just enough time for people, you know, you had a downstairs bell and when somebody rang your bell, you know, they, we had enough time, it's like on a Sunday, if people rang the bell, our family, my mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul], father [Herbert Randall, Sr.], and sister [Barbara Randall] and I would have enough time to just start throwing stuff to, to tidy up the apartment before they got upstairs. It's about the fourth floor (laughter). Speaker 1: And did any of y- you said in Riverhead, that the Hunters lived nearby so everyone was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --pretty close? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, in the Bronx, was it just your family? Speaker 2: No. Just, just my family that, that family thing went there. I mean, we had neighbors of course and whatever, but no, no family. Speaker 1: And you said that blacks were moving to the Bronx in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So was it a entirely black area that you were living in? Speaker 2: Yes, when I, when I, when I moved there, I, I don't recall, except for the store keepers, and, and, you know? Speaker 1: They would be white? Speaker 2: Teachers they of course would be white. Not of course, but they were white. Speaker 1: Now clearly (laughter), clearly you're a young person at this time but, could you, if I asked, you know what's the Bronx like in the mid-'40s [1940s]? Could you just give us-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whatever you've got? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the thing is, is that the Bronx at the time in that particular area where I said, 166th and Tinton Avenue, it was a really a community of people, it really was. And, people used to look out, you know, if they felt as though you were doing something in the street that wasn't appropriate, they would take you by the scruff of your neck, or whatever and, and then tell your mother (laughter). And, it was a community and we lived, we lived, we lived there until about, oh god, I don't remember what, what it was, but, then drugs started taking over and start- started coming over in the, maybe in the 1950s, or-- Speaker 1: Mid-'50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: --sometime, drugs started and the community started, it was a difference then, there was--it was a major difference but at that time it was really, it was, it was great. It was a community of people. Story_ID: 533255 Speaker 1: You said that drugs entered the community where you were living [in the Bronx, New York] in maybe in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of drugs and what--you said you felt like you lived in a community, how did it feel like it changed? Speaker 2: Well, just for example, the, the young teenagers, okay who, okay they were in gangs at the time and, and what--it's an interesting thing, I remember the, a couple of teenagers, my mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] and I, my mom, my mom always used to drag me to, to movies (laughter) because--at night 'cause my dad [Herbert Randall, Sr.] worked at night and so she'd drag me to movies. And so, we were coming home one night and we were in the hallway and these, two of the teenagers who we knew, everybody knew, everybody in, in my neighborhood, and so these two teenagers were running up, one had a, like a, a zip gun and they were running up on the roof, 'cause they were gonna have a gang fight with somebody. But the thing is, that the interesting thing is, they said, "Oh, hi, Mrs. Randall." (Laughter) "How are you?" And they ran upstairs. When the drugs took over, these same specific teenagers, you know, they, it was no more, "Hi, Mrs. Randall," or, or whatever, it's the same exact guys, you know they were strung out. The drug at the time was heroin, I mean I was a young kid, so I, you know. But heroin, heroin was the thing then. And, then houses, apartments started being broken into because, you know, they needed money for their drugs and, you know, it was just a totally, totally different, different lifestyle or situation. And, where you used to be able to walk down the street and whatever, and I'm not saying that nothing ever happened, yeah, but I always felt secure. But then, it's a m- it's a major difference, but it was heroin. Story_ID: 533256 Speaker 1: Today, what sights, sounds and smells do you encounter that remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Or one or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. (Pause) I don't know. Things are certainly different, are different now and I don't know if anything reminds me, the only thing that reminds me of it, I'm saying, oh my god there was so much so different than it is now, and I'm glad, I am so glad that I was brought up when I was, when I came along instead of coming into, into this period of time. Speaker 1: Why? What did you-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: What benefits did you glean as a result? Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, is that, what benefits are the benefits as a child, I'm talk- I'm just talking specifically of being a child, being nurtured and, and, and, and understanding and education. I'm not talking about in the sc- in the school rooms, but just being education, taught to have values, to, to respect and a number of other things that put me in good stead I think as an adult and caring about other people and a number of other things. Story_ID: 533257 Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church? Speaker 2: We, I'd say my sister [Barbara Randall] and I, I forget, it was, I, I don't remember the denomination of the church, but it was right around the corner on, what? On 166th Street [Bronx, New York], I don't remember, I don't remember the--but we used to, to, they used to let us off from school for religious education or something once a week? I don't remember what it was, but then we, we'd go to the church and then would--they'd give us religious lessons in the church. But, and my sister was, she went to a church, Reverend Hawkins' [Edler Garnet Hawkins] church [St. Augustine Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York] on, on Prospect, Prospect Avenue. And she was, she joined the church or whatever as a young, young person, but I, I, I, I never went too much, you know? As a young person, I had better go, you know, to church because my [maternal] grandmother [Isabel Yearwood] would (laughter), would kind of make us go to church and things like that. But, no, after that I, I, I really didn't go to church very much. Speaker 1: And when you were at the age when you were required to go to church-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --did you participate in any of the activities? Speaker 2: The--only the activities that I had to, but I would never volunteer, no. You'd have to, on Easter you'd have to say or whatever, or whoever or whatever but, other than that I'd sort of-- Speaker 1: Stayed away? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 533258 Speaker 1: Let's go back to a little bit of the entertainment. You were saying your mom [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul] took you to the movies? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, con- continuously. Speaker 1: What were you guys going to see? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Who were the stars of the day? Speaker 2: Oh man. Speaker 1: And do you remember-- Speaker 2: Oh wow. Speaker 1: I mean did you have a favorite? Speaker 2: No, well-- Speaker 1: Just tell us about that-- Speaker 2: The thing is, is that my mother took me to the movies she wanted to see (laughter), I didn't go to see kiddie movies, I mean like they have now, no my mother--Bette Davis and, and, and, I mean I used to sit up there and be bored but, you know, I'd just--of course I'd have to watch them, but Bette Davis, she loved and she loved all these dramas and people playing piano and the house is burning down and the music would go up and, and anyhow (laughter). So, it wasn't, I, I'd, I'd, I had no preferences because I didn't know, I mean this is what you did, your mother took you, took you to these movies and--. So I don't know, I mean, it wasn't, "Oh Herbert [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], oh there's a, you know, there's a movie you'd like to see," you'd always come see it, so I, I was kind of like company for her, yeah. Speaker 1: And what about music? Did you have, what kind of music were, were you listening too? Speaker 2: In the house? My father [Herbert Randall, Sr.] was interested in classical music, which I couldn't stand. And the music that was certainly played in the neighborhood [Bronx, New York], they used to have record shops on the corners so, or not necessarily on the corners but they had record sho- and they'd play the, the, the latest, you know, what was called rhythm and blues at the time or race music at the time. And so, well in the house my father liked classical music, my mom was more into Dinah Washington, who I love today, yeah, Dinah Washington I remember, and other singers and so it's, it was a mixture, actually a mixture of music. Story_ID: 533259 Speaker 1: Where'd you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to elementary stoo- school, there's P.S. 23 [Bronx, New York]. We lived on 166th Street, P.S. 23 was like a block or two away, or a block and a-half away, and we used to walk, walk to school. So I went from there, I walked from, yeah, we used to walk to school and back, of course it was just there and, yeah, P.S. 23. Speaker 1: We were speaking a little earlier and you said that the students you went to school with were black, but all the teachers were white? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was that true when you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: Of course, sure. Everybody, principal of course, administrators or, and the teachers were, they were all white. Speaker 1: And did any of the teachers influence you particularly? Do have any favorites or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Perhaps negatively, did they--what was your relationship with your teachers? Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember if it was so much then, perhaps that was in junior high school, but I, I don't remember it may have been in the, the, in the lower grades, but I just remembered sometimes the teachers would just sit there and say, "Listen, if you don't want to learn, I get my paycheck." I mean I literally heard this a number of times from var- different teachers: "I, I get my money, I get my paycheck whether you wanna learn or not," not me specifically but, generally. And, n- certainly all of them weren't like that but I don't really remember any-- Speaker 1: Nobody special? Speaker 2: --specific teacher. Nobody special. Speaker 1: Do you remember what kind of student you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: Horrible. Horrible, I was a horrible student. Speaker 1: Were you misbehaved? Speaker 2: No, not that, it's just that I, I, I wasn't a very good student, you know, I wasn't a very good student. No, I, I never, no I wouldn't do that 'cause I was brought (laughter) no, no, no. It, you know, you could be anything in the world, whatever, but you behaved yourself, you know, that you did. Speaker 1: And did you--in elementary school did you have any interests or, not particularly? Speaker 2: No. I, I, I don't remember having any interest other than just being bored, you know. Speaker 1: So what about junior high? Where did you attend? Speaker 2: I think it was P.S. 51 [sic. J.H.S. 51, Bronx, New York] that was, I could also walk from, from my house to, to 51, I don't remember the exact location of 51 anymore. That was hard because you, you dealt with older kids, and they were into older things. And, and then at the end of my, I think it was the end of junior high school kind of, then there was drugs, you know, it's the beginning of, of drugs and, you know. Yeah. Speaker 1: The heroin? Speaker 2: Hey, yeah, heroin, but the thing is, is that they were sniffing then it was like a mixture of a Hispanics and blacks sniffing cleaning fluid and stuff like that and, but heroin was always there, yeah. Speaker 1: And is the same true in junior high? It wasn't really a special-- Speaker 2: Oh god, no that probably worse-- Speaker 1: --environment? Speaker 2: That was worse I think, yeah. And, I mean, it was more like a prison, (laughter) more like a prison. The lower grades were a little, you know, less institutional kind of thing. But, junior high school was worse, I mean, it was just hor- total horror that means it's something that was required by law or somebodies law and everybody had to participate in it. Speaker 1: And how about high school? Speaker 2: High school-- Speaker 1: Where'd you attend? Speaker 2: It's called Food Trades [Food and Maritime Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York], this was down on 13th Street, it's a trade school and I thought, well, you know, that was interesting, food, you know, you'd get a job or whatever. Speaker 1: How'd you get down there? Speaker 2: You know, by subway, subway, yeah subway. And, and, no, the thing is you're older then, and you have other interests and you have to re- you know, you have to finish high school or something (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have to do anything special to get into the trade high school? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: You just chose that and then you went? Speaker 2: You just chose that and they'd say, "Fine, good," (laughter). Speaker 1: And you were doing culinary arts? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Could you cook? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 533260 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Food and Maritime Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York] did you have any particular aspiration or idea about what you were gonna do? Speaker 2: Well, the thing is that you're always taught, al- always taught, you know, you get a, you get a good job, you know, you get a good job, and that's never defined what the job is and what does, what does good mean? But, you get a job and whatever. So aspirations, no you just, you know you have to finish school, you know you have to finish high school, and maybe you'd get a good job or something, no. Speaker 1: So how did you start taking photographs? Speaker 2: Well that happened when I went to, I went to a community college, New York City Community College [New York City College of Technology]. And, it was in Brooklyn [New York]. And the, the col- the college had nothing to do with, (laughter) with the photographs but, the outside interest, I had a friend at the time, Alvin Simon, who was interested in photography and he--. Well actually in nineteen fifty- what was it '55 [1955], or 1956? I saw a, either my father [Herbert Randall, Sr.] or my sister brought home a book, well they would always bring home books, but this sp- specific one was, was Langston Hughes and Roy DeCarava, Langston Hughes of course is Langston Hughes and Roy DeCarava is a fa- fantastic photographer. And it was called 'The Sweet Flypaper of Life' [Roy DeCarava and Langston Hughes], okay? And this is the first time that I had seen black folks in any kind of visual material that were treated as people, you know? And I was just very impressed by it and, and then about the same period of time, there was a major exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City [New York, New York], it was titled 'The Family of Man' and Alvin took me to, or we went to see the exhibit. I was really impressed by the, some of the photographs there. So, that's pretty much how I started and Alvin, you know, gave me whatever help he could in terms of how to do, you know, how to do these things technically. Story_ID: 533261 Speaker 1: So where'd you get your first camera? Speaker 2: Oh goodness, I don't really remember. I scrimped and saved and-- Speaker 1: Got something? Speaker 2: --and got something. Speaker 1: And what were you taking photographs of initially? Speaker 2: Everything and anything. And I had the, it was, you know, it was a blessing in the sense that I, I think Alvin [Alvin Simon], no, I know, he had taken a course with a photographer by the name of Harold Feinstein, and he said, "Herbert [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], he's a very fine teacher, and you should, you know, if he'll take you." And I, he did take me, and I was horrible, I was really bad (laughter). And he took me and actually he had a great deal of influence in, in what I do now actual- no really he's a fantastic teacher, fantastic. Speaker 1: How so? What-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: What was training with Feinstein like? Where did you start? Speaker 2: Oh it's--I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Where did you start? And how did he correct some of what you were doing that you described as terrible? Speaker 2: He never corrected anything I did, that was my assessment and I'm sure it was his, well he, well but--. It, it was never this is horrible or this is bad or whatever, it was, you know, you can always do better, and it wasn't exactly like you can do better. He would, he would basically, basically get you to find out what your interests were and to explore your interests and how you interpret your interests visually. He didn't tell you what you were interested in, that you would have to find out yourself, so I don't know if that's an explanation, but-- Speaker 1: So did you take a class with him? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, what did you know about him? Could you tell us a little bit about his-- Speaker 2: He was out of his mind. Speaker 1: Did you know anything about his photography? Speaker 2: Yeah, well he's-- Speaker 1: Well describe him-- Speaker 2: --a fantastic photographer, crazy. Speaker 1: Well describe him and his photography. Speaker 2: He's crazy. He, his photography generally dealt with humans, I mean just, it's like he, he--Harold, at the time, was doing a lot of things on Coney Island [New York, New York], but just people interacting on, on the beach or whatever, it was just people basically, and he, he's a fine technician also. And his photographs, his photographs had a lot of, there was a lot of substance to his photographs, a little human substance to his photographs unlike a lot of other things that were generally accepted as, you know, as good photographs. So and, but he, Harold himself, I loved him to death, but he was out of his mind, you know. He (laughter) I hope he doesn't see this, but, he was just, he was a fantastic teacher and I, and I, you know, owe him anything I can give him for, you know, just giving me what he gave me. Speaker 1: So you started off getting the recommendation from your friend Alvin and taking this course. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How long did you work with Feinstein, what was your-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember, maybe s- I don't know, maybe five, six months perhaps, I don't even remember the time. Speaker 1: And did that put you in the position to decide that you were gonna make a career out of photography? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I got jobs in, got jobs in, in photo labs, you know, developing film and doing whatever, printing and whatever and studios and things like that, while trying to develop my own talent, you know, on the, on the side, and that went on for years, um-hm. Speaker 1: What did your family think about it? Speaker 2: Oh, not too much, you know, because before when we were talking about, you know, you get a-- Speaker 1: Good job (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) good job. (Laughter) And so that didn't work too well with them, but, you know, they, they weren't too horrible about it. Story_ID: 533262 Speaker 1: And did you leave home after you graduated high school [Food and Maritime Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, let's see '57 [1957], '58 [1958], well the [U.S.] Army, (laughter) the Army kind of left me from home. That was in '59, [1959], '59, [1959], 1959. I was in college [New York City Community College; New York City College of Technology, New York, New York], I finished in '57 [1957]. Anyhow, the Army took me about from home and never to go back (laughter) to that, to that home, but, yeah. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: Where did I go in the Army? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Where were you deployed to? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was a trip. Well I took basic training at Fort Dix, New Jersey and then I was sent to Germany and I was in a tank outfit and there was a, a big thing because Elvis Presley was in the same, same tank battalion. And so I spent a year and a-half in Germany dealing with tanks and whatever and trying to, saying gee, I hate this pla- (laughter) I hate this job, but, you know, it'll be over soon. So, I spent about two years in the Army, and then I was discharged and then I went back to photographing. Speaker 1: And did you take any photos while you were in Germany? Speaker 2: Yeah I did. As a matter of fact there's, there's only one that I took actually that, it was of a, it was of a machine gun that we could not get to function, it was inside the tank and we couldn't get it to function and I really didn't give a damn whether it functioned or not because--. But so, we had to take it out and we put it on top of ta- of the tank and they finally got it, got it to fire. But anyhow, the tank--the machine gun was sitting on top of the tank and a farmer on a tractor, and he was hauling a, he was hauling something, I don't remember what he was hauling. He was coming along and I'm ri- looking at this ridiculous damn gun and, and really didn't care whether it fired or never fired, and just the horror of all of this. Then here comes this farmer, just coming along in the field and I, and I, I have the photograph of that, as a matter of fact it's down in Southampton [New York] now on dis- on display, not that one, but a number of photographs. But that's basically the only thing I, the only photograph that I took there in Germany. I just wanted to, you know, it's like sometimes you just hold, well I do, hold my breath, only have so much time left and it's just like, get me the hell outta here. Story_ID: 533263 Speaker 1: So you got discharged [U.S. Army] and you came back? Speaker 2: I got discharged in '61 [1961], came back and continued photographing, I was getting on--I was getting better, I was getting a lot better and-- Speaker 1: And so it's, what year is it now, '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: It's '61 [1961] now, and so 1962 I was working as I'd said before in, well I went back to a, I was working in a photo s- photo lab, and there were two other black guys who were interested in photography like myself, and about the same age. And, and we kind of socially hung out, and, and then we, you know, of course interacted, you know, with our photography, and that turned into a larger group, Kamoinge which exists today (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Kamoinge Workshop? Speaker 2: Yes. And larger group, Roy was its first director, or our first president, Roy DeCarava, I'm sorry, and it still exists today. Speaker 1: So, how did you choose that name, and how, what purpose were you serving-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in coming together as a group? Speaker 2: Okay. The name, I think Al Fennar, one of the fellows that was working at the lab with me was reading 'Facing Mount Kenya,' I believe the name was--Jomo Kenyatta, I believe the name of the book was 'Facing Mount Kenya.' And so we met as a group just to deal with technical things and other things. And so I guess there comes a point where people have to have names of, of, you know, of a group or whatever, and so they looked in the back of the book and they said, "Oh here's a--you know, Ka- Kamoinge means like working together, let's use this as a name." Then we, we got involved with the larger group and they took, took that name, Kamoinge. What our purpose were, was, the images of black folks again, again and still is, it's, it was to counteract the bias in the media generally and that is, was one of the main thing, plus the fact that, that if I encourage or if I were encouraged, I mean that means so much to people, it so, it certainly mean a lot to me, encouraging each other, critiquing each other's work and just basically, you know, trying to--. And so you can get to the point where you can, that you were, what? That you were proficient and you can, and you can do this well. I mean, so. Speaker 1: So you mentioned DeCarava? Speaker 2: Roy DeCarava, yeah. Speaker 1: Roy DeCarava-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and Albert Fennar? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And who else though was a member of that early group? Speaker 2: The early group was Jimmie Mannas [James Mannas], and too, with Al, Al Fennar and Jimmie Mannas worked in the, in the, the lab with me. And then a friend, Lou Draper [Louis Draper], he was a friend of mine, he didn't work in there, he was involved in the original group and then we went into a larger group and-- Speaker 1: And that larger group of black photographers was already meeting also? Speaker 2: They were all-- Speaker 1: You sort of merged? Speaker 2: They were all, yeah, they were also meeting, I think, it's not I think, I know, their group was, I think was called Camera 35 or something, and, and they were meeting at the same time, they were meeting in Harlem [New York, New York] and so we joined, we, we joined together and again Roy was our first director, mentor. Story_ID: 533264 Speaker 1: So talk about Harlem [New York, New York] and the Bronx [New York] in the mid-'60s [1960s], what's it like? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Same thing. Well, at that time we're talking 19- 19- the early 1960s, drugs had, had, had, drugs had done their--or doing, done and doing their, doing their thing. But, there were people trying to do things still, you know, people, there were some people trying to do things, a lot of people trying to do different things. It was just like a magical times, it was magical meaning what? Magical but, let's put it this way, we were on a mission, you know, you're on a mission, and we believed that we could change this crap, okay? We, we, we totally believed that with a lot of effort we could change this stuff. And we tried to, you know we, we had tried in every way we could to do this so it was magical times, magical times. Story_ID: 533265 Speaker 1: Harlem [New York, New York] in the '60s [1960s] is a magical time, what, where is there to go in Harlem? Are you, is there, are you all frequenting any important night clubs that we should know about or, going to any museums, I mean tell us about the lay of the land. Speaker 2: Well, there was a, they, there was a museum at the time it was called the Market Place Gallery [New York, New York], I don't remember exactly what street that was on. And we had a show or two there I think and, actually mainly I remember just photographing in Harlem and, and, and I don't remember going to too many clubs or anything 'cause I wasn't too much into, you know, to clubs and things. But, there certainly were many up in Harlem. Speaker 1: And you said, you, everyone was on a mission to change things? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of us were on a mission. Speaker 1: What are you changing? What are you-- Speaker 2: Oh, we're changing the conditions that existed, you know, people--just to try to better people's condition. People, people needed, oh god, they, they needed everything, they needed everything. It was just a, when people have no, no hope, or, or you feel as though they have no hope it's, you know, you have to do what you can. I'm, I don't know how to explain that. Speaker 1: And did you attempt to do some of that work through your photography? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In New York? Speaker 2: I, I tried to, well just capture what was and of course there wasn't much of an outlet for it, but because people weren't interest- not people, the, the powers that be, or the, the media that, that existed certainly wasn't interested, you know, they were interested in some other nonsense. Story_ID: 533266 Speaker 1: What format did you start with? Speaker 2: For- camera (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Photographing, what kind of camera did you start with? Speaker 2: I started with 35 [35mm], and I still deal with 35, but of course I use other, other formats, I've used four by five but I, I very rarely, rarely use them. Speaker 1: And did you generally shoot black and white? Speaker 2: Always. I do, have done color, but color to me is a different medium, which is fine but I just, you know, and I've had to use it at times, but that never particularly interested me. Speaker 1: Looked on the--I'm, I'm afraid I'm gonna say it wrong, The Kamo- Kamoinge [Kamoinge Workshop]? Speaker 2: Kamoinge, that's fine, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well on the website it looked as if most of you preferred black and white 'cause there's like a collage of a number of different photographers'-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --work. A lot of it was black and white. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what do you like in particular about the black and white format? What does it do? Speaker 2: Well it expresses, it expresses something. What does it express? It tones the, well it, it's--color in a sense is a fantasy to me, just to, to some degree, it's a fantasy. Black and white has more of a, more of a feeling, or more of an emotional kind of thing and colored just--it, it is becoming a kind of, it, it's become more natural or as I see it more natural, but, I don't know, it's just a preference that I have, it's something that I don't know if I can express or I don't express it well. Speaker 1: I think you did a pretty good job. Even in between the words. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 533267 Speaker 1: You're freelancing in Harlem [New York, New York], and event- eventually in 1964 you go to Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about-- Speaker 2: I could tell you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the progression? Speaker 2: I could tell you a lot about (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Please. Speaker 2: But, in 1964, I think it was April, April of 1964, the last of April, 1964, I'd gotten worried that I had received the John Hay Whitney fellowship [John Hay Whitney Foundation] for photography, it was basically, do a year's photographic project, program. And so, in the proposal that I'd written to the foundation I had said that I had needed to do some photographing in the South, I'd never been south before, why had I never been south? Because I never wanted to go south before 'cause I, you know, I didn't remember if I could remember to sit on the back of the bus or the side of the bus or whoever the bus. I just never had been south before. So, I had a fr- I, I had, I have a friend, as a matter of fact I just saw her not to long ago, Julie Pr- Prettyman, at the time, Julie Poussaint [Julia Poussaint] now. Well, sh- she was running the SNCC office, SNCC of course is Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee office in Manhattan in New York [New York]. So she was running the office, I knew Julie and so Julie had said, "Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], you know, since you have to go and do some work in the South, we have a summer project that's coming up in June," 'cause this was like April, May, and she says, "You know, maybe you, you could go down there and help the, help the projects, and also, you know, get some in, the work that you want to do." And so I said, "Oh that sounds, you know, that sounds interesting. Where? Where is your project?" And she said, "Mississippi." And I said--I forget a lot 'cause that was a long time ago, I re- don't remember exactly, but I can remember exactly what I said to her: "There is no way in hell I'm going to no Mississippi, you know. No." But anyhow she said, "Well, think about it." So I thought about, and I didn't think I was gonna go. So anyhow she has said that there was a meeting to be held for volunteers you know and why don't I just go and check it out. So I went to the meeting, it was at the church center in Manhattan, and Sandy Leigh [Sanford R. Leigh] who was a project director of Hattiesburg, Mississippi, he was there and he was trying to get people to go down to Mississippi. And so he finished his talk, and I don't know why he came up to me, or maybe the reason why he came up to me 'cause I was one of the few blacks in the audience, maybe, I don't know. Anyhow, so he said, "Oh," you know, "how, are you planning to go to Mississippi?" And I said, "Well I don't really think so." So he said, "Well, you know, you know, you should, maybe you should go," and blah-blah. Anyhow, he found out that I was a photographer and he said, "Oh, no, no, no. You gotta, you have to come to Mississippi, and you have to document my program." So Sandy was up in New York for maybe two weeks, we hit every bar in Harlem as I remember (laughter) and there's a lot of bars in Harlem. And he--it was important for me to know who I was gonna work for if I was gonna go and do something like that, you know 'cause you're in a crappy situation (laughter) and, you know, and if you can kind of coexist with the people you're working with it's even better, or your so-called boss or whoever. So, Sandy and I got along fine and he--so I said, "Well, okay," you know, "that--," then I decided to go. Story_ID: 533268 Speaker 1: There was a training session in Oxford, Ohio for the people who were going into Mississippi. And a week before I was supposed to go, I think it was a week, or maybe it was less, Julie called me, Julie Prettyman [Julia Poussaint] at the time, and, and said, "Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], you have to go down to Washington [D.C.]." And I said, "Why do I have to go down to Washington?" So Julie knew me, she said, "Herb, don't ask." (Laughter) "Just go down, don't, you know, just go down to Washington, you have to see [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry 'cause he has to okay your going." And I said, "What?" You know, and she said, "Herb, don't ask." And so anyhow I think it was in order to phot- they knew I was gonna go down there to photograph, and I suppose they wa- Barry wanted to check me out. I don't know what it was. Anyhow, I went down to Washington, and I saw Marion and he was busy at the time, and I said, "Hi, I'm Herbert Randall, and I was told by Julie b- that I had to see you." And he's looking at me like he doesn't know what the hell I'm talking about, and really didn't care. So he said, at some point, he just said, "Oh, listen, I'm busy," or something to that effect, "but go see Julian," this is [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, "and if Julian says it's okay, it's fine with me," or something to that effect. So, at the time I didn't know Julian from, from, from him. And so I asked, I think one of the secretaries there or something, or she overheard it and she says, "Well Julian is at a restaurant down the block or something so you go--." So I'm walking down the block and I go into this restaurant. Now I realize, I don't know what the hell Julian looks like, you know. But anyhow, I--the lady said that he was with his family, so I saw a young man with his family so I said, oh that must be him, so I went up to him and I said, I said, "I'm so-," you know, I apologized for interrupting their meal, but, you know, I was blah-blah and I, I had to talk to him at some point, and I'd wait outside, you know, until he finished if he could. So he said that, he was finishing his meal, and he said, "I have to check on my car," his car was being repaired near there. And, you know, he had w- he had walked out with me and I could walk with him to, to the place. His wife [Alice Clopton] wasn't too pleased, but that's okay. So, we went down to the repair place, and so we were talking, so he asked me, you know, why--. So I told him that, that Marion had told me to come see him, and so he kind of understood SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] (laughter) I guess and so he said, "Listen, if you wanna go, you go." And so I, I said, "Listen, tell me something." I said, "What do you think is gonna happen down there?" And he says, "A lot of people are gonna get killed." And I said, "Yeah, I think so." So anyhow, he said, "Look, if you wanna go, go ahead down there," and whatever. Story_ID: 533269 Speaker 1: Then onto Oxford, Ohio, I don't know if you want me to go into that? Speaker 2: Please do. Speaker 1: Okay, went down to O- went to Oxford, Ohio, and the first day that I got there, that we got there, came with some other, other volunteers. The first day I got there, Bob Moses [Robert "Bob" Moses] called us into the auditorium and informs us there were two, two groups of--there were two groups of volunteers, the first week, there was, first week--I was in the second week, okay? And, so Bob informed us that t- three of the people who were in the first week's training session were missing. And told us quite frankly if they were missing then they were--for a certain amount of time, I mean this is a matter of hours or days at the time, couldn't have been probably a few days--that they were probably dead. Speaker 2: And is this the Chaney, Schwerner and Goodman (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes it was. And, and that was Andy Goodman [Andrew Goodman], James Chaney and, oh god, Andy Goodman, Chaney and, oh god, now when I start thinking of these guys-- Speaker 2: Michael Schwerner. Speaker 1: Mike, yeah Michael Schwer- Mickey Schwerner. So that's how, that's how the, the training session began. And so, Rita Schwerner [Rita Schwerner Bender] was there in Ohio and she was just totally in, you know, totally in tears. And so, that's how, that's how the, the training session started, I don't remember too much of the training session, just saying, oh my god, we're gonna go down there and get our behinds killed. And so we were there a week, and then the, for some strange reason, on- which only SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] knows I'm sure, is that I was required to go into Mississippi by car, everybody else, not everybody, the majority of people went into Mississippi by buses. I remember there's a whole line of buses lined up, and you know, the people were getting on various buses going into Mississippi. Now, from the first, the, from the first group of volunteers had gone in there a week before, they knew that people were being harassed, not only in Mississippi, but all the other southern states, and all the other states trying to get into Mississippi. So I was, I was required to go to Mississippi by car. (Laughter) And the car, the car was a white foreign car with northern license plates on it, the driver was a white, white male, a student, white male, and there were five of us. And the other three people were three white females, not any of those combinations were not (laughter) great going into, going into, to Mississippi. Story_ID: 533270 Speaker 1: We decided that the best thing to do is because people, you know, people were harassing you all through, going, going into Mississippi, we figured we wanted to get to Mississippi, if we made it, we wanted to hit Mississippi in daylight. So we planned, you know, everything to see, get into Mississippi in the daylight. So we figured that the best thing is t- when it was dark that I would sit in the, in the, the front seat in the passenger's side, and that would be fine. But in any kind of daylight, I was in the back covered over with a blanket, I, I think it was a blanket. So, we went on, and first stop. Oh, we got very lost in Kentucky, we were so lost, I mean in some, you know, rural area in Kentucky. And we pulled over into this clearing off of a, off of the, off of the road, and so the--I had a map, the, the dome light in the cars were all, either the bulbs were taken out or loosened so they wouldn't go on because that's one reason why Medgar Evers got it, got out of a car lit--that's not why he got it, but I'm just saying, you don't want the light to go on when you get outta of the car 'cause you're, you know, you're a better target. Anyhow, so there was no dome light in the, in the car, and so I had a flashlight with a map trying to look at where the hell, you know, where we're going. And so I'm looking at this map and, and, one of the, one of the la- the, the ladies in the back said, "Oh my god, here's a police car." So, I said my favorite word, "Oh shit," to myself, and I'm saying, oh my god, things going through my mind is we ain't even gonna make it to Mississippi, you know. So anyhow, I just like was frozen with this map on my lap and the flashlight in my hand, I didn't want to m- make any sudden moves. To make a long story short, I hear a voice (laughter) say, "What is the problem?" Or, "What- what's going on?" Or, or something, (laughter) and nobody said anything in the car. This was outside the car somebody was asking, nobody in the car said anything. I'm saying, oh my god, somebody say something (laughter). So, nobody said anything so I finally said, "Oh I'm sorry officer," or something, "but we, you know, we're looking for--," whatever we were looking for, route whoever or whatever. So, then I'm, I'm kind of halfway looking 'cause it's dark out there and, and then all of a sudden I see a hand coming through the window and I'm saying, oh god, this is it. Anyhow he's pointing to the map, he says, "All you have to do is go up here and go down five miles and turn right," whatever the hell he was saying, I wasn't wat- you know, I wasn't, I wasn't getting it all, I was just so damn relieved. So he says, at the end of it, he says, "Do you understand?" I said, "Of- oh yes, thank you so much." And he said to ask everyone, "Do- you know, do you know where you're going?" Now everybody's, "Oh yes, we know where we're going." So he left and so then the driver says, "Where do we go?" I said, "How the hell do I know?" (Laughter) Nobody had heard it, we're just so relieved. Story_ID: 533271 Speaker 1: Anyhow, and a few other incidents we got into Mississippi, yeah a few other incidents, and we got into Mississippi, in daylight. Our first stop was in Jackson, Mississippi, and we had to check in because when you're in Mississippi, you always checked in so people knew where you were. So we checked in and then, then went on--down on, down to Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and well, we had to go to the bathroom too 'cause I couldn't go to the bath- whatever. So we then, we had went on down to Hattiesburg, and was taken to the family where I stayed for the summer, and--the Wilson [ph.] family, I stayed there the summer. And I, I really don't remember too much of that 'cause I hadn't slept in, I don't know how long in that, plus I was in the back, crumpled in the car. And so, I, I think I just, Mrs. Wilson showed me where I was just, you know, the room that I was to stay, (laughter) it was the best room in the--it was like the, the best room in the house they gave me (laughter). And, so I just kind of collapsed. The next morning, Doug Smith, who is the, the assistant director of the program in Hattiesburg, Doug picked me up, I hadn't seen him before, he picked me up and on the way over to the office he told me that, the car that I had come down in and another car had been shot into that night before (laughter). So, that kind of began, and when I got there, that was the pho- first photographs I took of the, the bullet holes in the cars, so that kind of started my, my stay in Hattiesburg. Story_ID: 533272 Speaker 1: So, before you went to Oxford [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you talked to Sandy Leigh [Sanford R. Leigh]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did he give you a sense of what his former project was gonna be? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And what did he tell you? Speaker 2: Well he told, well, I, it--it wasn't so much what he told me, it was what my que- my questions were. I said, "I don't do dogs," dogs meaning picket lines, I'm saying, "Unh-uh, not me." Picket lines and he said, "Look, there's not gonna be any of that. We don't want that. Our main objective is to, to--voter registration, get people to vote, Freedom Schools to teach kids you know a lot of things that they don't know, and they didn't, and to build community centers and to--." And so, I mean, those kind of things. And so, it wasn't so much of what he said, it's just, he said, "No," you know. Speaker 1: And you said there were, you know, you got pulled over and you told us about the, getting the directions from the police officer-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --perhaps unsuccessfully. And you said there were several other incidents, so once you left Oxford, did you, were you just under a constant tension? What did that feel like? Speaker 2: Oh I, I don't know. It's a, it's a kind of feeling that, when is it gonna happen, when are you gonna get it? Because with the experience of, of these guys [Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman and James Chaney] just being killed the, you know, whatever, a few days before or, or--yeah, a few days before. And the thing is, is that the tensions were so high throughout the South at the time because it was almost just like they believed they were gonna be invaded, you know? And the new- the local newspapers and the various southern towns saying, oh these people are gonna come down here and whatever and, and rape your mother or whatever the hell they were supposed to do. So, people were on edge and of course, J. Edgar Hoover, (laughter) the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] at the time is saying, hey, you know, he wasn't gonna help, he wasn't gonna help anybody, at the time, he was saying that. So, I mean, how do you feel? I mean, you know, you- you're in a car with three white women, which is fine now I suppose, but, you know, then, I mean this is like, hey come kill me, kill all of us. As a matter of fact they probably had to kill--well that's a, that's another story. But, but, you know, the thing is, is that it's, it's, it's, but you gotta do, you, you got, the thing is that if I was just down there socializing or something, I was down there to take photographs of a project, a, a project where people needed to vote, people needed to, needed to learn, learn a lot of things and, and that was the important thing. So you just keep your, up--it's for a good reason I'm doing this, I'm not just doing this to be doing it because I wouldn't have done it. So, I don't know, I can't, I, I, I can't explain that other than, you know, it's, it's for something. Speaker 1: Yeah, a purpose. Speaker 2: It's just something--yeah, bigger than yourself, bigger than a whole lot of people, big purpose, but for no other reason, not me, unh-huh. It's a, it's a--. And in terms of when I've--saying you've killed me, they probably would've killed the white, white folks first, or, or harassed them. I remember one time in, when I was in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], I was wi- they, there were a group of a volunteers who were all white, and this farmer, or I, I assume him--I assumed he was a farmer, Hattiesburg farmer, and he was, I couldn't tell what he was saying, but from the expression on his face and from his hand movements and something he was like really upset. And I overheard him say something like, "What, why do you, why do you, why do you do this?" And then very clearly I heard him say, "You see this nigger over there?" (Gesture) And he pointed directly at me. And he says, "You see that nigger over there? He don't know any better, what the hell is wrong with you?" Turning back to this white volunteer, so you know what that says is, hey I don't, you know, I don't know no damn better, so I do all of these things, but you're white, what the hell is your problem? He cou- he just could not fathom that, and he couldn't understand that. I don't know how I got off on that but-- Speaker 1: You're right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --where you're supposed to be. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 533273 Speaker 1: So you said your first photographs were of the cars? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: One being the one that you had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just came down the night (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) managed to arrive in. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And where do you go from there? Speaker 2: Well (laughter) you go, you're saying, oh shi- oh sh- wow Lord, this is how it starting? My god, I've got two months of this. Anyhow you, you get involved, you get involved. Now Sandy [Sanford R. Leigh], Sandy the project director, never told me how to take pictures, when to take 'em, how to take 'em, or anything. And I never told him how to run his program (laughter). So I said, "Well, what, now what? You know, what am I gonna do here? What? How can I be of help?" And so, there were these programs, there were voter registration programs, there were Freedom Schools and community centers, and so I, I spent time in, in all of these programs, photographing them and then sometimes I'd have to do photographs for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], you know, because they needed a special photograph for publicity for whatever and whoever. And when I wasn't doing that, sometimes you had to visit jails and things and you never sent one person somewhere, you know, so sometimes I'd visit the jails because we always had people in jail so we had to visit them. Sometimes I would go out with voter registration people to photograph 'em and plus to help them and just to be with them and sometimes Freedom Schools that was another thing. So, it was just how do I document this whole thing? And you know, and then the bloody times, you know, people with blood gushing out of their heads and, and, you know. Story_ID: 533274 Speaker 1: Rabbi Lelyveld-- Speaker 2: Yeah, tell us about tha- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Arthur Lelyveld [Arthur J. Lelyveld]-- Speaker 2: Tell us about that? Speaker 1: He was a, he was a go- he was quite a, quite a, quite a person. He had, Rabbi Lelyveld had taken I think his vacation time to come down to Mississippi to Hattiesburg, to, to be of, or whatever help he could be and so he was, they, they--he was supposed to do voter registration to help with voter registration. I spoke to Rab- the Rabbi the night before and we were talking, we were joking, and he said, he used to call me photographer because probably he couldn't remember my name, and whatever and that's what I did. He says, "Tell me something, do y- what help are--," people coming in here from time to time, you know, like taking their vacations, "what, what, you know, what good are they really? You know, what good are they?" Or something to that effect. And I said, "Well--." He was, he said it in kind of a joking way, and I said, in a kind of joking way, but a very serious way, I said, "Listen, what you can do--." Or, "How can we be helpful, how can we really be helpful, those of us who do these kinds of things?" So I said, "Well, what you can--you could really be helpful at, is if you go down there and, and you get really beaten up good, I'll come down there and get some great pictures of you and then, man this stuff will go all over the world and then, you know, and, and you'll really shine a spotlight on--." So we were kind of, kind of joking, so I was supposed to see him at, a, a specific time for some reason or another. They left before I got to the office; they went out to an area to do voter registration. And so I came into the office, and I said, "Where's the rabbi? I was supposed to photograph him for--," some newspaper in Cleveland [Ohio], I think he was from Cleveland. Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: And so, they said, "Oh, he's over in--," wherever, and I said, "Oh god." So somebody gave me a ride, I was in a station wagon, somebody gave me a ride over there-- Story_ID: 533275 Speaker 1: You got a ride over to where the rabbi [Arthur J. Lelyveld] had gone? Speaker 2: Yes, to the area where the rabbi was supposed to be at. And I got, we were in a station wagon, I got, it was--the church, one of the churches that we worked out of, and so I remember opening the door and I remember looking up on a, a little knoll behind the--not quite be- yeah, behind the church and it was, just seemed like there was a lot of confusing, people were, you know, mulling around and, and, and rushing around. So I'm saying, what the hell is going on here? And so, I got ou- I remember getting out of the station wagon and going over to--. And then I saw two of the volunteers I think and they, I knew, you know, that they were beaten, I mean they were, you know holding their arms and one was bleeding I think. And then I remembered the rabbi, and, and one of the volunteers had the rabbi by the arm and they sat him down on a, on a bench, and blood was gushing out this side of his head and I'm saying, oh, sh-. I'd, you know, I know I have to take this, you know, this photograph, but you know, it's important that this man, you know, what? Can I sn- what am I gonna do, put a, you know, bandage on his head? Do we take him to the hospital? Hospitals are in, you know, Hattiesburg [Mississippi]. And, so, interesting thing, he was in shock, he was in shock, and he sat down there, and he saw me, and he, and he understood. And it, it just one of the things I never understood, is that he said, he just looked at me, he says, "Go ahead and take it." Well, he's in shock now and he's bleeding, gushing, blood gushing out of his head. So I took a photo- I took a couple of photographs and I really screwed up on the exposure, but tha- anyhow. So we finally got some first aid stuff and tried to patch him up and then we, on the, in the station wagon, when I came in, we took him to the hospital and I didn't know what the hell was gonna happen at the hospital because, you know, they're going through, they, everybody in the white community knew who was down there to do what. So I don't know whether we're gonna get, you know, get more problems or whatever. Anyhow, we all went over there 'cause they all needed to go into the hospital. And they had some kind of parade in Hattiesburg, some kind of parade, and I remember all these damn Confederate flags and things, I'm saying, oh, Jesus Christ. So we got him into the hospital and so one of the, one of the people from the office came 'cause they had heard about it and I, I said, "Take this film and--," you know because I didn't know what, what was gonna happen, and I just, you know, I didn't want them to get, get ahold of this film because--. And, because I used to send my stuff to Atlanta [Georgia], when I finished a couple of rolls of film I would send it to Atlanta to get rid of it, they would process it. I had made a deal with, with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] that they would process my film in Atlanta, and they would send me back contact sheets because I had no negatives or anything in Mississippi, so they would just send me contact sheets back. So anyhow, I gave 'em that and they, they took it, but nothing ever happened. They, they, they took him into the hospital, he was just there for a day or two or whatever and then they released him. But, it was just amazing that he just, you know, within his shock, I mean, he was able to say--'cause he knew I, I just, see I didn't, you know, do I put something on his head or what do I--? Anyhow, so that's one of the, one of the, the, the photographic experiences I guess and there were a few others but nothing, I don't think any are that traumatic as that one. Story_ID: 533276 Speaker 1: You did a little bit of everything, you did a little bit of everything just to help out, and the people--. You know, and in, and in, and in terms of photographing, of course as I said, I did the Freedom Schools, I did this, I did the voter registration and whatnot, but the, the main thing is what I couldn't do which I cou- wou- which I would have loved to have done, was take photographs of some of the people who helped us, you know, in terms of the people who took us in to, to, to, to live in their houses and, and because of, because of security reasons I couldn't photograph them. Because, you know, if that was found out who was whatever, then they would have lost their jobs or hurt or killed or whatever, so I couldn't, I really couldn't photograph tho- and those are really the backbone of, of what was going on, they're wonderful people, wonderful people, courageous people, they get, you know, nobody knows a damn thing about 'em and, you know, that, those were the people. It's like the people, the Wilson [ph.] family, where I lived, in the--. Mr. Wilson, Mrs. Wilson worked for a young white family and she, she took care of the children, she cooked, she did a little farm work on the side because I think they lived on a farm, and what else? I think she worked six days a week and she made, was it twe- twelve dollars a week and that wasn't a lot in money even in 1964, I mean it was nothing for doing all that work. And Mr. Wilson, he worked for a car dealership, I think cleaning cars or something, and he made like fifteen dollars a week and I think he also worked six days a week. And, I just remember with horror, another horror is coming home one night from a--I was later than I usually would come home. And, anyhow usually Doug [Doug Smith] would take me or whatever and, but I was with, with some white volunteers and we tried to avoid that, you know, mixing c- mixing cars because, you know, these people could get crazy. So anyhow, anyhow somebody, one of the guys said, "I think, you know, we're being followed." So anyhow, I was near to my house, and so we, so I said, well you know, we--nobody was supposed to know where we lived for obvious reasons, you know, people--. So I just said, you know, "Go around the--," it wasn't a block, but, "go around the block and, to see if this car's following us," and it was. So anyhow it, we went around a few times and, but the car was far enough back that I could, when he went around again I could just jump outta the car because there was no light that would, you know, a dome light. So, I jumped out and, and ran into the back, back of the house. When I got, I, I, ran to the front of the house to see 'cause I know they were gonna come around again to see what was gonna happen, if anything was gonna happen, I went to the front of the house and Mr. Wilson had, I saw a silhouette of him, he had his left hand on the screen door, he was just pulling it open and he has his right hand on a shotgun, he was going out. And I said, "Mr. Wilson," as quiet as I could 'cause there were other people sleeping in the house, and, I said, "Mr. Wilson, please don't, don't go outside." And he said, and he said loud, "Herbert [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], are they, are they, are they bothering you? Are they messing with you?" And I said, "No, Mr. Wilson, nobody's messing with me, nobody's bothering me, nobody's messing, please don't go out." And, he didn't and, and, you know, they just went on. But, you know for years, (crying) I'd wake up and, and, and you know, here's this man who, his, his family, his family is in this house and he's going out there to protect me, he's going to protect me, and, and everything he had, I mean, materially and, and his family in this house. And, and he wasn't the only one, people would do that, people would do that. So, I'd wake up for years, and, and, and would--and, and, and, and, and, and just think about, oh my god, what could have happened if he'd have went out there with that, you know, with that, with, with that shotgun because, you know, these people don't give a shit. Just what would've, what would've happened, it's like nightmares. Anyhow, but I, I just can't say enough for the people that you don't know about, you know, that were unsung, they, you know, you don't know about 'em and I couldn't do because you know we, I, I--security reasons, I, I, just couldn't photograph them, I'd have to photograph them from behind and whatever. But, god, there were too much. You know, you hear about a lot of other people being heroic and stuff, those were the heroes, you never know about 'em. Story_ID: 533277 Speaker 1: Did you communicate with your family at all while you were in Mississippi? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, they were terrified. And, I used to call my sister a lot, my older sister, and I remember, I used to call her from a drugstore down at the corner. And I remember saying to her once, very, very helpful actually, that's another story. But anyhow, I remember saying, she asked me a question when I was talking to her on the phone and so she said, "Well, why can't you tell me that?" And I said, "Barbie [Barbara Randall], come on you know better than that." Well, I'm implying that everything was tapped, all those phones were tapped and I'm sure those phones were tapped too. She wanted to know location or someone's name or something like that, I don't recall exactly what it was but, I just remember saying, come on Barbie, you know, Barbie, B- Barbara, and they call her Barbie, "You know better than that, that--," you know. Anyhow, but I used to communicate with them usually by phone, I didn't have time to write, what the hell is there to write? "Oh, having a wonderful time, wish you were here." And, they were helpful in the sense where my brother-in-law at the time, he worked for travel, trav- whatever the heck the name of that thing was, travel, they helped people who had problems in tra- traveling or whatever from various places. And one of the volunteer's sister had some problem in traveling and so I was able to--whatever. But yes, I, I communicated with them as much as I could, but it was usually by phone because, and but, they knew I was okay (laughter) from time to time. Story_ID: 533278 Speaker 1: We hadn't talked yet about your becoming married. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So if you might tell us a little bit about that, and then tell us about, you know, what that separation was like? Speaker 2: I wasn't married [to Rosalind Singho Randall]-- Speaker 1: From my information, you weren't married for a terribly long time, so-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: This was early in your marriage? Speaker 2: No. It was before I got married. I-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I came back in s- pardon me, in September, and I was married in later, you know, in September, I think a little later than--I don't remember, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see. I thought you had married before. Speaker 2: I wasn't married when I went down there. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you stayed from-- Speaker 2: From-- Speaker 1: --June until-- Speaker 2: From June-- Speaker 1: --August? Speaker 2: From June, June, June until September, Septem- no. I'm sorry, la- that last part of August I think I came back and I'd lost a great deal of weight and people, "Oh my god," and, "Where have you been?" "I've been to Mississippi." And, you know, it's, the strange thing is that I, I had a year's fellowship [from the John Hay Whitney Foundation] or whatever and they would have been great if I had had this experience at the end of my fellowship because I was, the fel- the fellowship was supposed to start in, in June or July or something, but I had enough money to, to, to, to last me. Well, the point being I guess is that, you know, Mississippi, I, it took me a little time to get myself together, so I really wasn't able to fulfill the thing that I sh- you know, that I wanted to do. And, but, you know, it--life is what it is and I did my best. But I, took me a little while to try to get back to being civilized I guess or whatever, wherever I was. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think that's a great word choice. Did you ever, you said that you had thought, you know, how am I gonna document this? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have a, a spirit or purpose about you? Like, you know, I'm just gonna capture humanity, like did you have a way of thinking about what you were doing when you could think of it soberly? Speaker 2: N- well, the thing is, is that, I could never think soberly, never I, I, I don't ever recall, you know, it's just a continuous, (laughter) I mean you know, I, I, don't think I'm overstating it, I mean, you know, it's a continuous, you thought that was bad, well, (laughter) guess what happened five minutes from now. It wasn't day to day, it was sometimes hour to hour. And, "Niggers we're gonna blow you up at twelve o'clock." All right, you know, so, you know, don't blow us up at twelve o'clock 'cause we got three other calls that are gonna--you know they're, they're scheduled for twelve o'clock. But, soberly, no, but the thing is what I tried to do is just document the best I could, the various programs that were going on. And then once I felt as though I had covered all of those programs as well as I could cover them, then I would just sometimes just go out and, for me, and to, to, to photograph. We won't get a chance to see it, but there's another photograph of, of one of the photographs that I took that are not in any of these things, they're just personal work that I did. And, so, you know, but there wasn't much of that, you know, 'cause it, most of it was just documented their programs and I said, well, I think I've done it well enough and just let me just go around and take what I wanna take. Story_ID: 533279 Speaker 1: And you shot that on 8mm? Speaker 2: No. 35mm, 35mm, all of it was thirty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm s- actually meant 35mm. Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew what you meant. Speaker 1: In black and white? Speaker 2: Black and white. And the thing is, is that the interesting thing is that when Sandy [Sanford R. Leigh] said, "Come and document my program," and I agreed to document his program. I, certainly I'll not, not on my part and I don't think on his part, it was not for any p- specific reason, like we're going to do thus and such with it, it was just document the program. And, many years later, you know, as I gonna throw out some negatives (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Why do re- first how did you reconnect with the negatives, I'm saying you said you, you said you sent everything to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What did you physically do in order to get the work? Speaker 2: Oh, well the, the agreement was Tom Wakayama [Tamio "Tom" Wakayama] who is the, who is the head of the--whatever Tom was the head of, he, I made agreement with him in Ohio that they, they had full use of anything that I took during the summer. They would process the film, send me back, as I said, contact sheets and I would collect my negatives when I left Mississippi, 'cause I did not want my negatives back. But they had full use of, of, of anything that they could use until then. So, I, he, he, you know, and there, I was sent the, the negatives back in September, in New York [New York] and there they, they laid or whatever, and I tried to shop some of this stuff around, but nobody was interested, because the summer [Freedom Summer] was over and the blood was over and that's all they particularly was interested in anyhow. So, I just put them away, you know, really and, and, what, thirty-five or so years later, I got a letter and a manila envelope, wasn't a letter and I have a habit, because I live on the reservation [Shinnecock reservation] I have to get my mail to the post office box in Southampton [New York] and I remember getting manila envelope from the University of Southern Mississippi [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], and I'm saying, well, you know, what the hell do--? And I have a habit of just taking mail that's not personal and I just thumb through it and throw it right in the garbage (laughter), you know. And I was about ready to throw this and, "Dear Mr. Randall [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall]," you know? All right, more--and then I read a little further and I'm about ready to, to throw it in the garbage, and it mentioned Sheila Michaels' name and, and I s- oh, and then I read it, you know. And it was from Bobs Tusa [Bobs M. Tusa], who was the archivist or was the archivist at University of Southern Mississippi. And she said she had contacted Sheila, whatever, and they were looking for various memory- word I can never pronounce (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Memorabilia? Speaker 2: Yes, thank you. And if I would have any or whatever. So, make a long story short, I sent the negatives--'cause I was a, a couple of months before I was due out a bunch of, a whole bunch of negatives, and Mississippi, was gonna be one of 'em (laughter) and so I said, ah, I'll hold on to 'em for a little bit longer. So I said, well listen, since I was gonna throw them out, you know, then they would be of some use to, to somebody, you know, so I sent them, I donated the negatives to the University of Southern Mississippi. Speaker 1: Did you wanna throw 'em out so that you could get rid of them? Speaker 2: No, I was just getting rid of-- Speaker 1: Just-- Speaker 2: Getting rid of stuff. Speaker 1: --cleaning the space? Speaker 2: You know, it's just stuff, I didn't want it. I mean, I certainly didn't wanna remember it. And I had taken what I, you know, the, the ones that I wanted. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And, which was very few, but, the other stuff I had no use for it, nobody else seemed as though any use for it so why would I keep it, you know? Speaker 1: And what did Bob- Bobs Tusa do with it? Speaker 2: She, she was collecting various things from that period of time and she--pardon me--she, she turned it into a, there's a major ex--exhibit there at the university's museum [University of Southern Mississippi Museum of Art, Hattiesburg, Mississippi] of the photographs from that, from those negatives and then it, then a book, the 'Faces of Freedom Summer' ['Faces of Freedom Summer: The Photographs of Herbert Randall,' Herbert Randall] the University of Alabama Press published. So, that's what she did with 'em (laughter). Yeah. Story_ID: 533280 Speaker 1: After you take care of yourself for a while-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --when you return to New York [New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --what do you do? Speaker 2: Let's see, that was '64 [1964], I think I went to work in, what is it, Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]? Did I go to work in Bed-Stuy? I don't remember yesterday, much less (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-six [1966] maybe? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty- yeah I think I went to work Bed- Bed- Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth in Action, it was an anti-poverty agency in, in Brooklyn [New York]. I think Jimmie Mannas [James Mannas] who I had mentioned before, worked at a lab together way back, and member of Kamoinge [Kamoinge Workshop]. Jimmie I th- well Jimmy lived in Bed-Stuy, and so he was involved with a poh- photography program in the agency and so they needed someone to head the p- the photography program there and I did that. And it was a program where it, it would, I think y- young people from, I forget from what age, to about eighteen or nineteen to teach them a, hopefully teach them a, a, a vocation or whatever, and the state would, would give them like thirty, I think it was like thirty dollars a week to come to the programs, and so they had various programs. And so, yeah I, I don't remember, I, I was there a couple of years I think. Speaker 1: Now, when you come back and you're working at, in Bed-Stuy-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh? Speaker 1: Has photography become more of a profession? Like, you know, you said you were raised to get a good job, your family-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was a little confused-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about the photography. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But perhaps they're coming along-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --after a few years? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is this now something that's considered-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --at least a decent job? Speaker 2: Well, well I guess. Well, not really. But, I, I, I don't know, it was just a, a thing where, where you could hopefully help some kids and, you know, you got paid, you know, it wasn't a great deal of money but, it was, you know, it was okay. There was, it was all right. And, you could help some kids in doing the thing that you knew how to do, you know? And, and at that point, I don't know if I really considered what people thought about what. (Laughter) I mean I loved my family dearly, and I loved people but I, I'm, I'm not too much interested in what people think. Story_ID: 533281 Speaker 1: And you're married at this time? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your own family. Where did you meet your wife [Rosalind Singho Randall] and-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --you know? Speaker 2: She's f- she was brought up in, in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] not too far from Eagle Avenue, which is not too far, it's in walking distance from Tinton Avenue. I'm not sure how--I, I guess we met, we were members of the--go ahead--members of--and people wonder what the hell is he, what is, what does that mean, go ahead? (Laughter) We were members of the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth--whatever the youth, whatever the youth, youth thing [NAACP Youth Council]. Speaker 1: Organization. Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds good. And so, I believe I met her as, yeah in that, yeah through that and that was in nineteen fi- oh Jesus, in the 1950s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And did you start dating immediately? Or did that sort of develop-- Speaker 2: No. There were a whole bunch of folks there so, you know, eventually we started dating and yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Eventually we got married. Speaker 1: So were you gone away during the--during your courtship? Speaker 2: Had I? Speaker 1: Did you go to Mississippi during the, after you had started seeing your wife? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or di- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and then-- Speaker 2: We were dating then, and we had planned to get married. But, you know, I'd go, yeah, we had, yeah we got married after I, after I had got back from Mississippi. Speaker 1: And did you do that in the Bronx [New York]? Speaker 2: Got married? No. We got married in Harlem [New York, New York] where in Harlem, I don't know, it was, the best man, he's dead now, Bill, Bill Bolden [ph.] (laughter). He drank and we got married in the church because we didn't wanna get married in city hall, that's a little too cold we thought. So we got married in the church, but it was just a few of our friends, I mean it wasn't any big service, just really close friends. And so when it was time for Bill to give whoever the ring or whatever, it rolled down into the, into the, what baptis- what do they have? The baptismal thing in the back, the thing rolled down there and so, we started, you know, like laughing and the minister really didn't appreciate that. I mean, and then plus the fact that he had a certain I, I don't know what you call it, he had to speak in a certain kind of way. And, and our friends, oh, she's, she's a forty year old women now, she was a little girl and she used to imit- she would imitate the, the minister, (makes sounds) (laughter) and so--with the ring falling down. So we started laughing and then the minister had to, to, to say, you know, "If you're not serious about this, this thing, you don't need to get--." I said, oh god, Jesus, and I just (unclear) (laughter). The whole, the whole thing was, the whole thing was high comedy. So, I'm sorry. Yeah that's--we got married in Harlem (laughter) at a church. Story_ID: 533282 Speaker 1: What's your wife's name and wha- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My name, my name-- Speaker 1: What does she do? Speaker 2: Rosalind's name (laughter) my, my wife's name, I'm sorry, is Rosalind [Rosalind Singho Randall], what is her, Rosalind's last, middle name? Norma, her, her maiden name was Singho, S-I-N-G-H-O, her father was from Ceylon which is now, Ceylon is, what, Sri Lanka. And, what else are we doing here? Speaker 1: What, what does she do-- Speaker 2: Oh, she was-- Speaker 1: --in her career? Speaker 2: She, she's retired now, but she was a social worker. Speaker 1: And do y'all have any children? Speaker 2: We have a son and he's thirty-five and he's, lives in Worcester, Massachusetts and he's a policeman, which is a trip (laughter). Speaker 1: What did you think about that career choice? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't think much of it, but the thing is, is that it's an interesting thing. We had a family friend here once and she asked Dana [Dana Randall] what he was going to do or what he was doing and he said, "I'm a policeman," or, "I wanna be a policeman," I don't remember which. And she said, "Well what does your parents think about that?" (Laughter) And he said, "I didn't ask my parents." So, I was looking at, watching this and I was saying to myself--my first reaction is like, what the hell i- yeah, "What do you mean?" You know? And then I thought to myself, I did what I wanted to do, he's gotta do what he's gotta do, he's gotta, you know, that's what he--. So when, then people used to call up and, and they'd say, someone from the DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] called, the drug enforcement agency, they called up and it was the vice ch- p- chairman or whoever it was, and being from the area that I came from (laughter), she announced who she was from the DEA and I'm saying, "Oh my god, I had nothing to do with this, I was in Chicago [Illinois], whenever this, when you, whatever you're gonna say. No, you've got the wrong number." So, I foun- she said, "Oh, I'd like to--," she said, "Oh, this is not Dana Randall?" I said, "No, this is his father," and then I relaxed and said--whatever. But when I hear any kind of--and other policeman have called here, "I'm sergeant somebody from the such and such police." And I go back to: "I was in Cincinnati [Ohio] when whatever happened." But then: "Oh, Dana? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, he--," whatever. No, but, the, the thing is that that's what he chose to do and that's who, yeah, that's his choice. Story_ID: 533283 Speaker 1: And at any time did you live in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]? Like when you-- Speaker 2: I lived in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) came back, you're working at the Bed-Stuyvesant, Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --In Action [Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth In Action]? Speaker 2: I, we're living in the Lower East Side [New York, New York] at the time I believe, and for a short period of time I lived in Brooklyn Heights [Brooklyn, New York]--but that's certainly not Bedford-Stuyvesant--when I got out of the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: And what does Bedford-Stuyvesant look like in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]? Is it urban blight? Speaker 2: I, I, you know, I, I really didn't spend that much time in, in, in, in, in Bed-Stuy per se, I mean, I'd go from one office to the other office to, to another office and, so I, I--you know, I would see various parts of Bed-Stuy, and you know, I, but I really didn't have that much con- no, it's just work, you know? It's a job, you know, you go to and whatever and so I, I had no, I don't know. Speaker 1: And after you finished at the youth action-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --center. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you go to the Brooklyn Street Children's Museum [sic. Brooklyn Children's Museum, Brooklyn, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I re- I taught, taught photography there and--to adults and children, I preferred the children. It's, it's, it's interesting that some technical things children have no fear of doing, and adults do, and children catch on much quicker than, than adults, and it's an interesting experience. So I taught there and I also photographed their collection of various things and, yeah, so I worked there for a while. Speaker 1: And did you teach, do you teach anywhere else? Have you been--? Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --lecturing? Speaker 2: --I did. I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Have you been lecturing or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I-- Speaker 1: --been a lecturer? Speaker 2: Yeah. I, let's see, in March I lectured at Miami University in Ohio [Oxford, Ohio], and, and then various other places (laughter). Speaker 1: And what's your subject matter when you-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --give talks? Speaker 2: --photography of course, and very often, the photographs from Freedom Summer, you know? And just general photography, the, the thing in March was just generally photography and--basically. Story_ID: 533284 Speaker 1: You live on the Shinnecock reservation [Southampton, New York]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which is--are we on Long Island [New York]? Speaker 2: We're on Long Island. Speaker 1: Do you--how did you come to be a part of this reservation? I under- I understand it's through your family? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Jane Hunter Randall-Paul]. Speaker 1: And, how long have you lived here? Speaker 2: My mother is, is Shinnecock and sh- I w- well my wife [Rosalind Singho Randall] and I and young son [Dana Randall] at the time, very young son, he was going to Hunter Elementary School [Hunter College Elementary School, New York, New York] and he had to come out of there, out of, out of Hunter Elementary and we were not too happy about putting him in a, in the local public schools, and we needed a bigger apartment and, there were a number of other things, and New York [New York] at the time was, you know, a little rough, you know because, New York at one time-- Speaker 1: Is this in say the 19- 1980s, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --early-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --late '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Ear- '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 1: Or in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Something like that, but early on in New York, I never thought about what time I came in or what time I left or wherever I was going, I mean, you always had to be aware because you were in New York. But, I never even thought about it, but around that time I had to, you know, so I said no, this is no good. So anyhow, we moved to here in 1980, or thereabouts, full time. Speaker 1: And you had been visiting here before? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and as a matter of fact, building the house since 19- the house was I think we started in 1976, the foundation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, you know, we didn't have the money to really build a whole house. Speaker 1: And what was one of the things that prevented you from getting the money? Why couldn't you just get a mortgage? Speaker 2: Oh because the thing is that in order to get a mortgage, you have to have collateral, or the house, that, you know, the bank or whomever, whatever lending agency can take back. They can't take it back from the reservation, so they're not gonna give you the money. So I had to, you know, we had to just take mo- what money we had. And so 1976 was the, you know, the foundation and I would come out, vacations or, any spare time I would have and my uncle was a great deal of help, he was a builder, and so we would just hack away until, you know, 1980, where we could just live here. Speaker 1: And how much of your other family lived and lives here now? Speaker 2: God, so much, ma- many of my family are gone, dead, but many of the people on the reservation I'm related too but-- Speaker 1: And most are related to each other? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in order to be here, it's basically an extended family kind of a-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --environment? Speaker 2: Yeah, it is a kind of an extended family. Speaker 1: And is the reservation self-governed? Speaker 2: Yes. It, I think, what is it? May, I forget exactly what day, they have a election. They have three trustees who are tribal trustees and they govern the tribe. And, yeah and then they have another committee governing committee that I guess are under the, the tribal trustees, but it's basically run by the three trustees that are elected yearly. Speaker 1: And what are, what's the demographic? I understand that the Shinnecock intermarried with black Americans quite a bit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Could you talk to us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, that goes back, and, the, actually the Shinnecocks were probably pretty much decimated at a, at, at, at a time, as a matter of fact, there's a thing about the ship, the, I forget the name of the c- (Unclear), or the whatever. Well, the whole bunch of Shinnecockers went out there to, it was a whaling ship and they went out to try to save the ship and a lot of them, you know, perished. So they were pretty much decimated so, of course, people intermarry and, you know. Speaker 1: And is there any industry? Or what, what are people who live on the reservation engaged in? Do they go off the reservation in order to have work or to pursue their own businesses or careers? Speaker 2: Well, there are some businesses now, but that's fairly recent in terms of history that they have various, you know, food stores and, and things like that on the front of the reservation and s- they cigarettes, they sell cigarettes and things like that on the reservation. But, industry, there's no real industry here and so people generally have to, to go off the reservation to get work wherever they can get work, yeah. Speaker 1: And do you practice any traditional customs? Is there a church here? Speaker 2: They have a church, it's a Presbyterian church [Shinnecock Presbyterian Church, Southampton, New York], and it's, it's, it's very old, how old I don't know. And, and the, they have a church, they have a medical facility, they have a community center, and, and, and, yeah. Speaker 1: And have you done much photography of this area? Or the people who live here? Speaker 2: Well I have, but it's usually not of people, it's like, it's--what I do now, is that, as I'm getting older, I need to, to do exercise, and I hate exercise and things like that. So what I do is just walk around the water, waterfront, just walk all the way around, there's nobody who lives, there's, you know, there's nobody who lives back there, it's just kind of nature and water and, well natures part of water, and, so it's like a dual purpose, I get exercise and sometimes I take pictures, but that's not, that's not the, the important thing. Story_ID: 533285 Speaker 1: Well since the Hattiesburg [Mississippi] photos have actually been exhibited-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you've actually lectured with them-- Speaker 2: Mm. Mm. Speaker 1: Could you talk about where they've been exhibited and then where you have other, have had or have other exhibits? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: You said you have something in Southampton [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, currently there's a exhibit in Southampton town, it's at the Southampton Historical Museum [Southampton, New York], and it will be there until November 1st I believe. And, it, the curator is Brenda Simmons, and she asked me to, to, would I do the show, and it was with, with some other, other artists, painters, and I really didn't, I think they wanted to use some of the Freedom Summer photographs, and, you know, I, it was fine with me. But, she was coming over to--I wanted her to see one of the posters that I had and so she came over and to look at the poster and then, but the night before, I had looked through a case of--I was looking for something, I don't remember what it was, and I came upon this case of photographs and I said, oh, well maybe there's one or two photographs in here she could use instead of the Freedom Summer, or if, or that would be their decision. So, I think it was about twenty-five or twenty-six photographs in this case and she said, "Oh, then forget the other photographs, we're gonna use these photographs." So it's, it's photographs taken from 1959, 1960 'til present, you know, so it's a, it's a good mix. So, those are photographs there, I've had photographs all over and, at museums and wherever, where--and a number of shows (laughter), so many and, I'm in permanent collections in museums and whoever and whatever. Speaker 1: Do you think that your photographs have a particular aesthetic? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't, I, I guess they do. I what? I take--they're very personal I guess, they're very personal and I'm not talking about the, the Freedom Summer things, but they're--my, my photographs tend to be very personal and, I don't know, I can't explain any more than that. I mean I, I don't look at them as what they say or what they do, I do them, and I don't know, and that's up to people what they choose to categorize them or whoever or whatever, but I don't, you know? I just do what I do. Story_ID: 533286 Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit about Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a little further off camera and, was it worth it? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was certainly worth it, it was certainly worth it, if I had to do it again, (laughter) I don't know if I would do it again. But, I, I'm sure I would, but it was worth it in the sense for a lot of reasons, reason, one being I guess or not necessarily one, but reason that, we helped, I think we helped, we helped some people, we helped some people, we helped them in many ways, I think. For instance when, when, when we initiated, when the Freedom Schools began, you'd see children and their body language would, would be one of, you know, kind of down or whatever. I would say, maybe two to three weeks of, of going to Freedom Schools and just interacting with different things that they've never interacted before. These people hadn't even, never even seen Ebony magazine before. Speaker 1: I actually saw a photograph of some people seeing their first Ebony. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, they, you know, so it was so, just, you know, and, and, and you'd see the change, (laughter) the physical change in people, you know, the, the, the different facial reactions, the different body language. And people, and, and, and so for the first time you'd know that people--that they can be educated, not a problem, not a problem and why is it a problem? But that's another, it's a whole new, new, new thing. But, for, for a number of reasons, you help some p- you help people and you met a lot of people that, you know, whatever the cost was, it was worth just meeting, meeting, meeting people. You met some people who are religious, various relig- religion, I'm not a religious, you know, person, I'm reli- but not in a formal sense. And, actually it was the first time I think I had met, come into contact with Christians, true Christians, I mean I've met a number of--I was like twenty- I was twenty-eight years old and come, came through Christianity, but I don't really, I didn't see too many Christians. But there I met true Christians, and other religious, other religions, so it's, it was--yeah, it was more than worth it, more than worth it just some wonderful people, wonderful people. Story_ID: 533287 Speaker 1: Fannie Lou Hamer? Speaker 2: Mrs. Hamer. Yeah. I, I just remembered silly things about, to me silly things about Mrs. Hamer, and Mrs. Hamer was not silly at all. But, my--I remember it, I was at Tougaloo College which is in Jackson, Mississippi [sic. Tougaloo, Mississippi], and Mrs. Hamer was there and with some other ladies and so the oth- other lad- other ladies were, they kind of making not, making fun of me, I'm not quite sure what it was. But, Mrs. Hamer just said, "Leave that boy alone," (laughter) "Leave that boy alone." And I just remember silly, silly things like that with Mrs. Hamer. Mrs. Hamer, it's almost like she had--I mean from the first time I saw her in, in Ohio [Oxford, Ohio] at the training session, it's, it's like Mrs. Hamer had a, it's like a halo, or a aura, that you could see, you could see. And I told--I never got a chance, I never got a chance to tell her what I thought of her. And, I was, I was telling that to, at one time to Victoria Jackson Gray [HistoryMaker Victoria Adams] who ran for United States Senate, Senate, through the Freedom Democratic Party [Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] in 1964. And I said, "Victoria, I never got a chance to tell Mrs. Hamer--," 'cause I would never call her Fannie Lou, "--Mrs. Hamer what I thought of her." But I told her that, I said, the things that have come back to haunt me, or the things that have come back to haunt me in my life are the things that I didn't say when I could've said 'em, or the things I could've done when I didn't do them. And I just told her, told Victoria what I thought of her, and Victoria's dead now, but I got to see her about a month, a month before she died. And Victoria was, Victoria was the same Victoria, she was dying, but she had that special smile on her face. And, (laughter) and still helping people, still helping people. She's dying and she's helping people. The person that I'd gone down there with, Barbara Schwartzbaum, Barbara can't dial, couldn't dial a phone right, but, anyhow. And Victoria would say, "Herbert [HistoryMaker Herbert Randall], would you please dial the phone for Barbara?" And she just was very special. Anyhow, a lot of people, a, a number of people who are very special. Yeah it was worth it and the thing is, is that because we all believed at the time that we were gonna change something, I, I don't know if, I know, but I, I, you know, it, it didn't quite happen but, we tried and we will continue to try. But, we believed it, that something was gonna, gonna change, but, I don't think we knew quite, at the time, what we were, what, I don't know, what, what we're up against. That's it, that's all. Story_ID: 533288 Speaker 1: If you had it to do again, would you choose photography as a career? Speaker 2: Yeah. Photography, I would have done something, I might have been paint- I would, might have paint, I, I don't know, I never tried painting but, yeah, yeah, yeah I, that's my, that's my passion, that's my life to a certain extent, yeah. Speaker 1: And when you're finished with your life, what would you like to be remembered for? Speaker 2: That's an interesting thing. I don't know if I would, the--it, it doesn't matter to me, it doesn't matter. I tried to live the best I could and tried to do the best I could, and, to be remembered, people have to--if, if I'm remembered at all, they just have to remember me the way, you know, they, they choose to remember me. But I have no, I have no, no lofty goals about what I would li- you know, what, how people, how I would like people to remember me, that's, I, I, I don't even know if it's important to me. People are important to me, but how they remember me, that's up to them, that, that I leave up to them. Speaker 1: I know this, this is not easy subject matter. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (Crying) I really, really appreciate you talking with me today. Speaker 2: I certainly appreciate, appreciate it. Speaker 1: And we appreciate you going to Mississippi and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --taking photographs. Speaker 2: Thank you...