 Story_ID: 39762 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Garth Coleridge Reeves, Sr. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, G-A-R-T-H, middle initial "C," Coleridge, C-O-L-E-R-I-D-G-E, Sr. Speaker 1: Reeves, R-E-E-V-E-S. Speaker 2: R-E-E-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 12, 1919. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Nassau, Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay, Nassau. Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, right now, I'm a retired publisher emeritus of the "Miami Times". Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: This is November 5, 2013. Speaker 1: June 5th, right? Speaker 2: Did I say (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you said November (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm running ahead of time. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, so June the 5th, 2005--2013. Speaker 2: June 5th, 2013. Speaker 1: All right, okay. All right, now, and where are we at the present time? You don't have to give your address, just, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in San Souci, in North Miami, Florida. Story_ID: 39763 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, I eat everything (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Do you have a favorite color? Color? Speaker 2: Color? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, I'm partial toward green. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, any time of year is fine for me. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I lean toward the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Story_ID: 39764 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors and what are the stories about their occupations and what they were doing? Speaker 2: Well, I know that my mother's father was a priest, an Anglican priest in the Bahamas. And he was a Itinerant. He traveled from cities or village or island to island throughout his career. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know his name? Speaker 2: Yes, his name was Michael James Cooper. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so I assume he'd been to college and all that, right, if he was a Anglican priest, you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. He didn't tell me about that. At least I did not know my mother's father. But he was, he must have been trained there in the Bahamas somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about growing up in the Bahamas that your mother told you? Speaker 2: Well, she told me that she was, traveled a lot. When the priest moved to a new area, he would take the family with him. And she went on several islands, Exuma, Grand Bahamas, Watlings, different islands that the family moved to. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so did your mother talk about going to school herself? Speaker 2: No, we never discussed that. She talked about my schooling, not hers. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: But she was schooled in the Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, but she never talked about what school or what kind of--did she-- Speaker 2: Not about her schooling, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she have any special talents or gifts that she-- Speaker 2: No, she was just a housewife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a well-read woman. She was, and she was--I remember she was a student of Gandhi, Mahatma Gandhi. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you say she was a student of Mahatma Gandhi, did she--so she believed in non-violent direct action and-- Speaker 2: She did, yes. She-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she always, when--we only had radio then. And every time Gandhi spoke, she would make sure I was there to listen to that talk. Speaker 1: Okay, did she have any East Indian ancestry herself at all? Speaker 2: Have any what? Speaker 1: Did she have any ancestry in India herself? Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, well, what about the rest of your mother's relatives there? Were there any stories about them, anything? Speaker 2: Well, she, when she moved to this country with me, she was--I wouldn't know about them. I had gone, I went back to the Bahamas after I was grown and met all my relatives. But I never knew them before. Story_ID: 39765 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, let's go to your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Henry Ethelbert Sigismund Reeves. The Sigismund, I never did understand it because it was German, and I don't know where the German came from in our family. Speaker 1: Would you spell his name for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Ethelbert was, E-T-H-E-L-B-E-R-T, regular, and Sigismund was S-I-G-I-S-M-U-N-D. Speaker 1: And what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, my father was a printer. He was a master printer and learned his trade there in the Bahamas. Speaker 1: So was he born in the Bahamas? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born about the same time as your mother or-- Speaker 2: Yes, about the same time. Speaker 1: Maybe 1890s? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, okay. So now, your father was a master printer? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he worked for the oldest newspaper there, "The Nassau Guardian". Speaker 1: Okay, now the "Guardian" affiliated with the "Guardian" in Britain? Speaker 2: Yes, I know, but his was the--they're not connected. That was just the name they took, but that paper is about 300 years old. Speaker 1: Okay, so now what are the stories about your father's ancestors in the Bahamas? And how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, I did not, I knew my grandmother. I didn't know my grandfather, but he was a magistrate, a judge in the islands. And he traveled about different islands, administering justice. Speaker 1: This is your grandfather. Speaker 2: My grandfather, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his name? Speaker 2: Henry. Speaker 1: Henry Lewis Reeves? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and he was a magistrate? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 39766 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, now, did your father [name] go to college in the Bahamas? Speaker 2: My father worked at the newspaper all of his life before he left and came to the, to Miami in 1919. Speaker 1: Okay, well, I was asking if he went to, if he was able to go to college in the Bahamas? Speaker 2: No, no, he had, he went to grade school there. And he got his training from an English priest who gave him lessons, his father had to pay for lessons in advanced studies. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, so he works for the "Guardian". How long had he worked for the "Guardian" before he came to the United States? Speaker 2: Probably, probably worked there about twenty years. Speaker 1: Okay, and what made him decide to start his own paper? Speaker 2: Well, I had four sisters ahead of me, and I was the first boy. And my father said when he had his first son, he had to, he was looking for greener pastures. And he thought he would do better in the United States. He had heard a lot about this country. And he came this way to see what it was like. And he liked it, and he sent back and got my mother, and she brought the children with her. And we've been here since 1919. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is just two years after World War I, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Two years after the end of World War I. So, I read that he was trying to buy some printing equipment, and then he wanted to go to Harlem, wanted to go to New York and set up, right? Speaker 2: Well, he was gonna buy his equipment in New York, and I think he wanted to bring it back, thought about bringing it back to the Bahamas. But his friends in Miami thought he had a better chance here and that this was a young city that was gonna be great one day. And they talked him into staying here. And he did. Speaker 1: Okay, so did he buy his printing equipment in New York? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. And so from what I understand, he came back to Miami here and started a printing business. Speaker 2: He started a print shop. He had three partners, a doctor, Alanda (ph.) P. Holly, a Haitian doctor and a minister named, S. A. Sampson, was the minister. And a printer was named M. C. Bodie, B-O-D-I-E. And those three men invested their meager funds, along with him, and he opened a printing office in Miami, called it the "Magic Printery", P-R-I-N-T-E-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, the Magic Printery, okay. And how did they do? Speaker 2: Not too good. They (laughter), he was happy because they were breaking even, but his friends, he finally bought his friends out, and he became the sole proprietor. Speaker 1: And I read that he bought his friends out for less than $400.00, right, it was about-- Speaker 2: I think it was $375.00. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. So it must not have been much of an investment there. Speaker 1: Now, this is 1919, and money went a long--I mean further than it goes now. So-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, he had bought control, I think in 1921. And in 1922, I think, he started his first newspaper, 'The Miami Sun', which lasted about eight months. And it did not do, with all the shortages of the war and things like that, it didn't do well. And after eight months, he closed it down. Then in 1923, September 1st, 1923, he launched his second newspaper,'The Miami Times' that has been in operation for the last ninety years. Story_ID: 39767 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your sisters work with the paper [The Miami Times] too? Speaker 2: Oh, everybody helped, everybody pitched in help dad build that newspaper in whatever they can. Even my sisters sold papers on the streets along with me. Story_ID: 39768 Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe for us the history of Overtown [Miami, Florida], and why Overtown's important? Speaker 2: Overtown has a strange history. We were happy in Overtown because it was a place, it was an all-black area in which the people--everything was maintained there. We had our own bank. We had our own bakery shops, our own meat markets, our own schools. It was a self--it was totally segregated, but it was a self--everybody controlled everything. We owned all the restaurants, all the eating places, beauty parlors, barbershops. And we were happy there. We sort of, what we call, "knew our place" because segregation was very, very strict. And the Ku Klux Klan, if you heard about the Klan, they ran the town more so than the police department. Story_ID: 39769 Speaker 1: So, I've heard this story before from Birmingham, Alabama and other places in the South, where the Klan would take a couple of days, a day or during the year and just ride through, or parade through the black community? Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And would they be armed? Were they armed when they did that? Speaker 2: Oh, they were armed. Oh, yes, they were armed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we didn't, couldn't see them, but then (unclear) they came out. Everybody knew they were in charge. I've only heard about one group that challenged the Klan once. And I never did find out who it was, but I think the word around town was it was, I think they called him Texas Slim. But anyhow, the Klan was getting ready to parade on 11th Street. And they were starting across the railroad tracks which was the white section. And while they were gathering, Texas Slim had gotten his boys together, and they brought out their artillery. And they started firing as soon as the Klan started in our direction. And the Klan retreated that night. They did not parade that night because it was a little too much fire power there. Speaker 1: Now, these were dangerous times in terms of lynchings all over the South and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --and race riots when white people would burn the black community down and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, lynching was prevalent in those days. That's one thing my mother always warned me about because lynching was, was--oh, it was a popular thing among the whites to show their control in the South. Speaker 1: And in the North actually. I mean there were plenty in the North too as far-- Speaker 2: Yes, there were, yes, there was. Speaker 1: --as far North as Minnesota and, you know, Indiana and Ohio. Speaker 2: It was not as prevalent in the North as it was in the South, yeah, just put it that way. Speaker 1: Right, I just wanted--I didn't wanna leave that out so in case somebody watching this thought it was just in the South (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But it's not. But, okay, but Overtown was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Overtown was a thriving community. And there was--rich people from the North used to come down to Miami Beach and downtown Miami to spend money during the winter. And we called it, the "season." They would come in after Thanksgiving and stay until up in the year, after--until the weather got better up North. And we had a pretty solid community, pretty solid, a well-knit, closely-knit community. Story_ID: 39770 Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it that the black community was important to the tourist in--right, was that true? Speaker 2: Important to? Speaker 1: I mean the tourist and, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Many of the tourists brought their help with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But most of them stayed here and most of the very rich ones, when they left, they left, always left one or two people in their homes, their mansions, to take care of them. And they were permanent residents. Speaker 1: Okay, so what you're saying is that there were black people in the neighborhood, I guess, that lived, that were caretakers of these white residences in Miami Beach? Speaker 2: Well, they were caretakers, yeah, there, yeah, right. Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They did, a lot of 'em did live over there year around, but not to take part in the civic and social activities of the city. Story_ID: 39771 Speaker 1: Now, I had read that when they chartered the city of Miami Beach in 1896, that over half of the people that were on the charter were black people (laughter)-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --yeah, that worked on the railroad here, you know. Speaker 2: Well, Henry Flagler who built, brought the railroad in, had a lot of blacks on those--and when they wanted to get the place chartered, they didn't have enough names. So Henry went out and got his crew, and many, more than half of them, I think were black, who incorporated into the city. Speaker 1: Right, so black people have been here from the earliest time? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: And I think a settlement here goes back to the Indian days in the 1500s, but as a city, itself, Miami Beach wasn't--or Miami wasn't incorporated till 1896, I think? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Miami Beach was not a big city as it is today, yeah. It was Miami and the beach was sort of like a place to go to swim. And I remember black people used--that was our beach years ago. We would swim over there, and South Beach was where black people swam. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were black people living, you know, near South Beach or using South Beach? Speaker 2: Well, black people were only the caretakers who lived there before that time. Now, it's interesting to note that one of the richest islands on Miami Beach is called Fisher Island. It's just at the tip of Miami Beach going into the South side. And that was owned by a black man named D. A. Dorsey, who owned the property. And he sold it, he sold it at, oh, it must have been in probably 1950 or something like that. Story_ID: 39772 Speaker 1: Now, D. A. Dorsey, he was the first black millionaire-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, he's very rich. Dorsey was a philanthropist too. He gave to, he gave the money for the first school and the first library, and the Dorsey House was a gathering place for the well-to-do. They had a nice house. It's still there today. I think the Black Archives owns it today, but they refurbished it and that's a black attraction when people come to Miami to see the Dorsey House. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Black Archives has a lot of mementos there in the Dorsey House. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did D. A. Dorsey make his money? Speaker 2: D. A. Dorsey, Dana was his first name. Speaker 1: Okay, Dana. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did he make his money? Speaker 2: He made it in housing. He bought houses. And the money, he built houses. He built these--they called them shacks, shot--they called them shotgun houses because they're all--if they built a three-bedroom house, everything was in a line. And if you, they say you could shoot down the hall and won't hit anything else (laughter). That was the hallway, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, so he developed homes for poor people, I guess, right, low-income people? Speaker 2: Well, actually, yes. He built the home for people who came here to build a railroad, didn't have a place to stay. And Dorsey was the one to furnish the housing for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in--but real estate. He made his money in real estate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was a shrewd investor. He owns stocks and bonds, and for a man with no education, he did very well for himself. Speaker 1: So he had no education? Speaker 2: Limited, maybe he had, maybe high school. He never went to, never went past high school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and I don't wanna let this get by either, but he built Booker T. Washington High School? Is he the one that built that? Speaker 2: No, he didn't build it. He-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he built mostly frame houses, small frame houses that were popular during that day. I didn't see a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a stone house in my community for a long time. Speaker 1: Yeah, but did he donate money to the building of the high school, to Booker T. Washington? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He didn't? Speaker 2: No, I don't think he did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I read-- Speaker 2: He did that for Dorsey, he gave them the land to build Dorsey High School, which was the one, the first one in-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Liberty City. Speaker 1: Okay, so he donated the land for Dorsey High School, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Named after him, and--okay. So he, was he still alive when your father came to Miami Beach? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father rented property, rented office space from him for his newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dorsey was the one that started the first bank. Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Do you know? Do you remember? Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember, I don't know--I can't remember the name of that bank. Speaker 1: Now, this is the first African American bank in Miami, right, the City of Miami? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. It's not still in existence, I guess, right? Speaker 2: How's that? Speaker 1: It's not in existence any longer, I guess? Speaker 2: [No audible response]. Speaker 1: Or is it still in existence, the bank? Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, now, what was the main street in Overtown? Speaker 2: Second Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the street, all the clubs, the night clubs and bars were on and that's where Dorsey had his Dorsey Hotel. He had his hotel and his bank and his offices there. Story_ID: 39773 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: An early? Speaker 1: Earliest childhood memory, the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: I went to, I remember starting elementary school in 1931, no, no-- Speaker 1: No, it would have been 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen--in 1925-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I went to elementary school at Dunbar Elementary School because--well, I went to Dunbar Elementary. But at that time, the blacks did not have a high school. They were just building the, they were talking about building the Booker T. Washington High School. But we did have a make-shift building in Overtown, a wooden, frame structure on 8th Street that blacks attended. But I remember high school kids had the elementary school while I was there, when I was in first grade, they had some high school kids out there. And, because Dunbar was probably the only place they could go in that time. Speaker 1: So the high school shared the building, the same building at Dunbar-- Speaker 2: Same building as the elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School. Now, did you like school? Speaker 2: Well, my mother said I didn't because the first day I went, I, they had a--I was on the first floor, and they had these large windows that opened up. And there was no air conditioning, and no panes in them. And I saw the window open. I didn't live far from the school. And I (unclear) two blocks away. So I went out the window and I went back home. And my mother said, well, what are you doing home? I said, well, I didn't like it. I didn't, I didn't like school. So she took me back and explained to me (laughter), says (laughter) school was new. That was the first day (laughter), and so I was not acclimated at the time. After that I stayed in school (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: [No audible response]. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: No, just school. School was school (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, what about teacher? Did you have a favorite teacher at Dunbar? Speaker 2: I had some favorite, oh, yes, yes. I remember my first teacher was Murray, Ms. Murray. I never will forget her. And the principal was Mrs. Lily C. Evans. She went on to become a principal at another--they named a school after her here. Speaker 1: Lily C. Evans. Speaker 2: Lily C. Evans, L-I-L-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and there's a school named for her here in Miami. Speaker 2: Here in Miami. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Liberty City. Story_ID: 39774 Speaker 1: Okay, we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: At school? Speaker 1: No, of growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, of growing up? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Well, I, I--well, most of us called ourselves having a happy childhood. You had your, you felt safe in your own neighborhood. You felt comfortable there. You did not feel threatened in any way because you were among your own, and we sort of had a happy childhood. We didn't have to go downtown for anything because that's when you went--you had trouble when you went downtown because you were not treated well. But I would say that I had a happy childhood coming up, didn't have a--we were poor as a church mouse, but our parents always made us think that we were special. We had everything we wanted. And I didn't know my mother was pulling, was--well, she was doing what she had to do. I never had a bicycle. And I sure wanted a bicycle. And I would ask my mother for one every year at Christmas. And my mother had this line she'd give me. She'd take me in her arms and say, oh, boy, I love you so much. I couldn't stand the thought of you riding a bicycle out there in the street. Somebody come by and hit you, I'd die. And that's--mama told me that lie every year (laughter) 'cause she, we didn't have the money to buy that bicycle (laughter), and she (laughter). And I never did buy--I never did get a bicycle. I was grown up and going to college and still didn't have a bicycle. Story_ID: 39775 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, now, did you like to read growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I did, only, there was not a great--I had to grow up reading great literature because the only books my father brought into the house were the "Harvard Classics". And that was, that was good literature. But it was deep. It was, you know, it was the greatest poetry, the greatest essays, all the sonnets and, you know, the "Harvard Classics" is a great book if you remember those. They don't, they don't--they put all the encyclopedias today, but I still have my old copies of the "Harvard Classics" that my father, I remember bringing home in the 1920s. Speaker 1: So you had to read--now, what, for instance, what books were you reading out of the "Harvard Classics" when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, the "Harvard Classics" had about, oh, about a hundred different sets, about 90--70 or 100 sets. And, you know, you read poetry, sonnets, Shakespeare, Milton, Julius Caesar, you know, and, you know, you really--I was really wishing I could get a copy of "Popular Mechanics". That was one of my favorite books (laughter) and couldn't afford the "Popular Mechanics", but we had the "Harvard Classics". Story_ID: 39776 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were growing up in Overtown [Miami, Florida]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so were you very close to the main street, you know? Speaker 2: Well, we lived at 1949 on 5th Place, 1949 NW 5th Place. And everybody walked everywhere. My church was about 10 blocks away, and when I took my mother to church, we would always walk. And I remember a lot of times, the streets were not even paved then because they were, you had to just walk through the water, through the mud and sometimes we had to take off our shoes and walk then, and put 'em back on when we got to church. But I remember when the sewage came through. During the old days when we first moved out there, they didn't have any sewage and everybody had an outhouse. And I remember when they were putting in the sewers, and we had so much fun playing in the ditches out there. They had to dig the ditches all along the streets, and we played in those until they brought the pipe in. And I remember days like that. They were good days. Story_ID: 39777 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, were there many cars on the street then when you were growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Cars, I--we didn't have a car. My dad used a bicycle to go and come to work. And he got arrested once for riding my mother double on the bicycle. And they actually took him to jail. Speaker 1: Now, this is--were these white cops? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all they had, white cops then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No black. So they brought my dad up before the judge, or whoever was in charge, probably a sergeant or something. And he said, what's your name, boy? That's what everybody called, everybody was a boy. So my dad, my dad said, Henry Ethelbert Sigismund Reeves. The man, the judge or the sergeant looked at him, said, well, damn, why didn't they call you George Washington Thomas Jefferson Franklin Roosevelt Reeves? And my dad say he stiffened up, he said, because I happen to be a subject of Her Majesty the Queen (laughter). I said, what happened, dad? He said, the man just looked at him and said, "Case dismissed. Get him out of here." (Laughter) Now, actually, they took him to jail for riding double on the bicycle, take him to jail (laughter). I asked my mother, I said, well, how did you get home after that? (Laughter) And she said--and dad never took her on the bicycle any more. He just rode himself, rode his bicycle there and back (laughter). Story_ID: 39778 Speaker 1: What a story. So, any other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: No, just as we grew up in Overtown, Overtown was nice. I remember as a teenager and during my college days, I enjoyed Overtown because we had so many of the popular artists out of New York and Chicago who were always coming down during the winter to go to the big cafes and night clubs on the beach. And they would go on the beach for their--but they didn't, they couldn't live on Miami Beach. So when they finished their acts, they all came back to Overtown where they could live, to the (unclear) Mary Elizabeth Hotel or Sir John Hotel. And that was a favorite spot, Rockland Palace. And they always brought in the big bands, every week, during the season when all the visitors were in town too. They would bring in Jimmie Lunceford and all the big bands and name--you name them, and they brought 'em in. Speaker 1: Count Basie. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Duke Ellington? Speaker 2: All those, all those names, you'd find them and others. And we had a popular nightclub called "The Rockland Palace", and then the whites had a nightclub. It was a, they were--the whites owned it, but it was strictly a black club called "The Harlem Square" run by Al Goldman. And they brought good entertainment. I remember once they brought a white band to the black area, and that was Al Goldman. Story_ID: 39779 Speaker 1: The biggest hotel on the beach was the Fountain Blue which it still is today, and they would bring in Sammy Davis, Jr. and Frank Sinatra, and they would--at first they didn't let blacks into the theaters until--the one to break that up was Josephine Baker. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Josephine Baker. She was a big Paris star, and she was, and she had in her contract that she would not appear unless it was an open, the office was open and black people were allowed to come in. And I was at the, I remember I was at the first show that night that (unclear), [Siros] that Josephine Baker performed. And they called the newspaper to let us know that they were gonna have black people and invited (unclear). I went with my sister. And we were in there, and they had a few black people. Maxine Baker--Maxine Baker I think was her name at that time. She was one of the attractions there, but Josephine Baker performed. And she was good. And that was the first they had ever had blacks at a mix audience show there. So that's where she broke the color band. Speaker 2: About what time-- Speaker 1: Then the other clubs started mixing them in. Speaker 2: About when did that happen? About what year was that? Do you remember about what year it was when she broke the color line? Speaker 1: [No audible response]. Speaker 2: Would it have been in the '50's [1950s] or-- Speaker 1: That was in the '50's [1950s], I would say. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, in the '50's [1950s], right, can't remember the year, but-- Speaker 2: Okay, 1950s. Story_ID: 39780 Speaker 1: All right, so, sir, you grew up like working on the paper, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The only job I've ever had in my life, started as a copy boy. Speaker 1: Okay, so you've done all the jobs at the paper? Speaker 2: Yeah, right on up. Speaker 1: All right, started as a copy boy. Now, I heard that you were a paperboy too? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sold papers on the street. Speaker 1: All right, those are the two boy jobs, copy boy, paperboy (laughter). So, and you were doing this in grade school, all the way through, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I didn't--my dad didn't want me down in the office until I was 12. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I was twelve [years old], I was--he started teaching me the trade. And he was very good at it. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you read the "Miami Times" every week when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but I had to work on it. I had, see, I remember-see, I started from the beginning. We used to set type one character at a time. I don't know if you remember this when you--but today the technology is so great that you, I was wondering how we did it, setting characters, one character at a time. Speaker 1: And these, I mean these are actually, I mean one letter at a time in a tray, right? Speaker 2: One, that's right-- Speaker 1: You'd put 'em in a-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right, and that was like pulling teeth. And we did it, and got a paper out every week. My dad was so proud that, during the hurricane and the Depression, and no matter what would happen, the "Miami Times" has been put on the street every week for the last 90--we're in our 90th year, never missed an issue. And my dad was proud of that. Story_ID: 39781 Speaker 1: So what were some of the big issues in the paper when you were growing up? What was the most important issue? Speaker 2: Actually, the biggest news was the lynchings every week and everybody was, wanted to know who--you look in the paper, you'd always see so many lynchings. And, God, it was just--it was a terrible time. But that was the big news. And then once, you know, the Civil Rights Movement really didn't get started until late, until late. You wonder why. But any time anybody started anything, there was always somebody there to knock you down to discourage you from thinking they are not in control. And it just took time, and when Martin [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I didn't believe him at first. I didn't think you could do it without violence. I thought it was gonna, it's just gonna have to be a bloody affair. And Martin, Martin--it's a good thing that man came along. I think he convinced a lot of people that, you know, they got us outgunned anyhow (laughter), you know. You can't win, can't win. Some of the darkest days of my life was, '46' [1946], I spent in World War II. Story_ID: 39782 Speaker 1: Okay, so, sir, so were you able to be involved in very many activities in high school or, you know, clubs and sports or anything like that? Speaker 2: Clubs, but I was a little skinny guy, and I wasn't, wasn't athletic in any way, intramural, you know, we played, that's all, but I was, I was just there, (laughter) having a good time. But I learned entrepreneurship there. We used to, none of us had any money in those days. We got .10 cents for lunch every day. And the cafeteria, you couldn't buy anything in the cafeteria for .10 cents, so we used to chip in and put our dimes together. And it was a store across the street. And we would buy a loaf of bread and get some lunch meat and make ourselves--things was much cheaper than--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you could get a sandwich for .10 cents? Speaker 2: We'd make it do. Speaker 1: So .10 cents would get you a sandwich? I mean you could put together enough parts to-- Speaker 2: That's right. So, but I had a gimmick. I used to sell candy bars. A lot of kids, they, I guess they had had breakfast before they came to school, and a lot of 'em didn't have any, never ate lunch at 12:00 o'clock. And I wondered about that with kids. I thought everybody had to have something to eat all the time. But a lot of kids, they ate a candy bar. And in those days, the candy bars were large. And they had, they sold candies for a nickel, and I, where I worked downtown, by the "Miami Times", there was a wholesale store where you can buy a box of candy for .80 cents. And you sold it, you sold--your bars, you got a $1.20. So I used to like O'Henry's, so I bought a box of O'Henry's one day and took it to school. Story_ID: 39783 Speaker 1: I bought a box of candies, took it to school. And I was selling 'em for a nickel. Well, at the end of the day, I got a dollar twenty [$1.20]. So I went back, when I went to my, when I returned again, I bought another box because I got .40 cents now. So I sold them the next day. So now, I got .80 cents. I got enough to buy two boxes. And I bought two boxes, bought a box of O'Henry's and a good box of Goodbar's, "Mr. Goodbar". And I started, I was, man, I was cleaning up. I got to four boxes. I'd sell four boxes of candy 'cause everybody had a nickel to buy a box of candy, usually lunchtime because they didn't, they didn't have any lunch money, you know (laughter). Or those who had lunch money would have an extra nickel. So that's the way I started, and I was, man, I had money from then on in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Got started about tenth grade. Speaker 2: Now, this is during the Depression when money was scarce (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, (unclear) (laughter). Story_ID: 39784 Speaker 1: How were your grades in high school? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I was good in 'em, I was pretty good. And I could have been better, but my sister was much smarter than me. And I know she used to make all A's every six weeks. And I'd come home with A's and B's, you know. So I bet her that, I said, I bet you. So my dad heard me bet, and telling her, just talking about betting. He said, well, all right. You bring me all A's--he used to give us all a dime for every "A" we brought home during the grading period. And he said, if you bring all A's, you'll get a quarter for a full--I thought, that's a lot of money, see. Man, I worked hard at it. I got all A's and one "B", got the "B" in mathematics (laughter). And I hated Ms. Hall after that (laughter). I said, now, how could you do this to me (laughter)? She said, Garth, that's all you earned (laughter). And that was it, that was it. But I had pretty good grades, yeah. Story_ID: 39785 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about this. I didn't ask about this, but in the news in 1936 when you graduated, was the Summer Olympic games that summer, I guess. Speaker 2: Jesse Owens. Speaker 1: Right, right. And did, was that, I mean was that as big a deal then as we think it was, now? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I still have my scrapbook, believe it or not, with Jesse Owens picture (laughter) from the, from that 1936 Olympics, still got it. And that was big, that was big, oh, God. You know, I like the part where Hitler couldn't stand it. Hitler had to leave (laughter). That was great. I liked that part. Story_ID: 39786 Speaker 1: Now, did you, speaking of that, people like Joe Louis, Jesse Owens, I mean did they come by the office of the newspaper? Did your father get a chance to meet, you know--I know he had to shoot the pictures--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, and then, yeah, I remember Joe Louis came to town, and he would, he was having a press conference at the Sir John Hotel. And I went, I went to cover it in my role as a reporter for "Miami Times". And all the white guys were there, and they were kind of pushing me out the way, you know, a little white guy 'cause Joe [Louis] was a big man then, and all that. So I remember Joe putting his arm around and pushed him back aside and said, wait a minute, wait a minute, let the brother in here, let the brother in here. That's Joe (laughter). I said, all right, Joe, stand up for the brother too, see. So little things like that you remember about people because everybody wouldn't, you know, wouldn't do that. But Joe, he felt his, he felt his color. Story_ID: 39787 Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I wanna get to Jackie Robinson after the [?] War. Now, I'm trying to go chronologically. So we're gonna take you-- Speaker 2: Now, Jackie came during the War. I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I think, when Jackie used to come around here, but he mostly, but after. But Jackie came, the--Montreal used to practice down here too, somewhere in Florida. But I remember when Jackie took the field in New York for the first game, I was in the stands. I was one of those 43,000 that day, and that was the happiest day of my life. Speaker 1: This is 1946, right? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-six [1946]. I was going to school in Brooklyn where dad, I was taking a course in linotype mechanism. And, 'cause my dad had bought this linotype machine and didn't know how to (laughter), much about it. So he sent me up to the institute, and I timed it so that as soon as my course was finished on Friday and the Dodgers were opening up on Monday, (laughter) and I was sitting right there in the stands. My sister was living in New York then, and she got me up early (laughter) to show me the trains to catch, and I was going to the stadium. I got there in plenty of time. And I was sitting up there. I saw Jackie [Robinson] hit his first home run. The next day, the play, they moved it over to Giant's Field the next day, and I remember the ball hit on the facade in centerfield, and he kept digging. It came back in the field, and he kept digging because it was in the field of play. But once it hit up on the facade, that's a home run, see, so. They were great days. Story_ID: 39788 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a mentor at FAMU [Florida A&M University]? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, the greatest mentor I had was an English teacher because I thought that things would get, would progress much faster. And I thought by the time I got out of high school, the University of Florida would have opened up, but (laughter), no, no. It took many years before that happened. And so when I got to A and M, I told the (unclear), I said, I wanted to study Journalism. I said, but, you know, they don't let us in their school. So I said, what do you suggest? My counselor told me, you go down to Mr. Langhorn--his name was J. L. Langhorn. He was from Washington, D.C. I will never forget him. And I went and talked to him. He said, don't be frustrated, said if you study all the English and English language, languages, you know, and he said, you'll learn to write, he said because you're gonna be in my class. And you're gonna learn a lot from me. So (laughter), and he was really good. He just taught freshman English, and then he later went on, later to teach advanced literature. But he was a great help, he was great help. Story_ID: 39789 Speaker 1: So you're out of school in 1940. You're working with your father [name]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you've got it made. You're living at home (laughter), you're single. Speaker 2: Driving my daddy's car (laughter). You know, if I wanted some gas, I'd just drive up to his place and I'd just sign my name. I was living the good life. And Second Avenue was good, all the bands coming in and in the winter, you know, the best talent is coming down, "Smart Affairs", Sammy Davis, everything, everything's going good, living good. And then Pearl Harbor, oh, God. Speaker 1: Now, this is December, 1941. Speaker 2: December, '41 [1941], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, December 7th. So Pearl Harbor then, there's the draft, right, after that? Speaker 2: I had heard about the Tuskegee Group, and when I saw Pearl Harbor, you know, they made everybody register. You had to register for the draft. So I started thinking. I said, that flying sounds good to me. I said, if I got to go, I said, I'd rather get in an outfit like these black guys who's flying those planes. I got a better chance with them than I have with the white boys, see. So I talked to my mother about it, and mama said, well, go ahead, put in. So I filed an application. I say, I sent it in too. But they didn't pay any attention to it 'cause the War wasn't going very good for 'em right at that time, see. And Pearl Harbor was in, in December of what '71' [1971], wasn't it? Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], yeah. Speaker 2: I mean '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I was drafted that, about February. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was drafted about February because I remember going down to the courthouse trying to get out of it, trying to slow it down so I could--'cause I wanted to hear from the Air Force if I was gonna get in there. And I went to, I said--I didn't tell 'em that I had filed for this Airport thing, but I told them that, I said, I think you made a mistake in this draft. I said, I am not an American citizen. I said, I was born in the Bahamas. I says, I'm a citizen of the Queen, English. So, the guy looked at me, and he picked up the records and looked at it, turned to me (laughter) and said, "You're not a citizen?" I said, no, I said, I was born in the Bahamas. He said, and you're, you're 21 years old? I said, yeah. He said, and they drafted you? (Laughter) I said, yeah. He said, well, if you don't have your black ass down to that railroad station on Monday morning, we gonna come and look for you. I looked at him. I said, well, if that's the way you feel about it, I'll be there (laughter). I couldn't argue with the man (laughter). I was just trying a ploy on him to see could I buy a little time, see. He said, no. And I found out later, I was talking to my dad. And my dad said, well, you know it's a law that you became a citizen, and I became a citizen. He said, any--I didn't know that. He said any child under 18, if they grant you a citizenship, grown up. And yet that's your children born in this country or over there, they become an automatic citizen. So, but I said, when, I said, well, why, how could they draft me if I'm (unclear)? He said, that's why they drafted you (laughter) 'cause you're, they classify you as a citizen. You were an automatic citizen when I got my papers, and my dad was naturalized (laughter) five to six years earlier, you know. So that was a ploy I found out didn't work. Story_ID: 39790 Speaker 1: Okay, so where did they take you from boot camp? Speaker 2: I went to Fort Benning, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, Fort Benning, Georgia, and so what was boot camp like? Speaker 2: Listen, it was good for me because the first formation I went to, one of the lieutenants said anybody here type, know how to type? And I put my hand up. They said, step out the line. Another, me and another guy stepped out the line, said, come with us. So he took us in the--I think the other men, they started their basic training. And we never--I never did go out a day of basic training. Story_ID: 39791 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so they take--you didn't train at all? You had no training? Speaker 2: No training. I had, I went into the office and I remember the--he was serving as Assistant (ph.) (unclear). His name was James Webb, and he said, let me level with you fellows. He said, between you and me we'd be going overseas very shortly. I said, overseas? I said, we just got here. He said, wait a minute. He said, I'm not supposed to tell you this, but I have my orders to get this group ready for overseas assignment. And he said, and that's what I plan to do. He says, now, I got a lot of work to do, and I don't have any typists. You guys are the only ones who, here who know anything about this. But you gotta help me and if you help me, I'll take care of you. And I said, well, what about the basic training. And he said, don't worry about that. You can get that later. So, we started, and I worked with him and all that, and after I was there a few weeks, man, I was made a corporal. And I was doing so well. And a couple of months went by, I started turning out that work, what the guy needed to go, getting ready to go overseas and made me a technical sergeant. I had five stripes. I said, oh, I'm ready now. I started even thinking, I said, I kept asking myself, I said, will anybody gonna learn to fire their rifle (laughter) to protect myself. And they said, don't worry about that. When you get overseas, said that's when the training will really start. So I said, well, I don't like the idea of getting on a ship going overseas, and I never fired a gun (laughter). I said, what--that's all right. Sure enough, June 31st, I was on a ship. I was on the Queen Elizabeth heading out of New York Harbor. We're on our way to Scotland, and six days later, we landed in Scotland. And I couldn't understand, I know when we first left the harbor we had a, had the bombers flying escorts for us, taking us out to sea. And then we, when we got out over the Atlantic, they left us, and I had been reading about the U-boats were having such a field day. They were sinking one and a half ships a day. That was their, what they were averaging. Every time you'd pick up a paper, the U-boats had sunk a freighter or another freighter, you know, and all. So I kept looking for the escorts, and I asked a guy, one of guys on the ship, I said, well, what about the escorts? He said this ship is so fast that all we do is sail a zigzag course, and we go to, we go overseas without an escort. I said, well, is that good enough for the U-boats? It's been working for us? He said, you won't see a, nothing--and I noticed the ship would go seven miles in this direction, and then go eight miles in this direction. And it did that all the way across--but yet, it was so fast, the Queen Elizabeth was so fast, we got there in I think in six or seven days. And so that's when we left, left Scotland and went down to England and set up our training camp. And that's when they started the real, fine-tooth training. Story_ID: 39792 Speaker 1: So did you get trained there? Speaker 2: I still didn't fire no gun. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I still stayed North of (unclear) working me to death (laughter). But I liked that, I liked that (laughter). I said, let the boys have it 'cause it's cold out there (laughter), and they--I was enjoying that. Speaker 1: Now, there's a story, I was reading about where you were supposed to go to Officer Candidate School and they-- Speaker 2: I went. Speaker 1: Oh, you went, okay. All right. Speaker 2: I attended (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're in England, so I started getting home sick and Christmas came by. That's the first worst Christmas I ever (unclear) seen in my life, man, my first Christmas away from home in 21 years. Ah, Lord, I (unclear) missed (unclear). So I start thinking of ways I can get back home. And they had an officer school already in England, said anything--they had engineering. They had quarter master. They had infantry. They had gunnery. You had everything over there. And they were doing big training. So I got smart. I looked at things. I was looking for a school to apply for that they don't have in England, and I found it. It was the coastal artillery. That's the only school I found. So when I went and applied for school, I applied. They said, well, why you wanna go to the coastal artillery. I said, well, I've always been fascinated by those big guns from the ships. And I said, that's it. They said, well, why don't you go to anti-aircraft school over here. I said, well, no, no. I said, I want to go to coastal artillery. They tried to talk me out of it 'cause they don't wanna give me that ticket back home. So I held off and sooner or later, my orders came down, accepted for the coastal artillery school, Fort Belleville, Virginia. Now, it's another interesting part of my career that came up. I caught the plane, went back home. The first thing is you go back home, you get a furlough, at home to see my family and enjoyed that and all that. And so, now, I'm going to officer school. So I went to, got my orders sent me to Fort Belleville, Virginia. I went to apply. So the guy picked me up, the sergeant picked me up at the station and taking me to the fort. He looked at me, black sergeant. He said, let me see those orders again. I said, here they are. He said, well, damn, they're from European Theater of Operations. I said, that's right. He said, and they sent you to Fort Belleville? I said, that's right. He said, I've been to this post 22 years and they ain't never had a black man in training in Fort Belleville. I said, well, they got one now. And he said, well, you damn sure got the orders here. So he took me, and it's at night. We get to the post, so he says, showed the guy my order, the white guy. The guy looked at me. He read 'em again, looked at it. He said, well, I think you're in the wrong place, he said, but I'm gonna put you to bed and we'll talk about it in the morning. I said, okay. I was a little tired. So they got me a room and put me to bed. The next morning, I got up, went down and had breakfast. The captain came in and said, Sergeant, you, your orders have been cut, and you're leaving for the anti-aircraft school in Camp Davis, North Carolina in 15 minutes. I said, I think you made a mistake. I said, I have order from European Theater of Operation that I'm supposed to study anti-aircraft--not anti-aircraft, coastal artillery at this base. He said, your orders have been changed. I said, how could you change the orders from Europe and you're in the United States? He said, I can do that. He says, "That's all, Sergeant." He walked away (laughter). And damn, they just, they sent me (laughter), they sent me to Camp David, North Carolina and had me in the anti-aircraft school. And I said, okay. I said, well, that's the way it is. Story_ID: 39793 Speaker 1: You didn't like the Army very much from what I understand. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. I liked the part of moving around. I'd never traveled in my life at the time, but moving around, going different places, you know, and all that. But it, they didn't treat you right, see. They didn't treat you right. And you had to just suck it up. Now, you couldn't do anything, couldn't do anything. (Unclear) I remember we went over, when we got to England, they issued us our rifles and live ammunition. And, well, guys were hunting rabbits (laughter) with a 30-30 carbine (laughter). They-- Speaker 1: That's a big bullet to put in a rabbit, isn't it? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: That's a big bullet to put in a rabbit? Speaker 2: I'm telling you (laughter). But I mean that was getting out of hand, so what they did, they collected, they collected the ammunition, (unclear) told all of us, turn in their ammunition. Well, see the guys, I think what they did, they got bored waiting on 'em to assign them some, you know, meaningful training. And what they did, they put most of us unloading the damn ammunition ships. That's what we were doing. Story_ID: 39794 Speaker 1: Okay, what were you considering doing if you weren't working with your father? Speaker 2: Well, I kind of--I told my mother [name], I said, I don't know if I wanna stay in this town, I said because it's gonna get me in trouble. I said, I had some bad experiences during the War. I don't wanna talk about 'em, but I said, I don't want anybody to make me feel less than a man. I said, that's the way I was made to feel a few times. I said, and I can't live like that. So she said, where would you wanna go? I said, well, I don't know. I said, but I've been in a lot of towns I like a lot better than what's going on here in Miami. And she said, well, it's up to you. I want you to make up your own mind, but said, I wanna tell you this. Wherever you go, you're gonna meet the same kind of people and say, it might--they might let you ride upfront in the bus and say, but that's not gonna change anything; said, you're gonna find what you're looking for is all over, all over, said--she named New Orleans, New York and Washington, and Los Angeles and all these nice places you'd rather be. But she said, I don't think it'll be much difference, said, but you think about it because I don't want you to just go ahead and find out what I'm telling you is true and you're frustrated again. You see, you really, I really was hoping you wanted to stay around, stay here with your dad and help him, say he ain't gonna be here forever, you know, say, he need some help down there. (Unclear) And even when she talked to me like that, you know, I kind of hit a spot there. I said, let me try it then. I'll see how it works out, you know. Story_ID: 39795 Speaker 1: And so what was the state of the "Miami Times" then? What was your circulation and what was your impact on the community in those days? Speaker 2: Well, it was doing pretty good. Of course, I was a, although I went to work at the "Miami Times", I--we were not making the money. But my dad also had a job printing establishment on the side. He was running like two things, the newspaper and the job printing. Speaker 1: Now, did he have like a gas station too or something 'cause you mentioned like going to get gas and did he have some other businesses too other than just the printing and the newspaper? Speaker 2: No, just the newspaper and job printing? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we printed everything, but in the town, you know, envelopes, books, invitations, programs, funeral programs, you know, everything. My dad's motto was, "We print anything from a card to a newspaper." And we did. We used to do the school newspaper too, print that too. So we had a thing going, and so I went over to the job printing place department. And I found out that I had to do some restructuring on the prices 'cause my dad had, you know, how you--old people, they set one price and prices change, and they think they should just stay right there. But things would go by, you know, so they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Paper's going up and the ink's going up. Speaker 2: Right. So there was a catalog I discovered in reading that told you how to price. And my dad had never seen this catalog before. He just did it on his own. He would figure out what the paper cost and what the ink cost and what the labor cost and add 'em up, and maybe add on 15 percent, you know. Well, I learned better after I read this catalog. And the catalog, they wouldn't sell it to you. They'll rent it to you because you had--they changed, every time they changed prices or something, they'd let you know. And I restructured the pricing for dad, and I was making a ton of money, man. It was, we had a good business. But dad was doing good in what he was doing, but he just did not understand the right pricing. He didn't keep up with what was happening in the, you know. And I got that going, and so we subsidized the newspaper. The newspaper was getting, was getting along, but it wasn't making any money. But the job printing office was making the money, and so we didn't worry about that. Whatever they were short over there, we'd pick it up. And things went quite well there. I got, the new machinery was working well. And we bought a new press, a bigger press and-- Speaker 1: And so you bought a linotype machine too, right, is that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, bought the linotype. Speaker 1: Now, was that your idea to get that? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Was it your idea to-- Speaker 2: No, no, my dad bought this on his own. Yeah, I was (unclear)-- Speaker 1: And that's the time that you were sent to New York to learn to operate it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you saw Jackie Robinson play his first game? Speaker 2: So we were doing quite well. And one hand was washing the other one, and one time I was telling my dad, I says, you know, I said, you're wasting your time with that newspaper (laughter). I said, you--there's a lot of money to be made over here in this job printing. People in this town need a lot of printing. So he said, nah, I'm a stick with it, said, you subsidize me a little bit now. He said, but one day this newspaper is gonna, it's gonna make more money than that job printing. I said, nah, you gotta be kidding (laughter). And sure enough, when the newspaper hit its stride, I closed the job printing department, shut it down, closed it down, yes, I did. And I said, the old man was right. Story_ID: 39796 Speaker 1: So what was responsible for the newspaper hitting its stride? I mean how did it hit its stride? What happened? Speaker 2: Well, one thing was the Civil Rights Movement. And the people got, the people started reading more 'cause, remember the "V" for Victory and the three (unclear) that the "Pittsburgh Courier" started and all that. And that thing was working. People were buying the papers. The "Pittsburgh Courier" actually was selling more papers in Miami than the "Miami Times" was one time. And so I said, well, this shouldn't be. We, this is our paper, and they're outselling us? I said-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the "Double V" campaign and all that, yeah, the Double V, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had campaigns. And then they had Jackie Robinson and Joe Louis and all that, you know, all that stuff that we couldn't get. And they were doing quite well. And I said, so let's just change up a little bit and sort of add some features. And we made a few changes in it, and it started picking up, circulation got better, advertising got better. We started making that money. Speaker 1: Now, who is--were the major advertisers the black business community there in Overtown or what? Speaker 2: No, well, no, it was--well, the business would be in Overtown, but they were white owned, like the biggest account I had was with a grocery store. They had a page in color every week. And-- Speaker 1: Now, which one was that? Do you remember? Speaker 2: A--his name was A. G. Grocery, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --funny thing, when the riots happened in 1980s, early '80's [1980s], that was where, one of the main issues came up, one of the arguments came up in this--in my (unclear) store, A.G., my biggest account. And I had to, I came out and told it like it was in the paper, although it didn't, the man didn't like it (laughter). But later on, they closed him down because they burned his place down, you know. He got, he got hot one, got mad and lost his temper and started calling people "Nigger" and all that. And I knew that wouldn't make it. And the place got burned down. Story_ID: 39797 Speaker 1: So, okay, so did you have a plan to, you know, take back the city from the "Pittsburgh Courier"? Speaker 2: Well, I just, I guess we, just the paper, we just sold them better. We, it just, I guess we started a--I don't know what you can say directly did it, but we caught fire. One thing was that I joined the Movement. I started paying more attention to the newspaper because the president of the NAACP came to me and told me, said, we need your help. We need this paper, and they would, the guy was telling me, said, well, my daddy wasn't militant enough and he thought I should push him a little bit more. I said, well, no, I don't wanna, I don't wanna, want my daddy to feel that, you know--I don't want him to feel that I'm too rough, and he's not too, you know. I said, I just--I'm a little uncomfortable doing that. I said, but I see what you mean 'cause, because I started writing some of the heavy stuff myself, attacking people. And he didn't like to attack anybody, see. But if you were wrong, you had to be attacked, see. And the same stores that were boycotting us downtown, we had to jump on 'em and tell the people, don't buy from 'em and all that, and (unclear) started boycotting and all those things like that. Speaker 1: Was there a first boycott that--what was your first boycott here in Miami? Speaker 2: Oh, shit, we had so many. Speaker 1: Do you remember the first one? Speaker 2: Well, we picked out the biggest and most successful department store downtown which was called Burdines's at the time. It's now Macy's today. But this store was called Burdines's. And they used to serve lunch. And the black ministers got together and started going to lunch there and being refused. And they did a sit-in down there. And sooner or later, the publicity got so bad that they won, won the boycott and integrated the place. Well, you had--that was just one thing. Then you had to move some place else. Story_ID: 39798 Speaker 1: In Opa-locka, okay, all right. Okay, now, there's a, so the--what happened with the beaches? How did the--so you met with the Dade County Commission in-- Speaker 2: We asked for a meeting at the beaches. And we set up, they set up the meeting and said they'd be there, and so we had a meeting, the meeting was set for 10:00 o'clock. We had a meeting at the NAACP office at 7:00, the group who was going down there. And we were planning our strategy, and by the time we got down there, they, they had policemen, plenty policemen around there. But they were just, they didn't know what to expect. And they were just around the neighborhood and around there. And so, but we had to walk from the parking lot to like up a gauntlet of police to get to the meeting (laughter). Oh, they--no, but we knew nothing was gonna happen with all the commissions there 'cause nobody's gonna throw a stone when everybody's looking, see. So we went, we walked down there, and went into the meeting. And we had found that there was no written law that says black people couldn't use county facility. But it was just the law of the land that you know you, like the white beach, you know (unclear) not gonna go there. And through the years they built this one beach, and they, we made ourselves comfortable with that, although we had 27 others that were really open to us. But nobody wanted to get beat up, 'cause you go there, they call the police. And they put you in jail and say you're disturbing the peace and that's all, and that's it. And nobody hear anymore about it. So this morning, we walked into the County Commission's meeting, and we said, we have a grievance we'd like to discuss with you. And they said, very good. What have you got to say? So we laid it out to 'em, and said, well, you've restricted us to one beach, which you have 28 of 'em in this county. And although the beach we have is pretty, it's not as nice as this one. We have here or any of the others. And we want to know why we are restricted just to one beach which is not a good one. And so, we're waiting on them to reply to us--no, we didn't finish. We didn't stop there. We waited on them. They didn't say anything. We say we are responsible citizens, all of us. None of us have been arrested for anything in this town. We're all taxpayers, and we all freeholders. You know what a freeholder is? In the old days, if you didn't own land, there are certain issues you couldn't vote for at the time of the elections, see. So they, they--we might go back to that. Hell, if you ain't got no damn land, you don't own no land, what the hell you gonna tell us whether we should tax it not? You ain't paying anything anyhow, you know, like (laughter). But anyhow, that's the way it was. So, but so, we said, we came down here--we have found that there's nothing on the books to show that, to say that we can't do it. So we come to use this beach, and we wanna know why we can't. And they wouldn't say a word. That was their strategy, you know. They told everybody, let 'em talk, and when they get through, just say "thank you, very much". And that's exactly what they did. So we went on, after we made our case, we said, well, you all have not said anything, so we don't know if you go along with it or if you don't. But we're gonna use this beach today, says, it's 10 minutes after 10:00 now. It took 10 minutes to make our presentation. That's all. They didn't say a word, and said, we're coming back at 2:00 o'clock and if you wanna put us in jail or beat us up, or have your hoodlums attack us, whatever it is, we're ready to defend--not to defend ourselves, but we're gonna make, we're gonna come here peacefully and use this beach. And then you're--okay. (Unclear). We must have had about 12 people in the meeting. By the time we got ready at 2:00 o'clock, it come down to about six (laughter) because, you know, some of the brothers (laughter), man, they gotta go to work (laughter). Anyhow, Gibson, myself, Oscar Range, and about six of us showed up. Now, Oscar Range and myself, put on our trunks under the, under our pants, and just had on our shirts and our slacks and our, you know, slippers like these. So when we got out there, we followed the car, got out. Gibson was with us, and we walked. And we heard a lot of noise coming from the clubhouse, not the club, the--what do you call the house where you change your clothes? Story_ID: 39799 Speaker 1: Bathhouse. Speaker 2: The bathhouse. They were just in there railing, they're banging on the wall (unclear), waiting, thinking we gonna have to come and change our clothes to go the thing, see. But we walked straight to the beach, and Range and myself pulled off our pants and our shirts and went and jumped in the water. And everybody, whites, all of 'em standing around looking and all of that. Some of the white people got out of, you know. Others didn't pay any damn attention to it. And so we're waiting on something to happen, and we must have stayed out there about 15 minutes. And nothing happened. So, okay, we came back, put on our pants and shoes. They're still in the house, raising all that hell, banging on the wall, raising all that hell. We just got back in our car and left. So I didn't put a thing in the paper that week about the thing. I didn't gloat over it. They were looking for something to, waiting on something. So, but we informed everybody that, by telephone, said, want you to go to the beaches, all of 'em. Don't go just to Virginia Beach, I mean don't just go to Virginia Beach. Go to the white beaches all over town and just, we're gonna see what happens. And we told the right people who, you know, who wouldn't, who would know how to act if they resisted something. But that next day when they showed up at all those places, nothing happened. Nobody said a word. From that day on, everybody's been using all the beaches in town. That's a nonviolent move that paid off without any bloodshed or anything like that, see. Story_ID: 39800 Speaker 1: Now, what's your analysis of that? I know we've talked to people in major cities in the South like Memphis and, you know, and Atlanta and there's a--in these major cities that depend on business and commerce. And they tend to crack when there's some pressure applied--at least during the Civil Rights days. Speaker 2: Well, here's what Thurgood [Marshall] impressed upon us. He said, do your homework. He said, the first thing you gotta do is look at the law 'cause a lot of times, he said, "There ain't no damn law" that says you can't go. He said, but it's tradition, and you just, you just figure you're gonna get in trouble, you know, but sometimes you have to invite it. You have to, you know, say, but do your homework. He said, and make sure you carry the right people, say if you carry a hoodlum down there, the first thing they gonna do is who--they're gonna look up his record and find out he been to jail (laughter). And they gonna write a story in the paper the next day (laughter) saying this man is a troublemaker 'cause he's been in jail, and he ain't nothing but trouble. And there he come here trying to change our ways. That was true. And so he said, do your homework, take the right people and make a presentation. That's right. And it worked for us. The same thing happened at the golf course. We didn't go out that Monday. We went out--it was either Wednesday or Thursday. And we went out and pro came up to us, "What you guys doing out here?" We said, we came to play golf. So I know the guy, I knew the guy 'cause, you know, he was a pro out there. He's (unclear) handlers. He said, "Guys, you know damn well you can't play no golf. This is, today is Thursday. What the hell you talking about?" I said, now, listen, Woody, we want you to tell us in plain words and why we cannot play golf today. So Woody say, all right, here's as plain as I can tell you. You guys cannot play golf today. Black golfers only play on Monday. And that's the way it is. That's all we needed. So we got our lawyer, right there with, (laughter) and we got our president of the NAACP. And we made our presentation. And we had the suit all ready. The next day we filed the suit, nothing else to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It had gone all the way to the Supreme Court, took us seven years, seven years. We filed the first one and got turned down in the local court. At first we started, you know, in the municipal court. And then we went to the State, the county court. Then we went to the State court. Then we went to the District Court. Then we gotta go to the next court, and we went to every damn one. And every one of 'em told us no, till we got to the Supreme Court, and they said, you cannot take a man's tax money and limit him to one day a week when anybody else can play any day. It was a simple decision...