 Story_ID: 202932 Speaker 1: Okay, so we'll begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer. And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. Today's date is Tuesday, October 12, 2004. And this interview is taking place in Petersburg, Virginia. Now, if you would, please, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it. Speaker 2: Daphne Etta Maxwell Reid, D-A-P-H-N-E, E-T-T-A, M-A-X-W-E-L-L, no hyphen, R-E-I-D. Speaker 1: Great, and the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: Date, oh, I was born July 13th, 1948, in Morrisania Hospital of the Bronx, New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay and your occupation please? Speaker 2: I have a lot of occupations: wife, mother, actress, studio person (laughter), owner, seamstress, grandma; all my occupations. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 202933 Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are like some People magazine-ish type questions, so if you could give us short answers to these. Would you please share with us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food is anything Italian. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring is my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: My favorite destination, so far, is Italy, but I'm still traveling around the world. And Vatulele [Island], near Fiji, is real high on the list, but I like Italy consistently. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one? Speaker 2: Yes, don't let the successes go to your head or the failures go to your heart. Story_ID: 202934 Speaker 1: All right, so, now, if you will, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Daphne] Maxwell Reid, let's begin talking about your mother, starting with her name, and where she was born, and where she grew up as a girl and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Alrighty, my mother's name was Rosalee Harris, and she became Rosalee Harris Maxwell marrying my father [Green Maxwel]. She was born and raised in Greenville, South Carolina, originally born, I guess, in Abbeville, South Carolina, which still exists, thank goodness. And she was born July 13th, 1924. And she went on to her glory on December 12th of 2003. Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like growing up as a girl in South Carolina? Speaker 2: My mother always shared stories about growing up in South Carolina, and she had a great childhood, albeit very poor (laughter), destitute. She was one of, I believe, eight brothers and sisters. She was somewhere near the bottom but not the youngest. She has one younger sister, my Aunt Mattie [ph.]. And her father left her mother [Eva Harris] when her second brother was born, I believe, and moved to Evanston, Illinois, and was never heard from since. So my grandmother took in laundry and also I understand had healing hands and would heal babies that were sick by caring for them and kind of ministering to them. And she was very poor, but raised very well-intentioned children. My mother was a little rebel growing up who always did things that she knew she should do but always had the compulsion to do (laughter). And the biggest--I guess, the most consistent story I hear is that she always used to eat green fruit. And my aunt, who is her younger sister, for some reason, took it upon herself to be the one to watch over my mother and say, "You know you're gonna get in trouble. Why do you do that?" She said my mother just needed some caring for. And my mother said, "'Cause I like it," (laughter), and she'd eat it, and she'd get a tummy ache, and she'd go on about her business (laughter). So, my mother was an independent soul. And I'm sure I got a lot of my independence from my mother. Story_ID: 202935 Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell]? Speaker 2: My mother was one of the most embracing women that I know. She accepted everyone at face value without judgment. She never judged a person from what they look like, where they came from, or how they carried themselves in the world. They were all just God's children to her. And she was very encompassing of all sorts of people and raised us kind of in that environment. There was always somebody new and different who were camped out at our house (laughter) who we were very involved with at church back when I was growing up. And the visiting ministers or the students would always be at our house. And they were from Chile, and they were from Kansas, and they were from all over the place. So, she was just a nonjudgmental, wonderful, always smiling, fun-loving woman. Story_ID: 202936 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father now, starting with his name and where he grew up as a boy. Speaker 2: My father's name was Green Maxwell, green like the color, no 'e' at the end. And he was one of three children, born in, I believe, Anderson [sic.], South Carolina--Andersonville, South Carolina, somewhere near Andersonville, near Columbia [South Carolina], on a farm. And his father [Alonzo Maxwell] was a farmer, and his mother [Ella Maxwell] was a farmer. And he had an idyllic young childhood. He told me about the pony that he had when he was six or seven years old and how much he loved his pony. But his father died when he was very young. And his mother married someone who had a lot of other children, and her lifestyle changed drastically. And my father probably didn't get over that (laughter). So he groused a lot about, "They took my pony away" (laughter) and seemed to have affected him. But he grew up on a farm, working hard. He was very light-skinned black man, so he could have passed but chose not to. He went, I know, one or two years to Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] after he graduated from high school and studied photography. And then he went into the [U.S.] Army and served in, I think, North Africa and Southern Italy during World War II [WWII] and was basically the driver and the file clerk for one of the, I don't know, commanding people. I'm really bad with Army categories. He had lots of pictures, black and white photos from World War II, of the regiment that he was in and the things that he was doing there. So he had quite a nice collection of that. And then he came back to the [United] States, and he was a limo driver for a while. And he tried the photography a little bit but ended up spending the majority of his life as a soda jerk at the then-called Whelan's Drug Stores [New York, New York]. And he made sandwiches and the best black and white malt that I ever had. And I used to drink them a lot during junior high school. And then after he retired from that, he went on to become a hospital accounting office person, I believe. And then he retired and spent the last years of his life in zen blissfulness. Story_ID: 202937 Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father [Green Maxwell]? Speaker 2: My father was a zen master. He was a peaceful man who spent his life, and according to him, said he was not a good conversationalist. So the way that he would interact with people would be to tell them jokes. And my father told jokes from sun up to sun down. And it wasn't much you could ask my father that didn't have a joke attached to it. In seriousness or in humor, he found a way to express a joke. And he always rephrased them so that he would sneak up on us and tell us a joke he had told us a hundred times but with a new beginning. So he was shy but very warm. Speaker 1: And did your father ever share any stories with you about people he knew who passed or any stories about people passing? Speaker 2: My father told us about just losing people. He lost his oldest sister and basically, kind of almost raised his niece, Gladys [ph.], who is my eldest on his side, I believe, that's still living. And he used to call me Gladys all the time. He would get me and Gladys mixed up when he went to name us. But getting closer to the age he was when he was doing this, I can understand how he (laughter) could do that, 'cause I keep calling my husband [HistoryMaker Tim Reid] my son [Christopher Tubbs] and my son my husband. So it's, it's Alzheimer['s] beginnings or something or old-timers is what they call it. Speaker 1: And, and I'm sorry, I should have clarified. 'Cause you had said earlier that your father was light enough to pass. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, I was wondering if perhaps he knew, did he have siblings who passed, or did he have relatives-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --who passed, or did he know people in town [New York, New York] who-- Speaker 2: That kind of passed not-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --dead passed (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, I'm sorry, I should have clarified. I should have clarified. Did he-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --ever share any stories about people that he may have known who passed? Speaker 2: No, he didn't. He, he, for some reason, he never, he never thought of himself as being able to pass, although he clearly could have. His brothers were very brown-skinned but looked just like him. He didn't seem troubled by it. He didn't seem uncomfortable with it. He carried his head erect and was very proud of who he was. But in choosing not to pass, he chose the path of, of poverty, basically, and we grew up in the projects but with pride. We always had food on the table, always had wonderful clothes to wear 'cause my mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] could sew them. So, he was quite happy as a black man who happened to be wearing somebody else's face. Story_ID: 202938 Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents [Rosalee Harris Maxwell and Green Maxwell] met? Speaker 2: I believe my parents met, I understand the story as my mother was visiting her family in Greenville, South Carolina, and visiting her brothers, and running around town in her brother's car and came upon my father in his [U.S.] Army uniform standing on the corner in the, in Greenville. And her brother knew him from, I guess, training or something and said, "Oh, there's Green." And they got Green in the car, and they started kind of seeing each other while she was down there. She was visiting from her live-in job in New York. And he went back overseas, and they wrote each other. And she found out that he was engaged. He broke off his engagement with whoever that lady was (laughter), and when he came back to the [United] States they married. Speaker 1: And your father's name, Green-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is there a story behind that? Speaker 2: I wish I knew if there was a story behind Green. It was just, you know, the Shaniqua of his time, I guess (laughter). Speaker 1: And so when they married, your father then moved to New York? Speaker 2: Yes, the both moved to New York [New York] and lived on 148th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, I believe was their first apartment. My brother [Rodney Maxwell] was born there, and I believe they were still living there when I was born. But right after I was born, they got the good news that they had qualified for the public housing in Midtown Manhattan, the Amsterdam Houses [New York, New York], and that's where I grew up. Story_ID: 202939 Speaker 1: Can you kind of tell us a little bit about the community you grew up in? And just kind of describe your block for us, and describe it for us. Speaker 2: The projects [Amsterdam Houses, New York, New York] are red-brick buildings. The tall ones are in the front by Amsterdam Avenue, and the short ones are behind it, going down to West End Avenue, and-- Speaker 1: Which ones did you live in? Speaker 2: Initially, we lived in the tall one, the highest number, 90 Amsterdam Avenue, and we lived in Apartment 8A. And it had a great view of the Hudson River because we looked out over the short buildings, and we could see the river in New Jersey. And it had a community center. It was, it had beautiful flowers and, and trees planted around it. It was a beautiful neighborhood. It was a totally interracial neighborhood, being in New York [New York] in the, it was '48 [1948], '49 [1949] I think is when it opened. And we knew the neighbors. We had best friends who lived across the hall and grew up with their kids. We all dressed up to go to Sunday school and church that was about three blocks away. There was a little grocery store and a five and dime store across the street. And down the block there were live chickens, and you'd go point out your chicken and have it killed. And it was smelly little store (laughter). And those are some of the memories. We lived about eight blocks from Central Park [New York, New York], so Central Park was another playground to us. And I remember going over to the merry-go-round, and to the lake, and the skating rink, and you would not know, growing up the way I did, that we were poor. But we were, and it just didn't seem to matter. There was a great sense of pride in the community. And there were fundraisers in the community. I remember bake sales and big carnivals that we'd have and take up some of the blocks in the middle of the projects, would just be booths of a fun carnival-like things to do. And there were playgrounds with barrels. I don't know of the significance of this thing, but there were barrels that were about six feet in diameter that were made of concrete. And you crawl through 'em, and you come out the other side. I have no idea what the barrels were in play land there, but that was one of the things that was in the playground, and big sand boxes, where my brother promptly got ringworm, and swings, lots of swing sets. So one of my favorite things was going to the swings. Story_ID: 202940 Speaker 1: Let's back up a little bit. One thing we didn't talk about were your grandparents. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And let's begin with your maternal grandparents. Did you know them well? Did you spend a lot time with them? Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandparents very well. I never knew my grandfather-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --on my mother's [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] side-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because he moved away to Evanston [Illinois]. I tried to find him when I went to school [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] in Evanston, but I never did locate him. My grandmother died when I was three. So what I remember of her is visiting her and me being a very short person, looking way up as we're kind of helping grandma walk. I believe she died of cancer. And that's all I remember of my grandmother. I, I have pictures of her, and I know she was very beloved by my father [Green Maxwell] and my mother too. She was probably close to my mother like I was to my mother. And-- Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Eva [Harris], and my dad called her Ms. Eva. And Eva Harris liked jewelry. So I have pictures of my grandmother. I have one picture I remember vividly of her sitting in the park, in Central Park [New York, New York], on a rock. And she was dressed to the nines in her hat, her earrings, her necklace, a brooch, a neck--all sorts of jewelry. She just loved jewelry, and my mother inherited that (laughter). So, she, my mother, always wore matching earrings and necklaces with bracelets and the brooch, and she was always decked out to the nines. And I was able to capture her jewelry box when she passed, so I really have lots of memories there. Speaker 1: Did you inherit that as well? Speaker 2: I like to have the jewelry around. I just can't wear a lot of it. I can wear a necklace and a pair of earrings, and it's gotta stop there. I have one ring that I wear. I got lots of rings, but I wear one ring, and my mother wore, like, six or seven rings on her fingers up until the day she died. Speaker 1: And what about your paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: My paternal grandparents I knew not at all, and it was Ella [Maxwell] and Alonzo Maxwell. And I know that Alonzo was born of Scottish and Indian [Native American] blood. I don't know how, whether he was a quarter or a half, but he was a very handsome man. And I've never met either one of them. Story_ID: 202941 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I have glimpses of my childhood as a very, as about a three-year old, but they're only supported by photos. I don't have a stream of thought. I think my streams of thought came when I was about eight or nine years old, and I can remember consistently things that happened over time. But as a three-year-old, I remember being very independent and wanting to do things myself and always wanting my doll to have the same dress that I had on. So, as my mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] made a dress for me, she had to make one for my doll. And I had one little doll called Amosandra [ph.], who was my favorite little down. And it was a little brown doll that was made out of soft rubber, and that's the one I used to dress all the time. She had articulating legs and arms and a big round head (laughter), no hair on it; the hair was painted on it. And I just loved Amosandra. And I remember being crushed coming home from my first year in college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. And Amosandra had been up in a closet and had dried out, and her head was smashed in. And I had to throw Amosandra away, and that really broke my heart (laughter). And that's the only kind of toy I remember from being a young child. Speaker 1: So, you said your mother would make a lot of your clothes, and-- Speaker 2: She made all of our clothes and hers. Speaker 1: And can you kind of, you know, just tell us a little bit about some of your favorites and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I'm a clothes horse. You know I. My mom made me little dresses. I remember a little green dress that had an overlay kind of apron thing to it, and I just loved that dress. And I remember it because Amosandra wore that one too. And sometimes she would make us mother-daughter outfits. And I remember a, one that was red and white, and it had something sheer over the skirt, and I just thought I was a princess in that dress. So, I did braids, and I wore bows and had--I just felt like a pretty little girl the whole time I was growing up. So I grew up as a teenager wanting to be a pretty little girl, too. Speaker 1: So you were a girlie girl? Speaker 2: I was a girlie, girlie girl. I cooked, and I sewed, and I was a girlie girl. And then I'd get down on the floor and, and shoot caps with the guys and mess up my knees. And I loved to roller skate. But roller skating in the projects was a treacherous thing because it was concrete, and we were on metal wheels. And oh, I have the knees to show what a wonderful childhood I had (laughter). Story_ID: 202942 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house growing up and what special occasions were like? Speaker 2: Birthdays were the most special occasion that we had. Everybody had a specific cake that it was their favorite that my mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] would make for our birthdays. And mine, of course, was chocolate with chocolate with chocolate (laughter). And I remember my mother's was a yellow cake with pineapple in between and coconut, and white frosting with coconut on it, and she just loved that cake. And I would look forward to January 'cause we were gonna have a coconut cake. My dad's [Green Maxwell] favorite was a pound cake, so for his birthday he'd have pound cake. I disregarded my brothers [Rodney Maxwell and Kenneth Maxwell] totally, so I don't remember what their birthdays (laughter) were like. But we had birthday celebrations, even if it were five or six people. You'd get to bring your best friend. And we'd sit around and have dinner, and then we'd have a birthday party and simple little birthday party, just joyous. We spent a lot of time around the kitchen table. We waited for my father to come home. My mother had a meal prepared. We sat down and we ate; we talked; we laughed; we exchanged ideas. And other occasions were Thanksgivings, which were wonderful. I was, I remember being so happy when I could graduate from the kids' table to the grownup table. My mom, and aunt, and usually her brother and his wife and kids would join us for Thanksgiving as well as all of our stray cousins who lived with us from time to time. And we had turkey, and we had sweet potato souffle, and stuffing. And she always made green beans, and my mother always burned green beans. I don't know why, but she did. It was a thing, and she'd, she'd laugh about it. After a while, she says, "I'm--everybody better pay attention. I'm making green beans." Somebody had to stop her from burning them. And my mother was a meticulous cook. She was anal retentive, so she would cut things very precisely. I said, "Mom, I could have had two meals made by the time you get through doing this." And she said, "I'm enjoying myself. Leave me alone," (laughter). And she would meticulously do dinner, and we'd just sit in anticipation. She'd have my father cutting up apples to keep him out of the way. And he'd be making Waldorf salad. And my brother, when he got old enough, would make the ambrosia that my mother made with orange sections and coconut, and ah, it was good; it was juicy and good. And I'd say, "Are you gonna make the ambrosia again?" Even when I grew up, by, my brother--"Are you coming for Thanksgiving? You gotta make the ambrosia." So (laughter), those are-- Speaker 1: What was-- Speaker 2: --the kind of things. Speaker 1: --your favorite dish that your mother cooked? Speaker 2: Ah, I had so many that my mother cooked, loved the way she cooked. She used to make arroz con pollo that was really, really good, and, and her desserts were all wonderful. She'd create cakes and pies and things that were just extraordinarily different and good. She would never stick strictly to a recipe. She had a little twist to it, and it was great. And Christmas was fun at our house, 'cause we always had a tree, and there was a whole ceremony of decorating the tree, and, and the whole thought that you saw nothing under the tree until you woke up on Christmas morning. And it was always delightful. Even if it was just a box of Lincoln Logs, we just had a wonderful, wonderful Christmas. Story_ID: 202943 Speaker 1: Can you give us an idea of what daily life was like for you as a schoolgirl? So you'd wake up in the morning and then? Speaker 2: I'd wake up in the morning and usually have had clothes laid out the day before. We'd have a bowl of cereal for breakfast, sometime, mostly Cream of Wheat and Wheatena and good little hot cereals like that. And I'd walk to school up till the fourth grade and had very fun times going to school, went to school kids in my neighborhood. And then in the fourth, I think it was the fourth grade, I was accepted into some program that they started in New York called Special Progress Enrichment [SPE] program. So I had to get on the city bus and go up about twenty blocks to another school, and I enjoyed that, too. But we'd come home from school; you'd do your homework; you'd help mom [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] prepare the dinner; do a little cleaning or a little sewing. Maybe I think we watched television, maybe, from six to seven. It was just a short amount of time the television was on, so we watched it a little bit, but it wasn't something that we looked forward to doing. We would rather go out and play. So we would go out and be with our friends and skate or shoot little games on the ground with bottle caps, or do hopscotch, or jump rope, did a lot of double-dutch jumping, and just basically running around the projects, having a great time. We had a community center also in the projects [Amsterdam Houses, New York, New York], and they had sometimes Saturday things to do or summer things to do. We'd go sign up for community center in the summer and go to courses where you learn how to braid lanyard. And you learn how to make a rug by taking a spool of, an old wooden spool--the thread came on it--and put four nails in it, and then kind of, with a crochet hook, weaving some yarn until it came out the bottom of this long, fat little thing that you wound up into a little rug. I, I didn't get past the baby's rug. I mean, I care--it was a lot of work (laughter). But that was one of the things. We always did things with our hands. We'd do arts and crafts and paper mache and all sorts of things. And I had a cousin that lived with me named Becky [ph.], and she was the craft-meister. I vividly remember, and I don't know how we did it, but we took little straws one time for Christmas and made this huge three-dimensional star out of three-pointed stars. I'm sure it had something to do with Buckmon- Buckminster Fuller and his geodesic dome kind of thing, but we made this great star. And I was just amazed that she could follow the directions to do this, and we could accomplish it. But I did all sorts of crafts. I'd come and do sand painting. I'd get these little sand painting kits where you put--a black cording is the outline of, say, the matador. And then you'd put glue in where his hair is, and you put the little black stones in there and press 'em down. And you wait for it to dry, and then you put red stones in where his little jacket was. And you'd come with this beautiful stone painting when you got through--and paint by numbers. The kits that I like best had the, all the little tiny pots that had so many colors, 'cause I loved the multitude and range of color. So I developed a very keen color sense. And somebody'd said, "That's blue." I said, "Oh, no, no, no, that's periwinkle," (laughter). I was a real pain. Story_ID: 202944 Speaker 1: Can you give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself? Speaker 2: Alrighty, my eldest brother is Rodney McAllister Maxwell, McAllister being our, from my daddy's [Green Maxwell] side, old name. He was born in November 24th, of 1946, and I was second, July 13th, 1948. And then my youngest brother [Kenneth Maxwell] was born on October 23rd, of 1955. He was daddy's little gift (laughter) and my little trauma (laughter). Story_ID: 202945 Speaker 1: Tell us what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up [in New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Sabrett hot dogs that are sold on the street with grilled onions and sauerkraut is a smell that I grew up with. The smell of pound cake cooking is one that I grew up with, the sound of city buses, subway rattling, kids laughing in mass, a lot of weee! (laughter) from the playground, doo-wop singing, a cappella singing, happened everywhere, the sound of the Spanish language being spoken that were all around us. Those are the things that remind me of growing up. Speaker 1: What sights? Speaker 2: The projects [Amsterdam Houses, New York, New York], all the different places in the projects, watching the other side of Amsterdam Avenue get torn down and Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] rise in its place, the church where I grew up, which still stands--I still go back there every time I go to New York [New York]--the sight of tall buildings with light slashing through and landing on the ground, and chasing shadows, and, and the sight of the sun setting over the Hudson River from my window, watching storms happen over the river. That's what it means to me. Story_ID: 202946 Speaker 1: So, one thing I didn't ask you about that I, I'd like to is when did you learn to sew? When did you--I'm, I'm assuming that your mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] taught you how to sew. So when did you learn to sew, and what were some of the things that you really enjoyed making? Speaker 2: I remember being a very little girl. I must have been about four or five, and I had a little hand-crank sewing machine. And it would make a chain stitch, so I made doll clothes with that. And then I started making my own clothes when I was about nine. And I remember making skirts, and little simple dresses, and then graduating to making a shirt for my daddy [Green Maxwell]--I remember that shirt--and grew up just making all of my clothes, because we only wore skirts, and, and blouses, and dresses in those days (laughter), especially to school, where pants were not allowed. I'm that old (laughter). So, I always made all of my clothes. I don't remember shopping for anything but lightweight sweaters, and shoes, and purses, underwear and slips perhaps. But I made little pedal pushers when they were in style, and, and all the little blouses, and camp shirts that I needed and things, so. Speaker 1: And do you remember, was it a big deal when you guys went out to shop for fabric and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Whoa, I became a fabri-holic at a very young age. I'm in a fifty-step program, and it's not working. I used to love going fabric shopping with my mother initially, but then I forged out on my own. And the things that my hands liked to touch and feel and what I was drawn to were the expensive cuts of fabric. I liked silk, and I liked mohair, and wool, and cashmere. And my mother was buying cotton (laughter), and I wore lots of cotton. I'm sure I bought my share of cotton for play clothes and some things. But I loved the feel of a good wool, and I still have that addiction. Speaker 1: And so do you still, do you, do you have, like, tons of fabric that you haven't, you know, cut a pattern out of yet (laughter)? Speaker 2: I designed the furniture that I have in my sewing room. And this sewing room was first built in our house in Encino [Los Angeles, California]. And it has nine 16-inch-deep drawers that's just fabric. And I go through it every once and a while. It's like walking down memory lane. I still have fabric that I got when I was in [The Bronx] High School [of Science, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And there are certain pieces of fabric that I just can't bring myself to cut because I know they'll become something that I'll get tired of and want to move on. And if they remain flat fabric, I can keep my memory of them. I'll get over that, I'm sure (laughter), but I love fabric. And I collect some old fabric when my aunt--when my cousin, Becky [ph.], died she had a lot of antique fabrics from the antique '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], things like some cotton batiste that had eyelid lace on the bottom and things like that. And there were just long 22-inch-wide pieces, that what do you do with something like that? And it came in very handy when my granddaughter was born because I made her christening gown from that. And I put little seed pearls on it. And I'm hoping that my granddaughter will hand this down to the next grandchild to be christened in. She finally got christened a couple of weeks ago. Story_ID: 202947 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about elementary school. Do you remember the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: The elementary schools in New York [New York] had numbers. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And the first one was P.S. 94 [New York, New York]. And I remember my first grade teacher, Ms. Balenson [ph.]. And she was an older white woman who had the habit of pinching the cheeks of people that she liked. And I found it quite annoying. Then I remember going to P.S. 191 [Amsterdam School, New York, New York]. I think that was the second and third grade. And then I don't remember any teachers there, but I remember P.S. 191. It's still standing on 60th Street, between Amsterdam [Avenue] and, and West End Avenue [New York, New York]. And then I got on the bus and went to P.S. 87 [William Sherman School, New York, New York] for fourth, fifth, and sixth grade. Speaker 1: This is when you were in the-- Speaker 2: In the Special Progress Enrichment [SPE] program. And then after the sixth grade, you go to junior high school. And I went to junior high school 17 [LaSalle Junior High School 17, New York, New York], which was on 47th Street and Broadway. We'd just had our fortieth reunion or something of my junior high school, 'cause we stayed together for three years, another special class that was created. I think we did three years in two. We did seventh and eighth grade together and then ninth grade. And I remember my ninth grade math teacher, Ms. Winston [ph.]. And I remember being angry with her at the end of the year because she always used to let me run errands and things during class, and I never learned algebra. So (laughter), and I remember my eighth grade English teacher, whose name was Bob Simon. And his son was the [Paul] Simon of Simon and Garfunkel. And I remember him coming to class one day and playing the standup bass and singing for us. It was before Simon and Garfunkel got big, so I found that a treat. And my junior high school, another English teacher but guidance counselor, Murray Bronstein [ph.], who is still with us. And we celebrated at his house when we had our reunion last year. And he was, for some reason, he took this class and inspired us to do all sorts of things. He showed us something that I didn't even remember, a kind of magazine newspaper that we had made. And each of us had written stories, and we'd written haiku and done interviews and going: wow, she was literate (laughter). And it brought back a lot of memories. And it was good seeing all my--well, I think the majority of my classmates showed up, and they looked exactly like they did when they were in junior high school (laughter), which was very funny to me. Story_ID: 202948 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Let's go back to elementary school-- Speaker 1: Elementary, um-hm. Speaker 2: --for a quick second, and let me ask you what kind of student were you in elementary school? Speaker 1: I was a very obedient, disciplined, and smart young woman, so I always did well in school. Speaker 2: And what were some of your favorite subjects during elementary school? Speaker 1: --remember in elementary school. Speaker 2: Or your favorite subjects in elementary-- Speaker 1: My fave-- Speaker 2: --school? Speaker 1: I guess it would be the--English. I don't know whether they were subjected like that. I liked geography 'cause we got to do projects of pick a country and say what their, what their import, their export is, tell about the population, what is typography of the land. And, and remember searching fervently for cocoa beans 'cause I was doing something in South America. I remember memorizing things. We used to memorize a lot of things, and I remember I, I memorized the Gettysburg Address and had to write it. And I got it all right, and I was so proud. Things like that I remember. Speaker 2: And during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations? If so, what were they? Speaker 1: In elementary school, I don't know that I wanted to be something. I wanted to see things. My aunt had traveled all over the world, and I wanted to travel. I knew I wanted to go to all these countries that I was hearing about, writing about, reading about. I wanted to know about other cultures. For some reason, I also wanted to know about other religions. And I remember going to Jewish synagogues for Seder holidays and different holidays. Friends that I was in school with, I would go to their service. And I would go to a Catholic church because a friend of mine was Catholic, and I wanted to see well, what is that about. I was a curious little girl. I remember going a lot to libraries and concert halls. We listened to a lot of, of classical music, went to Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], went to, when it got built, the [New York] Philharmonic hall [David Geffen Hall, New York, New York], and the New York [New York] theatre, and the, the zoos, the museums, the planetariums. We were always going somewhere. And with our church group, we were going on longer trips. We'd go to camps and things. And we'd go up to Rhode Island where the minister had a summer home, and we'd go fishing. And I just remember being very, very busy and that television was not a big part of (laughter) what our lives entailed--putting together jigsaw puzzles, babysitting. I did a lot of babysitting. And when I did babysit, I was mostly on the phone with my boyfriend, so (laughter). Story_ID: 202949 Speaker 1: You had mentioned church and your church group. What was the name of your church that you attended growing up, and what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: I went to the Good Shepherd-Faith Presbyterian Church [New York, New York]. It was an interracial Presbyterian church in Manhattan [New York, New York], and the ministers were white, but for some reason, it didn't make any difference. We had all sorts of culture there, and we did a lot of activities. I did the youth choir, just because all the kids just, that's what you do. You go, you sing on the choir. You go to church school, to Bible school. When you get old enough you teach Bible school. The trips were what I liked the best. We were always going somewhere in somebody's station wagon and singing songs. And I remember a youth group that we had probably junior high school time, where we did all the songs from 'West Side Story,' and just had a ball rehearsing that, and having fun. I just remember having fun at that church. Story_ID: 202950 Speaker 1: So let's move a little down to--actually, when you started going to a different school when you were in the program [Special Progress Enrichment program (SPE)] in the fourth grade [P.S. 87 William Sherman School, New York, New York], what was that like for you? Did any of your friends from your neighborhood, did they go to the same school? Speaker 2: There was only one person who was from my neighborhood who went to that school. His name was Alton Johnson, and he was in the same class I was in from the first grade all the way through [The Bronx] High School [of Science, New York, New York]. We should have been an item, but we never were. I guess we were (laughter) in class too much together, knew too, knew each other too well, but we were never an item. But Alton Johnson, I admired that he persisted. Sometimes he struggled a little bit, but he persisted. And otherwise-- Speaker 1: Were you getting any grief from kids back in the neighborhood about going to a different school? Speaker 2: No, no, we--it's like everybody got shipped off in different directions. There were all sorts of experimental programs that they were doing in New York [New York] at the time, so there were all different groups going hither. It was all over the place. Story_ID: 202951 Speaker 1: In [LaSalle] Junior High School [17, New York, New York], what were some of your favorite subjects in junior high school? Speaker 2: In junior high school, I remember vividly that Bob Simon's English class was one of my favorites because we were structuring sentences. We would break down sentences into specific structures, so we knew what a noun, and a verb, and an adverb, and an adjective was and how a preposition worked, da, da. And I just found that fascinating. I have no idea why, probably the analytical mind that I have. I loved my Spanish classes, which I started in fourth grade. One of the nice things about this progressive school is that they gave you additional things. And I remember vividly Spanish class and really enjoying Spanish class. And science, I liked science in junior high school. And Mr. Shackter [ph.], I think his name was, always made it interesting. Speaker 1: And who was influencing you around the junior high school years? Who were you being most influenced by? Speaker 2: I think I was being most influenced by my teachers. They were mostly the mentors, Murray Bronstein [ph.] for sure was a big force in my development of self-confidence. My mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] definitely was a strong mentor of my self-confidence. My cousin, Becky [ph.], was my craft and skills mentor. There was a woman named Gwen Johnson [Gwendolyn Johnson Acsadi], who I don't know if she knows what influence she had on me, but she did, because she used to work at the UN [United Nations]. She was in the population section. I don't know what she did. She was a tall black woman who I, I've never seen a woman walk with such pride. She had to be 5'9". Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And she loved fabric. And she, for some reason, she used to get fabrics that were the end bolts of designer goods and bring them over to my mother. And I was just fascinated with her being able to get these wonderful fabrics of these designers that were doing these wonderful things and--(unclear)--this is the same fabric (laughter). And she always used to encourage me to do cotillion stuff. Speaker 1: Did you like that? Speaker 2: Never did it, couldn't fathom it. I said, "You want me to come out, of what?" (Laughter) "I'm not in anything. What are you talking about?" I knew nothing about society. And I didn't want to go places where I had to sit, and wear gloves, and be demure. I was not the demure type. I'm going, I don't have time for all that prissy stuff, no. So I didn't get that girlie, but she was a big influence on me. And now she's a novelist. She's writing all these romance novels under a different name, so I don't know, I can't remember what her name is. But I, she just keeps popping up. I'm going, "Ah, that's Gwen's book," (laughter). Story_ID: 202952 Speaker 1: And what type of young lady were you starting to develop? And were you still very obedient? And what kind of young lady were you becoming? Speaker 2: I was a very obedient young lady. My father [Green Maxwell] was very strict and had high expectations that he measured (laughter). Speaker 1: He didn't just have 'em. He measured them. Speaker 2: No, he measured 'em and says, "And you will." And I didn't find anything too wrong with that. I'd do small rebellions but nothing on the grand scale. I was miss prissy, you know, kiss a boy and run and that kind of stuff, totally sexually inactive (laughter)--(unclear)--kind of uhhh! So, I was a prissy little goody two-shoes little girl. But I had little rebellions that, that I did in, sometimes in fashion, or in talking on the telephone, or in thought patterns, but-- Speaker 1: Never really acted on 'em. Speaker 2: I never acted on 'em. We, my parents did drink during, I mean the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s]; they'd have their cocktails. And they were of the mind that a young child having a little nip of something was no big deal. If you were sick, she had a bottle of rye in the cabinet, and she would put it in tea or milk or something, and it would cure an upset stomach or whatever. And when we got to be fifteen or sixteen years old, and we were going to be going out to clubs and things, they said, "You'd better know what you can handle," so they'd let us have a drink at home. And we would have something like a rum and coke or something like that. So we knew how to not get drunk when we were out, where we were going, 'cause we knew what liquor did to us. And we'd sit around in the family and laugh and just have a social occasion. Maybe once a month or something it would come up. But I think back on it, and I'm going, we're, we're very different now (laughter) than we were then. But I do remember when my son [Christopher Tubbs] was born. If he had trouble sleeping, a little brandy in his milk, and he went to sleep (laughter). Speaker 1: Cures it all, huh (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 202953 Speaker 1: So, what high school did you attend? Speaker 2: I took a test to go to high school. In New York [New York], there are specialized high schools. And I really wanted to go to Fashion Industries High School [sic. High School of Fashion Industries, New York, New York], and all my junior high [LaSalle Junior High School 17, New York, New York] mentors would not let me. They said, "You're gonna use your brain. You're not--you can always sew, so don't do that now. Take the test for Hunter [College] High School [New York, New York] and for [The] Bronx [High School of] Science [New York, New York] and for Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, New York, New York]." And I took the test for Hunter High School, and I didn't get in. And I was relieved because it was an all-girls high school, and I really wasn't into that. So I took the test for The Bronx High School of Science, and I got in there. And I said, oh, I guess I'm going to The Bronx High School of Science, so that's where I went. Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there? Speaker 2: I felt like I was going from one world of reality to this very ethereal world of brainiacs (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause you didn't consider yourself a brainiac, huh? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, I just happened to be smart. I could catch on quickly to things, but I never equated that with being intelligent. I just was smart and smart ass too, but I was really smart. And I went to the Bronx Science, and I tried to be a regular person at Bronx Science, and I think I succeeded. I enjoyed my biology classes and microbiology. I --Mrs. Green [ph.] was my favorite teacher there and fell in love with geometry and mechanical drawing. We had mechanical drafting class. It was a requirement, but I absolutely loved figuring out three dimensions, and that's why I probably loved geometry. When I got to trigonometry, it was okay, but geometry was my favorite because it was dimensional. And I, I guess I, I visualized dimensionally rather than on a flat plane. I can't draw a lick. But if it's something in three dimensions, I can conceptualize it and create it, so. Speaker 1: And I think I had read somewhere where you said you felt a little isolated when you were in high school. Where did those feelings come from? Speaker 2: I felt a little isolated because I had to travel so far from my neighborhood to go to school, and I went to school with people who I have never seen after school. So my high school experience was not like everybody's high school experience, where you have the neighborhood coming together, and you go to the prom, and you're--everybody is one big happy community group. I went to class with these kids and never saw 'em again. So, I went to my twentieth reunion, and there might have been two people there who I vaguely remembered. And I really couldn't pinpoint them anywhere but in class, 'cause we didn't have any experiences together. I had one or two friends, a girl a rode the train with and spent most of my high school kind of with whose name was Mona Covington [ph.]. And I guess she's, she just had a very different personality from me. She was very quiet and shy and lived in a very depressing situation, I think because she had much older parents than I did. So her whole demeanor was different from mine, but we had some wild times together (laughter). Speaker 1: You brought her out the little bit, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: She was doing some things that I wasn't doing. I'm going, hmm, this is extreme. And then there was a young man named Glenn de Chabert, who was on the basketball team at Bronx Science, which meant nothing, because we never won anything. We had the championship chess team, but basketball, no. We got creamed all the time. But Glenn de Chabert was my little black rebel. There weren't very many black folks up there, maybe about twenty of us. And he was my little militant buddy, so we had a good time after school for the, for an hour after school before we hopped on a train and went off in different directions. But, I think he became a lawyer in time. And then probably about ten or fifteen years ago he died suddenly, and I got the word from somebody that Glenn had died. Story_ID: 202954 Speaker 1: Did you start developing--what were some of your thoughts in high school [The Bronx High School of Science New York, New York] about what I'll be when I grow up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I haven't decided yet. Of course, I didn't have any idea then. Okay, I'm taking all these science courses. I should go and be a doctor. They call doctors in the middle of the night. I don't think I'm gon' appreciate that. No, I don't wanna do that. I still wanna sew. I wanna design. I want to, no. And I was in an acting group on Saturdays. It was a little group called the Group Theater Workshop [New York, New York], and it was run by [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks and [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer was one of our mentors. And Doug Turner Ward [HistoryMaker Douglas Turner Ward] was one of the writers in the program. And Antonio Fargas was there. And who else was there? Oh, lots of folks that (laughter) went on to great careers. But we did this little after--a Saturday thing. And we would do workshops and take these workshops on the road to the different communities. It was sort of supported a little bit by Joe Papp's [Joseph Papp] Shakespeare in the Park. It was his public service kind of thing that he did. So we had a little truck that the stage would fold out of the sides of the truck. And we'd do a performance in playgrounds that we'd tour around the city. And I remember developing little group songs and things that we were doing, and doing little monologues, and doing improvisation and things like that. So, I had that going on on the weekends, and so I thought, well, I could be an actress. And I'd look around, and there weren't very many black actresses. I'm going, that doesn't seem like a way to eat, so that's not what I want to do. I used to sing in the all-city junior high school chorus. And we sang at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], and we made records, and I used to really, really love that. I loved choral singing. And somehow I can meld my iffy voice into a big group and have a good time (laughter). And I also met my first love there, so I really liked it. So, no, I, I thought--I had no idea what I wanted to be when I grew up. So I thought, okay, I'll be a teacher. I'll teach Spanish. I like Spanish. And, but I, I wanna get married, and I wanna have a family, and I wanna raise children. But I like doing this too, so, no, I really didn't know. And I went away to college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] thinking I was gonna be a Spanish teacher, and it lasted one whole quarter (laughter). Story_ID: 202955 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [The Bronx High School of ScienceNew York, New York], what were some of your thoughts about college? Speaker 2: I knew that I was supposed to go to college. It wasn't a thought where, oh God, I hope I can get in. I never thought about, oh, can I afford to do this? New York was full of colleges. I could have gone to any college. My thoughts were more like, I wonder what city I'll go to to go to college. It was more free-wheeling than that. I didn't know much about what to expect at college. I just thought it was an extension of high school and just another degree that you get so that you would be accredited to do whatever you wanted to do. In high school my brother [Rodney McAllister Maxwell], who was two years ahead of me, went off to Northeastern University in Boston [Massachusetts]. And we went to visit him one or two times, and I didn't like the environment, so I said, I'm not coming up here to school (laughter). I knew I wanted to get out of the city [New York, New York] because I wanted my independence. I wanted to be away from home. And in our high school, we had a graduating class of 948 students, the year that I was-- Speaker 1: The graduating class? Speaker 2: The graduating class was 948 students. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And I was the senior class president. I, Glenn de Chabert and I had roughed up a couple of people to make them vote. But, I remember that 947 students went to college. And Alton Johnson went to the [U.S.] Marines. And-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --our guidance counseling department said you can apply to three colleges. That's all we can handle (laughter). So pick two colleges that you want to go to and a state school, because you know you can get into a state school. So there were recruiters back then. It was in the mid-'60s [1960s], and there was a big push to integrate a lot of colleges. So there was a recruiter who was looking for black students, I found out, to go to Northwestern University in Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And these were the best and the brightest, too, at-- Speaker 2: They, that's where they thought they were-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --coming, to Bronx-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --Science to get the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --best and the brightest. Yeah, we were the, the merit scholarship winners and the academics. It was one of the top four high schools in the country at the time. So, I was just [HistoryMaker] Daphne [Maxwell Reid] in, in high school. I didn't, still didn't think all this intelligence or anything. I just, I lived a wonderful life. I had lots of opportunities, lots of options, and I was having a great time. So I looked at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts], and I applied there. And Northwestern gave me an application, and I applied there. I'd got two letters the same day. And I remember that day, walking back from my job at Woolworth's on 58th Street, and I had these two letters in my hand. One was from Northwestern and one was from Brandeis. And Northwestern was giving me a scholarship, and Brandeis was giving me a scholarship. And the Brandeis scholarship was a little bit bigger (laughter). I said but Max is up there in Boston. I don't wanna go to Boston. I'm going to Chicago [Illinois]. I haven't been there. And that's how I chose my college. So I went to Northwestern and found out that I was one of eighteen black students at Northwestern out of a class of five thousand. Speaker 1: Only--wow. Speaker 2: And so my education began (laughter). Story_ID: 202956 Speaker 1: So, when you--actually, let me ask you this: do you think that sometimes you didn't really see yourself as a brainiac or like this highly intelligent person because you also had a very creative side? And oftentimes, you know, you're either, like, strictly intellectual or, you know, very creative. And so, and you really did both extremely well. So do you think that that was part of it? Speaker 2: I knew I grew up knowing that I was special and that I had gifts, and I was always an individual. So I never considered myself a black woman, or an intelligent woman, or a creative woman. I was just [HistoryMaker] Daphne [Maxwell Reid], and it was all part of the package. So I never analyzed it. I never considered it. It was who I was when I looked in the mirror day to day. Didn't everybody? (Laughter) I mean, wasn't everybody? Oh, it's so sad that you don't know how to do that, but you have other things that you know how to do. So it--I never waited. And when I got to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], I was finally confronted with the fact that I'm not just Daphne. And I was walking into a dorm room my freshman year. And a white girl looked at me, and she said, "I'm not staying here with any niggers." And I looked around. I said, well, where are they? I had no idea she was talking to me, had no idea, going, what are you talking? And she looked me up and down and stormed out of the room. And I said, oh, white and oh, I don't wanna be here with you either (laughter), so I got a single room (laughter). I had a ball as a freshman. I was all by myself. Y'all do whatever you want. I'm going to class. Oh, that guy, I like him, and fell in love my freshman year with one of my summer counselors, who happened to be a senior the year I was a freshman, and turned out to be my first husband. Story_ID: 202995 Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit more about, so you get there [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. You have this experience early on. But what were your classes like, and what was it like, you know, walking on campus, going back and forth to your classes? And did you, did the other eighteen students, did you guys kind of-- Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: --(laughter) seek-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --each other out? Speaker 2: Yeah, the guys sought out the girls more than, you know, the girls sought out the guys. But yes, we had some little knit groups that would shift every once in a while as to who was doing what. But the eighteen students became thirty-six, and so we, we (laughter) gathered those forces together, and then there were a few grad [graduate] students that came on. And we would go sit at their knee and, and get revolutionary with them, and of course, there were always the football players and the basketballs, so. Speaker 1: Was it ever overwhelming, like, to, you know, all day not seeing anybody who looked like you? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't overwhelming because the community I grew up in was totally mixed. And the, from the fourth grade on, Alton [Johnson] and I were the only black students in the class. So being in an all-white situation was real normal to me. It, that's why I was kind of stunned when the poor little girl didn't wanna be anywhere near me. I said, oh, you don't know what you're missing. But I did, as I say, met my future husband on, in the summer of my freshman year, and so I hung out with him a lot (laughter). And I had a few girlfriends, but mostly I was working 'cause I was on a work scholarship. Story_ID: 202996 Speaker 1: What kind of work were you doing? Speaker 2: I would go down to Chicago [Illinois] and work with inner city youth sometimes, and other times I would go and assist in offices and things like that. But then, think toward the end of my freshman year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I went and auditioned for a commercial because somebody said, "Well, go down here to this dinner, and ah, read a"--I'm going, I don't know what I'm doing, you know. Go to this place. And I get to that place, and you fill out a little form. They say, "Okay, now sit here and act like you're feeding a baby." So I acted like I was feeding a baby, and, and I walked away (laughter), and then you go home. And they called me and said, "You've got this commercial. You need to go down and shoot this commercial." Okay, I don't know what to--go get paid for a day. So I went down and did this commercial and was feeding a little baby. And they had some guy behind the camera who had a bowl of some nasty cold/hot cereal. And he put it on a spoon and flick it on my head. He was supposed to hit me on my head. He'd hit me in my eye. He'd hit--and the first few times I was saying foul language (laughter) with--(unclear)--"No, no, no, you can't say that on the"--"Oh, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you are shooting this," (laughter). So finally, he got one good, and I reacted in a way that they could televise. And they said, "Okay, thank you very much," and that was it. It was a commercial for Kleenex towels. And then the commercial went national. And I, I don't know anything about commercials. So, I filled out my first join SAG [Screen Actors Guild] form, and I paid my little, I think it was $47 dollars to join SAG. They paid me about $250 dollars for the day, which I thought was a gold mine. It was just wonderful. Oh, I'd do that anytime. Speaker 1: 'Cause what year are we talking about? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: So that was good money-- Speaker 2: That was good money. Speaker 1: --for the day. Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful. I said gosh, I'll come down and do anybody's commercial. I didn't know anything about residuals. Story_ID: 202997 Speaker 1: They [Kleenex] started sending me checks. Speaker 2: Well, explain to us what residuals are. Speaker 1: A residual is, if you have a national commercial running, they pay you per cycle for--they're usually thirteen-week cycles. And for each cycle, if you are a principal on-camera character, you get a flat fee and for each market that it's shown in. And so if it's national, it's a bigger flat fee than if it's local or regional, and this was a national commercial. And they sent me checks for like twelve thousand dollars and nine hundred dollars. And these checks keep coming, and I'm going, holy cow! I like this. So with that, I registered with an agent down in Chicago [Illinois]. And they started sending me out on these little modeling jobs for Sears catalogs, and Montgomery Ward's catalogs, and the newspaper. And I was just a little junior model. And then I got a call from my junior high school [LaSalle Junior High School 17, New York, New York] mentor, Murray Bronstein [ph.]. And he said, "A friend of mine at Seventeen magazine is doing a piece on black college women, and they want to talk to you. I've submitted your picture and stuff to the magazine." So, okay, thanks, so we did this little article I think on what is black power or something like that. Yak, yak, I don't remember what it was about. But then I got a call from her saying we do an issue called Real Girls, and it's girls who have achieved something. And the January issue is real girls who have achieved something. And you come to New York [New York]. We bring you to New York, and we put you up in a hotel with these other girls. And we take you out on the town. And you go to a fancy hairdresser, and you get fancy clothes. And you model, and you're in the January issue. I said, okay, I can go home anytime, and so they flew me to New York but wouldn't let me go home. They put us up in the Waldorf Astoria [New York, New York]. And I remember vividly my roommate was the Betty Crocker Cook-Off winner. And next door was the baton twirling champion from Iowa. And they took us out to see 'Annie Get Your Gun.' (Laughter) And I went with Mary [Virginia] Martin or Ethel Merman or somebody. I'm going, not what I had in mind for a trip to New York. Speaker 2: You're like, I can show you guys a different side of New York (laughter). Speaker 1: "Can I go home?" "No, you have to be chaperoned." I said--(unclear)--"Can I go home?" "No, you have to be chaperoned." I said, "Okay, mom [Rosalee Harris Maxwell], meet met at the theater," (laughter). They had taken us to the hairdresser's. And my hair was not like their hair. So when he got through my hair, it was (laughter)--I said I can fix it if you'll let me go home. And they said, "No, have your mother meet us." And so my mother brought some hair products to the theater and gave 'em to me, and I fixed my hair. And the next day we shot, and I wore a yellow two-piece suit that was made by the McCall Pattern Company, which came full circle thirty years later--whole 'nother story--and got a full-page spread in my pigtails (laughter), in the January issue of Seventeen magazine in 1967. So then, I was discovered by Eileen Ford from that picture, and she registered me. So I used to fly from college [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] to New York to do little day jobs and do editorials, as they called them, for fifty dollars a day. Story_ID: 202998 Speaker 1: And what was it like working for the Ford [Modeling] Agency [Ford Models] during that time? Speaker 2: Eileen Ford was the big cheese in New York [New York] at the time. And she would put out--she had a mimeograph sheet that would have all of her girls listed with their height, their weight, and their eye color I think. And there was--had to be four pages of two columns of maybe, I'd say, twenty people on a page. And then there was a last page. It said, "Special Bookings." It was Ali MacGraw, and [HistoryMaker] Daphne Maxwell [Reid], (laughter) and I think maybe three other people. So they would bring us from out of town. When I first went to see her, after she had seen my picture in Seventeen, she asked me to come and see her, and she looked at me. And she pinched around on my body and said, "Ah, you need to lose about five pounds. And then we're gonna take some test shots, and then you'll do some pictures with," so and so and so, "and then, and then you come back and see me." Okay--(unclear)--and then after that, you really never see Eileen Ford again. I mean you get one of her bookers who calls you on the phone. But one of the nice people I met was Amy Green [ph.], and she sort of became my modeling mentor. And she would bring me in to do all these little editorial jobs. And she kept doing-- Speaker 1: What's an editorial job? Speaker 2: And editorial job is how you wear something of somebody's. They say, "Okay, this year it's pink fluff and plaid, and you're wearing the pink fluff and plaid." They don't identify you as a model. You're not a famous model. And you're just wearing what's hot that time. So, the new look is this kind of coloring, and the new hair look is this, and it's you. But you, you're not--you're just shot. You just get made up and shot, and you don't get written up, or it's no big deal. Supermodels hadn't happened at the time (laughter). There were some models who worked a lot, but they weren't called "supermodels." And so I was just a working stiff kind of model, and this I did while I was at school [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. So I would fly into New York in the morning and shoot and then fly back to Chicago [Illinois] that evening. And that's when you could fly on United Airlines for a student fare of twenty-one dollars roundtrip. Speaker 1: Wow! Speaker 2: So I would go make fifty dollars a day. They'd pay for ticket, and I'd go back to school. Speaker 1: Now with the Ford Agency, were you the only black model they had? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think there were two others. I don't remember whether [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' daughter [Jolie Jones Levine] was before me or after me. I think she's younger than I was. But I think there were one or two others and one very regal African-looking dark woman. And I vaguely remember there weren't very many. Story_ID: 202999 Speaker 1: Let's go back to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] for a second. Your sophomore year, homecoming queen, how did that come about? Speaker 2: I had done this picture in Seventeen my freshman year. So I was modeling in Chicago [Illinois], doing my little Sears things and taking test shots, which are, a photographer wants to impress some of the ad [advertising] agencies. So he uses some of the local models who need pictures to take different pictures in different settings and things and do different hairstyles, or different lighting or something. And they're called test shots, and you build your portfolio with these test shots. So I was doing test shooting with a couple of guys and had some pictures. And my roommate my sophomore year says, "I like that. Why don't you submit that for homecoming queen?" I said, "Oh, that'll be a kick, wouldn't it; it'd be so much fun." So I submitted the picture. Then I got called for an interview. And we had to go and stand in front of five people and talk about yourself. I'm not shy; I never been shy (laughter). So, I'm very comfortable standing there talking in front of people. So, that's all I thought about it. Well, there were five girls selected for the homecoming court, and they were to be announced at this big pep rally. So I'm going, oh, yeah, that pep rally thing is tonight. Come on, guys, let's go over to the pep rally. Let's see what's going on. We're standing way in the back, my little clique of sisters, laughing and going, oh, this is ridiculous, that homecoming stuff. And they called out four names. I said okay, guys, time to go home. And then they called my name. I said holy cow. I said ooh, hmm, okay. So my roommate said, "Okay, you're on the court, go, go play." So I'm standing there with the homecoming court, and they're gonna have an election. So they, the daily newspaper runs the pictures of the five people to vote for for homecoming queen. I have to go to work that day. I'm down in Chicago all day. I don't get to vote. I come back. I asked my boyfriend--no, he was gone. He had graduated already, so. I asked my roommates: "Guys, did you vote?" And they go, pssst, no, I didn't go over there. I said, oh, okay, well, I, ain't a snowball's chance in hell that I'm be homecoming queen. And since [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid]--I mean not Tim. See, wrong husband. Since Bob [ph.] was playing for the Wheeling Oil, the Wheeling Ironmen--they, they were the farm club for the Pittsburgh Steelers, they were having a game that weekend--I said, oh, maybe I get to go see Bob this weekend. Story_ID: 203000 Speaker 1: And this was the same weekend as homecoming, the homecoming game [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Homecoming weekend. So I'm planning to go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to see him [Reid's boyfriend] in one of his games. And they have, they announce the queen at a ceremony after a parade the night before homecoming football game. That's on a Friday. Thursday I'm informed that you have to have a white gown for this to wear on the float with the homecoming queen contestants. I only had a green gown from my high school prom, and I hadn't--so Thursday night I went to the store and whipped up (laughter), a white gown to wear for homecoming and got on the float, riding with these chicks who are just aglow, all the sorority girls, their little sora--they pass the little sorority house and raaaa! And I'm sittin' there going, okay, anybody, see anybody out there. Ain't nobody out there. Speaker 1: You're like, where are the black people? Speaker 2: Oh, they don't care. (Laughter) They could care less. I was out there on my own. So we get to the end of this little parade, and there's a gang of people there. I'm really not paying attention at this point. I'm going, okay, I can still make the flight if we get, get through this thing (laughter) here and get, get this over with. I can get there in the morning, and oh, that'll be cool. I can go in the morning. And the president of the university [James Roscoe Miller], a very shriveled up little old man, comes out. And they open the envelope, and they announce the winner. And I'm looking at this girl who I know won, and I'm looking at her. And she ain't moving. They have called my name, and I didn't even hear it. And they said "It's you." And I'm going, me? First thing I think, oh, now I gotta go to the football game. I can't go to Pittsburgh. Anyway, so I walk over to (laughter) the president who's standing there. And he hands me these roses, and there's a little crown of roses, a little halo. And he puts it on my hand, and he says I have to stand here and hold this while they take pictures. And then he turned around, and he walked away. I said, but I--everybody kind of wandered on off. And I said, "Okay, well, so what are we supposed to do next?" They said, "Well, you get back on that float thing. We're going over to Scott Hall, and we're gonna present you in front of the John Evans Society." I said, "Oh, they're not friendly people," (laughter). So they pile all of us five girls down into the basement underneath the stage. And three little white girls are comforting--a very distraught little white girl who is just devastated that she didn't win. I'm going, "Ladies, I'll give this to you. You want it? I, I got to, I need to be going out of town, and I can't do this. So if you want, I'll give it to." And they said "No, no." And so they're comforting this poor little girl. I said oh, geez, I'm stuck with this now. So we go up on stage. The court is presented. You hear a lot of "Hey," (clapping) and then: "here is your queen!" Ah, un, oh (slow clapping). I said, "Oh, nice to meet you, too," and I walked off the stage (laughter). I mean, it was like, what? So I said, oh, this is gonna be fun tomorrow (laughter). So I had to gather my forces. I called the girls up. I said "Okay, y'all," (laughter), "y'all going to the football game; you all gonna be with me tomorrow," (laughter), "'cause this is sad." So, get to the football, and my crew is there. I'm wearing my roommate's orange suit, Sandy Malone's [ph.] orange suit. It, it was wonderful 'cause it was colder than any outfit that I had. I get to the stands to wait, and a photographer from Jet magazine comes, and he takes my picture. Bam! I'm on the cover of Jet magazine. That made it for me. But I, I took all the pictures. They presented the homecoming cup at halftime. And they gave me this cup that never had anything written on it. It said, "Homecoming Queen 1967," but they never wrote my name on it or anything. So I sent it home to my mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] (laughter). And I get off the court, I mean off the field, and that was the end of being homecoming queen. Story_ID: 203001 Speaker 1: Did it hurt? Speaker 2: No, it didn't hurt until the end of the year when the yearbook came out, and being a model, I was vain. I expected to see some very nice pictures in there. I had one picture before the table of contents of the president [James Roscoe Miller] holding the crown over my head and me smiling. And my name wasn't in it. My name is not in the index. It's like the homecoming queen did not exist that year, and the year before it had been a five-page spread. So I went to the editor of the yearbook. And I said, "Excuse me, why didn't you include the homecoming queen stuff in the yearbook?" She said, "Oh, it wasn't important this year." Speaker 1: This year? Speaker 2: I said, "Okay, I'll remember that." So I did remember that, and it tore me from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. They couldn't make that up, so. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: When my son [Christopher Tubbs] was looking at colleges, he says, "I'm thinking about going to Northwestern." I said, "Think again," (laughter). And I've never done the alumni thing at Northwestern. They just really ticked me off a little too bad. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: And it seems petty at times, but it was accumulation of things. And I think that was just the, the topper. Speaker 1: And what was it like on campus? Did people recognize you, or-- Speaker 2: I tried to figure out how I won. Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: And I ran up against a couple of grad [graduate] students who were teaching assistants. And they said, "We marched our classes up to the voting booth and told 'em who to vote for," (laughter). There were a lot of people who were being liberal that year. They didn't know that everybody else was being liberal, too. So it was a reactionary thing. It was a beginning of a lot of turmoil and--change. And we were taking over the administration building, demanding things. And that was the year of, the unrest started. So a lot of the white kids were being rebellious and voted for me. Speaker 1: Did any of them congratulate you, do you remember? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: --the white, yeah, there were some who did, yeah. It was not uncomfortable-- Story_ID: 203002 Speaker 1: So, you continued to do your modeling? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Then I got married my junior year. Speaker 1: Okay, and so that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: -Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: The end of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: And did you continue to take classes at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], or did you move with your new husband? Speaker 2: I moved with my new husband to Waukegan [Illinois] and continued classes (laughter). I said full time in school, so I graduated-- Speaker 1: What was that like, going to school and being married? Speaker 2: It was kind of neat, because there was a lady up in Waukegan named Lolly Drew [ph.]. And it was a commute. It was about a forty-five minute drive down from Waukegan to Evanston [Illinois]. And Lolly Drew was a seventy-five-year-old woman, who was the wife of a judge up in Waukegan. And she had the League of Women Voters. And I got involved with the League of Women Voters, and we'd go to her house and have meetings and things. And she was in one of my classes. So we used to drive down together, and that was fun, or I'd get on the train and ride down. Commuting to high school [The Bronx High School of Science, New York, New York] was an hour and half, so going forty-five minutes to college was really no big deal. So it was no big deal, really--come home and fix dinner, and do my studies, and go on. By the time I got to be a senior, my classes were different. I was doing mostly drafting and, and designing things that didn't take specific classroom attendance. So, I would have, I had [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett as one of my teachers in, I think it was in black history. So I--and that's the class that Lolly Drew was in. So we really had great discussions on the way back and forth. Speaker 1: Sure. Story_ID: 203003 Speaker 1: So at this time [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], what were you thinking you were going to do professionally? Were you thinking, wow, modeling, that may be something to do professionally? Speaker 2: I had been modeling, but I didn't think of it as a profession. It was a fun job to do. I was still training to become an interior designer and thinking about going to graduate school for architecture 'cause I wanted to be an architect at that time. Speaker 1: So were you thinking this is a good side job? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's was just how you make money. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: That's--(unclear)--a career, psst. I got married, as a matter of fact, and that spring Ford [Modeling Agency; Ford Models] wanted me to go to Paris [France] to do some shows in Paris, and I turned them down. I said no, I'm gonna stay here with my husband. I'm baking sweet potato pies (laughter). Of course they thought I was out of my--(unclear)--mind (laughter). But I was Susie Homemaker. Speaker 1: And in terms of the modeling, were you doing any runway modeling? Speaker 2: No, I walk like a duck (laughter), no, no, no, no, no. I stand very still. But I was doing a lot of junior modeling 'cause I have freckles, and they won't let me do high-fashion stuff. So I did a lot of hair things, no makeup, nothing like that. I couldn't do any Johnson Products [Company] or anything like that, only hair products, not, not face products. Speaker 1: Were you "the black model?" Speaker 2: No, I was one of, of a bunch in Chicago [Illinois]. Oh, there were some really psss, hoo-hoo, great models in New York [New York], I mean in Chicago. And we had a lot of fun together, you know. They had a--sometimes we worked together but not often, but we always hung out together. Story_ID: 203004 Speaker 1: And so let's talk about 1969, Glamour magazine. Speaker 2: Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: You were the first African American woman-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --to appear on the cover. So, can you just kind of tell us a little bit about just not as an African American woman, but what's it like as a model to be on the cover of Glamour magazine? Speaker 2: It was anti-climatic it turned out. Amy Green [ph.], who was my modeling mentor in New York [New York], when I'd come to New York she'd say okay, this is a cover try. And we'd do a shoot. She'd send me to the hairdresser and put me with a specific photographer, and we'd do what they call a cover try. Psss, we did it maybe seven or eight times and never got on the cover of anything. And then one day she called, and she says I need you in New York today, so she got me on a plane. When I got there, all she said was put mascara on, this lip gloss, and pull your hair over to the side, put on this red jacket. And I'm in a studio this guy named Art Kane, later to find out who Art Kane was, not then. So, Art Kane comes in. He says, "Ah, sit up there on the windowsill right there; just sit there." And I sat there, and about twenty minutes later, after he took pictures, he said okay, thank you and left. I left; I went back to Chicago [Illinois]. And that had to be in about July. And I was walking down the street in September, and Amy let it be a surprise to me, but I saw my face on a--I'm at a newspaper stand. And there's Glamour magazine, and I'm on the front of it. And I, I was taken aback, going, "Whoa!" (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's me. Speaker 2: Oh! But I didn't realize that I was the first black woman on the cover. I hadn't paid that much attention. Speaker 1: But what was it like just being on the cover? Speaker 2: It was pretty darn tasty. It was like you're standing there, and you wanna go, that's me; see, that's me (laughter). So you buy up a bunch of copies. You send them to mom [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] and said oh, get to the, go to the store, go get one. So it was a thrill, it was a thrill. Speaker 1: What was the reaction at home? Speaker 2: "Oh, this is nice," (laughter). They were never over-impressed about anything (laughter). They were just, they were delighted for me, and it made me happy. But, "How's school [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]? Now what about that class?" (Laughter) I go, "Oh, okay" (laughter). Story_ID: 203005 Speaker 1: So, you continue modeling [for Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models], and when did you move into disc jockeying? I know that that was in the '70s [1970s]. So, and how did that come about? Speaker 2: Yeah. I had gotten pregnant my senior year [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. I was pregnant for graduation. I was a happy girl. I had my son [Christopher Tubbs] in 1971. I think he was born '71 [1971], yeah, February of '71 [1971]. And I went back to work modeling around September or October. And (laughter) I was in the agency, and one of the ladies in the agency said oh, WLS [WLS-AM, Chicago, Illinois] is looking for somebody who can read copy well. I could cold read copy. I'd been doing a lot of commercials in Chicago [Illinois], so they knew that I could just pick up copy and read it. And she said why, why, why don't you go over there and see what they want. So I go, and Steve Edwards is there. He's the general manager at the time. And he says, "Okay, here, read this copy." And I'm reading, eh-deh-bey-da-da-da, and read the copy. And he says, "Okay, good, good, good. Now, are you available Saturday nights, starting at ten and finishing on Sunday morning at four?" I'm going, "To do what?" He says, "I'm, I'm gonna put you on the air. You'll have an engineer here, and you just cue him. He'll do all the music and all the technical stuff. You just keep the flow going and read the, the commercials as they come up." I said, "Yeah." He said, "Let's try it for a couple of weeks." I said, "Okay" (laughter). So, my first week comes, and before I get to WLS, which is a 50,000 watt station where they can hear you all the way to Louisiana, I, my stomach kinda grabs. And I'm going, oh my God, what have I gotten myself into (laughter). And I get to the studio, and I try to compose myself. And the little light goes on, and I start talking. And I'm playing the hits and 'Bridge Over Troubled Water' and 'Monster Mash' and reading commercials. And two hours into it I put on the song, 'Someone Left the Cake Out in the Rain,' because they said it's seven minutes long. I said, "I have to go to the bathroom," (laughter). I was so ill (laughter). I was so nervous. But I got all the way through that night, and they gave me a nice big fat check for just six hours' worth of work. I said, "Okay, I can do this again for you next weekend." So I did that for about four weekends--two weekends before I found out why I was doing it. There had never been a female rock jock. And they were trying to get Yvonne Daniels from WVON in Chicago. And she was having a little contract dispute, so they thought they'd break a female in. So I broke it in, and I did it for I think five weeks. I really enjoyed the experience. I really am sick of 'Monster Mash,' but I really had a great time. Story_ID: 203006 Speaker 1: And at this time, you were also, as you said, shooting a lot of commercials as well? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yep. Speaker 1: And just how was that going, and how--were you enjoying that? Speaker 2: I enjoyed the whole process of auditioning for commercials and doing them. I was very blessed, got some of 'em, didn't get some of them. I had a little bit of trouble because of the times. Black power was in, and white folks were looking for either somebody who was comfortable or not black at all. So there was a black agency. I remember one vivid day I went to Burrell [Communications Group], to the black agency, to audition for a Coca-Cola commercial. And the same day I went to Foote, Cone & Belding [FCB], and I auditioned for a, some floor cleaning product. I got a call from both of them. The comment was, from the black agency, "You're just not black enough," from the white agency, "You're black." I said, "Okay." I think I'll go do narration (laughter). So I started hanging out with guys who do voiceovers. Had a ball. Story_ID: 202969 Speaker 1: How did you get involved in that [voice-over narration]? Speaker 2: I was hanging around with a bunch of guys, Harlan Hogan and a bunch of guys who did voiceovers. And they said, "Oh, why don't you come to one of these--people--meet some of these people who do this stuff." And I met them, and they asked me to read stuff, and I can read. And so, I read them well, and they hired me. And I did school narrations and slide film narrations. And I taught COBOL [computer programming] language to people at Arthur Andersen [LLP, Chicago, Illinois] on videotape. I have no idea what I was saying, but as long as they wrote it down, I could say it (laughter). So, that, I did a lot of things like that and ended up doing my most lucrative commercial as a voiceover. I was the voice of a washing machine for Cheer, and we did five spots. And they went national, and, and they saved my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so then you kind of moved into acting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And can you tell us how you made the transition into acting-- Speaker 2: One of the-- Speaker 1: --in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: --in the '70s [1970s], one of my agents said that Robert Conrad was coming to Chicago [Illinois] to shoot a series called 'The Duke.' And he was looking for--he was auditioning people. And there was one specific role of the daughter of his fight trainer, who was going to be integral throughout the show. And he auditioned me, and we hit it off really well. And he found out that I was Northwestern's [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] homecoming queen. So he just decided I'm Queenie to him. So, he just used to tease me all the time, just calling me Queenie. I said I--and I was teasing him about the damn battery commercial they did and knocked this battery off my shoulder. So, we had that rapport going. And I shot the pilot, and he liked it, and said, "I'll write you into the rest of the scripts." And the scripts would come to the agent. She said, "You're not in this one." And right before they got ready to shoot, a change would come down, and I was handwritten into the script, so I always had a part. And we had a great time shooting that. So that was my entree into television. And then a couple of years later when I got divorced and moved out to California, I looked Robert Conrad up. And as soon as I got to town, he snatched me up and put me on a show called 'A Man Called Sloane' that he was doing at the time. And I was able to get an agent and start working right away when I got to California. Speaker 1: So-- Story_ID: 202970 Speaker 1: Why did you go to California? Speaker 2: I went to California because I had had a great career in Chicago [Illinois]. And I was leaving my husband and my son [Christopher Tubbs] and needed to stretch my wings and see if I could function in the big pond. So, I had a girlfriend out there with whom I could stay for a while 'til I got settled, and I jumped into the big pond. Speaker 1: And so let's talk about 'A Man Called Sloane.' Speaker 2: It was a guest starring role. I got to town and oh, got this great part for you. Okay, and (laughter) I got to work as a bad guy. I was a, an evil scientist. And they aged me. I had some medicine I was trying to shoot into people to make them age. And of course, I got shot with the medicine by somebody, and I aged to an eighty-year-old woman. And I had on this white wig. And they had stretched my skin and put this kind of glue kind of stuff on it. And it looked wrinkled and oh, it was great. The guy who did the makeup for that's name is Tommy Cole. And circles, all my circles come complete. Tommy Cole was one of the original Mouseketeers. And he became a makeup artist in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and did fabulous makeup as well as this strange makeup stuff. And years later, in the '90s [1990s] when I went to audition for '[The] Fresh Prince of Bel-Air,' I wanted to audition in full makeup. And I found Tommy Cole, and he made me up. And I would not go to an audition--I had four auditions for 'Fresh Prince,' and I would not go to an audition until I had seen Tommy, and he made me up for the audition. Speaker 1: So were you enjoying acting? And it was great. You moved to California. You had this great job-- Speaker 2: No, I mean I moved to California, and I had a great job, and then you wait (laughter). You are the new kid on the block. You don't know anybody, and I almost slit my wrists. I was there for about five months. It was one of the rainiest seasons they had had in California. I went into a severe depression. My son is calling me going, "Why aren't you here? Why did you leave us?" And I'm torn between the guilt of having left my family and sitting out there. And the sun came out, and things changed. Story_ID: 202971 Speaker 1: And you talked about the commercial that you did, the washing machine-- Speaker 2: The Cheer. Speaker 1: --and how it saved your life. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did it save your life? Speaker 2: When I first got divorced in May of '79 [1979], I had just done the Cheer commercial. And I had left my husband with my checking account having a balance of $147 (laughter) in it. And I said, ooh, well, I'm not staying here; I'm going. And a friend of mine gave me an apartment that he had up for rent, and we were able to work out a situation where I could pay him when I finally could. And the Cheer commercial started running, and my first check was for like $7,000. And I was going, perfect timing, perfect timing. Speaker 1: Because once again, national commercial residuals-- Speaker 2: National commercial, the residuals were huge. And there were different variations of them running, so I had numerous ones running at the same time. It was perfectly timed. The first phone call I made was to my mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell]. I said mom, we're going to Jamaica, let's go. (Laughter) And we took a vacation for three days down in Jamaica, just had a ball, just to celebrate, and then I started getting on my feet. So I had--I could bank some money. And when I went to Los Angeles [California], I could sit there for six or eight months without--and I could have a car, and I could have the things that I needed because of this commercial. So that was why it was a life saver. Story_ID: 202972 Speaker 1: In 1980, you bumped into an old friend from Chicago [Illinois] again, [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: I had known Tim Reid in Chicago as just another guy who was working as an actor. And he had a son, and--"Oh, yeah, hi, how you doin'?" I had worked with him and hadn't even remembered working with him. That's how big an impression he had on me. I vividly remember him walking down the street, Michigan Avenue, in a black and white plaid suit and golf shoes. And I thought he was the dorkiest looking black man I'd ever seen (laughter). And he thought I was the miss goody two-shoes of Chicago with, my wife and kids and I (unclear). So, we were just yeah, hi, how you doing? And a guy I was dating in Los Angeles [California] at the time--all the Chicago people hung out together in, in Los Angeles--was Steve Williams [Steven Williams]. And he said, "Oh, I saw Tim Reid up at this disco the other night. I asked him if he remembered you, told him you were in town. You remember him?" I said, "Ah, vaguely," (laughter). I didn't watch a lot of television. I had never seen 'WKRP [in Cincinnati']. So he told me he's doing this show about 'WKRP in Cincinnati,' so I turned on the television, and I go, "Oh yeah, I remember him," (laughter). So he called me, and we had a little chat, and, "How you doing, nice to," you know, "good to"--let's see, "get together for old times and say hello." And, and we had this little date that was supposed to last about five minutes. I was a different person than I was in Chicago, and he was a different person than he was in Chicago. And that five minutes went on for five hours. And we ended up having breakfast together and had a blast. I've never laughed so hard in my life. And we've been together now, we will have--let's see, this is 2004. We'll have our twenty-second anniversary this December. Speaker 1: And he was playing the role of Venus in 'WKRP'-- Speaker 2: He was Venus Flytrap. Speaker 1: --'in Cincinnati'. And you had a guest appearance-- Speaker 2: Yes, I had a-- Speaker 1: --on that show. Speaker 2: --I had a couple of guest appearances on, on '[The] Fresh [Prince of Bel-Air,']--on 'WKRP.' But the episodes that I got to be in were not shot before a live audience. They were filmed because they were intricate. The first one was I was putting him away in jail. I was a, a diamond thief, and I was coming on to him and giving him all these stolen diamonds. And he got arrested because he looked exactly like my boyfriend, who was the, also a diamond thief. So there's a split screen thing, so they had to do it on film. They couldn't do it in front-- Speaker 1: But most people would think-- Speaker 2: --of a live audience. Speaker 1: --that it was before a live audience. So can you kind of explain the process for like the-- Speaker 2: Sitcoms-- Speaker 1: --layperson. Speaker 2: For sitcoms you rehearse for four days, and then you act in front of four video cameras and a live audience. So you pace yourself for the laughs, et cetera, but you give full performance on Friday. It's already taped earlier on Friday without an audience there, but we get our, a good pacing. And they hope they can use the live audience version for what they put on television. In this case, there was no audience. And we were shooting all week all these different scenes that would compile together to make the show. So I didn't get the experience of shooting before a live audience. The second time I was on 'WKRP' I played a television reporter. And I was following Herb [Ruggles] Tarlek [Jr.], the little dude in the plaid outfits, around and trying to prove what a--I--there was a show called 'Real People' on television at the time, and it was a spoof of 'Real People.' But we were finding out all these bad things about him. All the things that they said about him, I would catch him doing just the opposite. And so, that was also shot film-style, so I never got to be in front of a live audience. But I was always going to his performances to watch him do it. Became friends. Yeah, we became a big family with the 'WKRP' thing. Then Tim and I moved in together, so. Story_ID: 202973 Speaker 1: And when did you first get your shot at doing something before a live audience? Speaker 2: It was many, many, many, many, many years later. '[The] Fresh Prince [of Bel-Air'] was the first-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow, okay. Speaker 2: --time. Speaker 1: Well, wait, wait, 'cause we have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot to cover before-- Speaker 2: No, I did mostly film--television shows. I guest starred on a lot of television--episodic shows, things that people vague remember like 'T. J. Hooker' and the '[The] A-Team' and-- Speaker 1: 'Hardcastle and McCormick.' Speaker 2: --'Hardcastle and McCormick.' Yeah, I would just be a person, one of the guest stars on the show. And then when [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] did 'Simon & Simon,' which he did right after 'WKRP [in Cincinnati'], they gave me the role of his girlfriend in the show. So I had maybe eight or ten episodes of 'Simon & Simon' that I shot, but that was also a film job. And then after that, he went on to do 'Frank's Place.' Speaker 1: And let's talk--so that was in 1987-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --right? So let's talk about 'Frank's Place.' Speaker 2: Yes, he went out on his own after being third banana in 'Simon & Simon.' And his--the guy who created 'WKRP in Cincinnati,' Hugh Wilson, also helped Tim write a couple of episodes of 'WKRP.' So Tim became a writer, and he wrote an episode of 'Simon & Simon,' and they did that episode. So he helped Hugh create a show called 'Frank's Place.' He wanted to go off on his own and star in his own show, so he created this show called 'Frank's Place.' And they went down to New Orleans [Louisiana] and interviewed a couple of people to find characters and found settings that they would like to recreate into this show and make the milieu very New Orleans-like. So, they cast me in this role of a mortician who would be his sort of love interest, so bang, boom kind of love interest, because the matron, my mother, the woman in the wheelchair who ran the funeral home was just the ruler of this community in New Orleans. And it was the most wonderful show I have ever done in my life. Speaker 1: What made it so wonderful, the content, the care, you know, the other others? Speaker 2: 'Frank's Place' was the first time that a half-hour sitcom was done not in front of a live audience. There was no laugh track inserted. We allowed the audience to laugh when they felt like laughing. It was not two lines and a punch line. It was a show that had texture, and, and you could feel the heat of New Orleans. We shot in a foggy set that we constructed that always looked like it was humid, and it always looked like it was hot. And we were in a restaurant, and there was actual food being cooked there. And you got all the nuance of New Orleans, and the cadence, and the characters from the voodoo ladies to the, the waitress emeritus played by Frances [E.] Williams, who was just an incredible, incredible black actress that not too many people know about but told us, she told us so many wonderful stories. It was just one of the best times I've ever had in television. Speaker 1: And it's referred to as a dramedy. What's a dramedy? Speaker 2: A dramedy is the sitcom that doesn't have a laugh track that sometimes tells a story that is sad. The episode that we got an Emmy [Award] for was starring Beah Richards. And her husband had come into the bar and had, had a lot to drink and committed suicide on a bridge. And she was going to sue us for serving him drinks. So it was the whole legality of the bar being responsible for administering drinks and the humanity of speaking one on one to this woman and finding out why she wanted to sue us. It's because her husband didn't have insurance, and this was the only way that they could get money to survive. And she finally says, I just can't do it. It was a plan, but I can't do it. And it was the most beautiful--it was called The Bridge, and it was a beautiful episode. But there was this, there were some funny things in it, but it wasn't a--ha, ha, hee, hee. So that's why they were called dramedies. They didn't have a laugh track. Story_ID: 202974 Speaker 1: And what happened with 'Frank's Place' in terms of the--why it didn't continue to stay on the air? Speaker 2: We had, we were picked up for a second season. And Hugh Wilson was offered a job at Columbia Pictures and went off to do another show ['The Famous Teddy Z']. And they wouldn't allow [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] to be the executive producer by himself. So they pulled the show, and it, it was devastating, 'cause Tim's mother [Augustine Wilkins Reid] had died in August. And then this show died in September. And it was aggravating because he could have done that show himself, but they wouldn't allow him. So he took it upon himself to make a political statement to CBS. And when we found out that it was also jerked because the president of CBS at the time, the guy who owned it at the time, had been offended by one of the episodes that we had done on junk bonds because he was a junk bond trader and thought it was pointed directly at him. And knowing Hugh Wilson, it may have been. But he was pretty pissed off with the episode and he said, "Kill it." Speaker 1: And you know, some have said at the time, CBS was plagued by poor ratings just in general, the network was. Do you kind of buy that, or do you think that it was more personal than that? Speaker 2: It had nothing to do with ratings at the time. There was no way that they could judge what our ratings would be, because in the twenty-two episodes that we were on the air, they moved us eleven times. And they claimed because they couldn't find anything to pair us with, they couldn't put us behind a--ha, ha, hee, hee comedy--and they couldn't--and it was only a half-hour show, so it couldn't butt up against an hour show. There would still be an, a half hour they had to fill. So they claimed there were programming problems, and they kept moving us around. My mother [Rosalee Harris Maxwell] didn't know when it was on. We didn't know when it was on because they moved us after they had printed it in the TV Guide, so people lost us. And they, people were crazily looking for--where is 'Frank's Place?' After we got canceled, there was an uproar. People called, people, they wrote hundreds of thousands of letters to put 'Frank's Place' back on the air. And CBS didn't put 'Frank's Place' back on the air, but they gave us another shot with a show called 'Snoops.' Story_ID: 202975 Speaker 1: And what was 'Snoops' about? Speaker 2: 'Snoops' was kind of like a Nick and Nora Charles kind of thing, a couple who was always getting into trouble being nosy (laughter), basically. I worked for the State Department [U.S. Department of State] in the protocol office, and [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] was a professor of criminology at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.]. And cases just kept falling in--oh, oh, we gotta find out why--and we were always getting into trouble and running around Washington [D.C.]. And it was a great little show, but we knew it was a payback for 'Frank's Place,' and we knew it was only gonna be thirteen episodes, so. Story_ID: 202976 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about ratings. Can you just briefly explain what ratings are, how they work, and how television stations-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) They don't work anymore (laughter). Speaker 1: --used them, before cable (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. When we were on television, there was only NBC, ABC, and CBS. There was a startup network, FOX or WB or something. They were little startup networks, but they weren't even considered. And cable was, you've gone into the hinterland if you're on cable. It's like public access at the time. So the three networks would poll the audience through a system and decide how many people had been watching the show. And there was a race--it was always a race--to keep your ratings high. And ratings really didn't mean anything because when 'WKRP [in Cincinnati'] was number one, they were canceled (laughter). So it, it--they say that ratings have something to do with it, but not really. If they really want to push a show, they'll push a show for various reasons. Story_ID: 202977 Speaker 1: And one other thing about 'Frank's Place' is that some have said that because there weren't stereotypical blacks on 'Frank's Place' at the time, in the '80s [1980s], that contributed to its being canceled. What do you think about that? Speaker 2: They--the white audience was not ready to see self-sufficient black people who didn't dance, jive, or crack jokes. They meandered through life speaking like normal human beings. And they--had never seen the culture of black people being expressed except in a monolithic way. And to show various different sides of these black people--we had poor black people; we had rich black people; we had white lawyers who hung out with black people--they were not ready to accept that at the time. But there were a lot of black people who were and who were refreshed by it. And were-- Speaker 1: 'Cause they lived it, and they knew it. Speaker 2: They lived it. They knew that there was something other than 'Good Times' happening. Yes, 'Good Times' happened. That was a funny show, but that's not all there was. And for them to, to make it seem like that was the breadth of black life was what we were trying to counter. Story_ID: 202978 Speaker 1: And after 'Snoops,' you and your husband, [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid-- Speaker 2: Ran away (laughter). We did a show called 'The Tim and Daphne Show' (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell us about that. It was a talk show. Speaker 2: A talk show, yes. We got together with King World [Productions, Inc.], who thought that we'd make a great little duo doing a talk show. And it was early in the talk show phases. I think 'Oprah' was on the air, but there weren't very many others, '[The Phil] Donahue [Show]' maybe. And we would try a new format, a variety kind of show. We would have performing guests as well as speaking guess, and do serious topics, and political topics, and how-to things, Tim cooking in the kitchen, throwing lettuce and all sorts of silly things. We would have interaction with an audience. And we did seventy-six one-hour shows. But it seems that they never bothered to try to sell it (laughter), so it kind of just petered away. And after that experience, I took a break, and-- Speaker 1: And what, what was that experience like? Speaker 2: Intense. Doing a one-hour show with seven different segments is a lot of preparation. And we shot two shows a day. And we did that three days a week because it was running every day, and it was extremely intense. Tim and I didn't agree on what a lot of the content was, so I wasn't, at that time, standing up and saying: "But that's the way I'm gonna do it." I didn't have the self-confidence to do that. He was the successful producer, and I bowed to his wishes and didn't like what I was doing. So, I don't think it would have worked out anyway. Story_ID: 202979 Speaker 1: So you said that you took a break. What do you mean you took a break? What did you do after that? So this was around 1990. Speaker 2: Yeah, '90 [1990]. In 1989, because there was so much intensity with shooting 'Snoops,' 'cause [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] was the executive producer, the writer, the star, he had to do post production, and the music layback, he was, it was an intense situation; he was ringing himself out. And I said we need to get away from this environment and give you a little taste of real life. So we bought a farm in Virginia, and we moved there in '89 [1989]. And after the talk show ['The Tim and Daphne Show'] I said, I'm home (laughter); I'm chillin'. So, I stopped going to Los Angeles [California]. I had been offered an audition for a show called '[The] Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.' And I said, "Well what is that?" They said, "Well, it's this young rapper who is"--I said, "ah, say no more, say no more. I can't stand rap, thank you very much; I'm not coming." And I got to the farm and spent the summer there. And then September came, and the new shows came on. And there's 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.' Oh, what a cute show! (Laughter) So I kicked myself a couple of times and said, darn. But then I developed a sewing project with The McCall Pattern Company. I sold them the idea of doing four videotapes and four patterns and teaching people how to sew. I wanted to earn a living in Virginia, but I had to do it a little more independently than running to Los Angeles to do job, so. Speaker 1: And how did you hook up with the folks from McCall? Speaker 2: I took the idea first to my favorite pattern company, The Vogue Pattern Company [Vogue Patterns] (laughter). Speaker 1: Everybody's favorite (laughter), well, most people's favorite. Speaker 2: Gosh, those are wonderful patterns. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And there was a black guy there. I'm sorry I can't remember his name, but he took me to the, the head of, of Vogue Patterns. And I told him this idea of creating a videotape to teach people how to sew so we could incorporate the patterns and sell them. I said there's this new thing happening now, QVC and, and--what's the other one--the first one that came out was-- Speaker 1: Home Shopping Network [HSN]? Speaker 2: Home Shopping Network. I said oh, we can go on the Home Shopping Network, and we can sell 'em and you know, do a little kit. And they looked at me with the blankest expression and said "I don't think we're interested in that"--okay. So my little friend at Vogue says I know the president at McCall's magazine. He's usually up for good stuff, so--(unclear). So he introduced me to Bob Herman. I went to see Bob Herman. I told him about my idea, and he said, "Great!" I said, "Ooh." He said now, what do you need? I said I think I can do it for about $150,000. He says okay, "I'm gonna get the fabric companies. I'm gonna get Singer sewing machine. I'm gonna get all these people to chip in, and then we're gonna do this. And then you--we'll help you do the packaging and the designing, and we'll," da, da. I said, "Let's do it." So we did the project. I shot it. They packaged it. It was beautiful. We took it down to Home Shopping Network. They weren't interested. Before I shot it, we took the concept down to Home Shopping Network with Bob. And they weren't at all interested. So I said well, there's this other place, QVC. Speaker 1: Were they not interested because they didn't think they could sell-- Speaker 2: They didn't-- Speaker 1: --volumes of it? Speaker 2: They, yes. They didn't understand the concept, teaching people to sew by videotape, ahh, nobody's interested. So, we took it to QVC and happened through--meet a guy there who was doing the new products who was very interested in it. And he saw that I was backed by McCall Pattern Company, and he knew that they were an established company. So they gave us a preorder of 100,000 units. So I had the funding to do the video. He did it on just the project and not on the actual product. So I shot the video. I edited them. We packaged, made a beautiful package with the McCall Company, and we went on QVC. And the first day I was on, they have a little counter of how many packages were sold. And Tim went with me, so he was behind the scenes watching the little counter. And when we started, we're selling these things for $82 a hit. We sold oh, 1,500 of them in the first hour. And it was like, God, that's absolutely incredible. So we sold out their 100,000 units. We had some more units that we were selling in the stores. We got the award for the best new craft product that year from Craft Association, and it was a great, great little experience. Story_ID: 202980 Speaker 1: And I know that you des--you have a pattern line? Speaker 2: Line, yes. Speaker 1: Is that with McCall's [McCall Pattern Company]? Speaker 2: Yes, with McCall's. Robert, Bob Herman said, "Okay. This went well. I want you to do a pattern line," Daphne Maxell Reid Collection. It wasn't unusual. He had done one with Brooke Shields, and a couple of other people had done these pattern lines. So I got together with the designers and we did the first few, and then it went on for a couple of years. We did it biannually. And I lost Bob Herman this year. He died in December, so. I feel really bad. He was too young, far too young. Story_ID: 202981 Speaker 1: So, around this time, 1992-ish or so, you had a guest appearance on 'The Cosby Show.' Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I did. Speaker 1: What was that like working on 'The Cosby Show?' Speaker 2: It was wonderful. I had known Bill [Cosby] for a long time. When I was in Chicago [Illinois]--when I first moved to Los Angeles [California] he was one of my mentors. So I would go to 'The Johnny Carson Show' with him and hang out with him every once in a while, and he was just a wonderful man. So to be able to go and work on his show, and I adored Phylicia [Rashad], adored Phylicia, and I also love CCH Pounder, and we were all on the show together, it was the most wonderful experience. I felt so at home there. Speaker 1: And so, you get a second chance, '[The] Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in 1993. Speaker 2: Yes, they called me at the farm and said, "We're auditioning for Aunt Viv in 'Fresh Prince'" and before they got the words out, I said I'll be on the next plane. Speaker 1: I'm not gonna mess-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --this up twice. Speaker 2: I will not mess this up again. And I made an outfit. It was a pale blue suit with a yellow zipper. And I wore that outfit to every audition I went. I went to the first audition there were two hundred of us; the second audition there were twenty of us; the third audition there were eight of us; and the final, before the network audition, there were three of us. Speaker 1: Do you remember the other, who the other actresses were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember one of the other actresses, and her name, don't ask me her name. It's gone out of my mind, the most classy actress I've ever met, because after I got the job, she sent me a congratulations note. I said, this takes class. I adore her. And we used her on 'Snoops,' and we've been in touch for a long time. Story_ID: 202982 Speaker 1: How did you enjoy working on the set of the 'The Fresh Prince [of Bel-Air'] of Bel-Air?' Speaker 2: I absolutely loved it. I was petrified because I had not worked in front of a live audience except for that brief stint on 'The Cosby Show.' But I had not been in a show where, it's you babe (laughter), and I was petrified. They embraced me as if I was a family member. I had a track record that they appreciated, so they were confident that I could do what I was doing. And after getting over the first hurdle of just doing it the first day, it was exhilarating. I really loved doing Friday nights in front of a live audience doing the show. It was great. Speaker 1: Was it hard coming into a role that had already existed? Was that hard? Speaker 2: It wasn't hard for me because I'd never really watched 'Fresh Prince.' So I didn't need to mimic whatever she [Janet Hubert] was doing. I didn't know her. I had never met her. And all I could bring to this family was me. So I didn't try to do anything else. So, no, that wasn't hard. And they accepted me without missing a beat. Speaker 1: So their expectations weren't that you would come in and be her? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: No, no. Story_ID: 202983 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about 'Once Upon a Time...When We Were Colored.' Tell us a little bit about what the project was and just what it meant to you personally as well. Speaker 2: 'Once Upon a Time...When We Were Colored' was a book by Clifton Taulbert that my husband [HistoryMaker Tim Reid] had read an excerpt in like the Parade magazine and Sunday paper and said, "This guy sounds like he's talking about my life." He's talking about the segregated South, but the sense of community, and the pride, and the relationships that existed in the black community in the segregated South. So he tried to contact the author and see if he could option the book and went through those processes. He was working for United Image Entertainment, which was Tim's company in conjunction with Bob Johnson, who had BET [Black Entertainment Television]. He was starting a film company, and Tim was who he was working with. And one day he was in the office, and a white guy came in the office and said, "I have a script I'd like to give you. I wrote it on spec. I mean, I just wrote it 'cause I felt moved to write it." And it was 'Once Upon a Time... When We Were Colored.' And Tim read the script and knew that there were only a few things he wanted to change, and he optioned the script. And the author also agreed to this script because it was a very good depiction of--his book was in vignettes, and he had taken the thread of a story and woven it through with the characters of the vignettes, so it worked out well as a film. He got Bob interested in financing it. And then Mr. [Wayne] Huizenga from Blockbuster [Video] was going to the one who would help finance the movie and get it shot. And I think they got about a million seven [$1.7 million] for it, and Tim set out to the movie. And we shot that in North Carolina in July. And that was posing for Green, Greenwood, Mississippi, and boy, it was hot. And we had lots of experiences, but we had the cast from heaven on that show. We had Phylicia Rashad, Leon [Robinson], Richard Roundtree, Salli Richardson [-Whitfield]. We had the most incredible group of people involved. We had Johnny--what, Johnny, Johnny, what's your last name--as our DP [director of photography] and cinematographer and--[John] Johnny Simmons. And he is an art student, so they had designed shots that were from [Michelangelo Merisi da] Caravaggio. And they were--and the lighting needs to be like this old Dutch master. And it was an exquisite experience. There were eighty-two speaking parts. We had the young boy grow up from being born to being sixteen years old and leaving. And we had a cotton field that we had to build because there were only cotton stalks. Cotton was out of season. So he rounded up all the people in the town after he found a big bale of hay that--I mean cotton that hadn't been processed and had the townspeople glue the cotton back onto the stocks. And there was a newspaper article in Dunn, North Carolina, where we were, and there was a picture of these guys out in the field. All the migrant workers had gone because they were up doing oranges or something in a different part of the country. So it was white townspeople who were gluing on the cotton. And the caption under the picture was "We picked it off. You put it back on." (Laughter) And that was the joke for Dunn, North Carolina. But we shot it. It was, it was hell to shoot in two weeks. Two people almost died. We got 'em back (laughter). It's--open-heart surgery. There were lots of things that happened during the shooting of that movie, but it was all very, very dear to us. And it came out to be an award-winning film, very, very proud of Tim's first directing debut. Story_ID: 202984 Speaker 1: In 1997, you all [HistoryMaker Daphne Maxwell Reid and HistoryMaker Tim Reid] created and established your own film studio company, New Millennium [Studios, Petersburg, Virginia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. While we were working on ['Once Upon A Time]...When We Were Colored,' we were down at Carolco Studios [Carolco Pictures, Inc.] in North Carolina. And at the time, they were quite falling apart, and we were getting "colored" equipment (laughter) to go with everything. We said, you know, (laughter) "We could build one of these things." And we said, "Well, we do have to find a way to make a living in Virginia if we wanna stay here on the farm, and they don't have a studio." So we started talking to people, and finding studies on feasibility, and found two partners who would join us in putting our money into building a state of the art studio. And we broke ground in February of 1997 on some land that the City of Petersburg had been able to give us through some donations from state grants and some other funding, and broke ground in February and opened in July of 1997. And here we are, many projects, many movies, many things later. Story_ID: 202985 Speaker 1: Did things start off the way that you hoped that they would with the studios [New Millennium Studios, Petersburg, Virginia]? I mean Petersburg, Virginia-- Speaker 2: Seems to be out of the way. Well, it became the center of the universe. It was such an innovative idea. And we had so many wonderful friends to call upon to create something great. And [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] has fantastic creative ideas, so we were able to bring all these folks, a Petersburg native, Mr. Blair Underwood, to do our first feature film that we shot here, 'Asunder.' Our partners financed it, and we shot that. It's doing well. Miramax is carrying that now. And then we created a television series, because Tim created a television that he's been trying to sell to HBO, and they didn't want it. And finally, it went over to Showtime and a show called 'Linc's.' And it was a political satire kind of thing, with a black Republican bar owner named Linc and the cast of characters around this [Washington] D.C. bar. And we convinced Showtime that we could, indeed, shoot it at the studio. As a matter of fact, we weren't going to shoot it anywhere else. And they bit. They kept trying to get us up to Canada, and we said no, not going to Canada. We've got a facility right here, and we can shoot it here. And they said, "But you've never done a four-camera shoot in Virginia." I said, "One camera with one person times four. We can do a four-camera shoot in Virginia." We did it, and we did it for a very low price point. And we were able to pull it off as a great series. We had a lot of fun, had Pam Grier starring in it. That was by Showtime's input. They had Pam Grier. They wanted to do a project with her and said this was the perfect one to do it. So we did it with Pam and a great bunch of folks and were very successful. We had I think thirteen shows the first year. They wanted to renew the show for a second season. And they said but we have to do it at Paramount Studios. And we said then we're not coming. We talked to everybody, and we said, "Guys, it is not worth killing what we are growing here to go do it at Paramount for thirteen episodes." And they said, "We agree with you. We'll abide by how you feel." Showtime came back and said, "We'll give you twenty-five [million dollars]." And we said, "Then we gotta go," (laughter). So, we went out to Los Angeles [California] and shot the second season of 'Linc's.' And things here were still going on. We were still doing some commercial work. The BBC was here shooting on our oval office set. We had lots of little projects going on, so it was still feasible. But it was like, when Tim isn't here, things are not the same. So when we came back from shooting 'Linc's,' our partner in the studio announced that he was running for governor (laughter), so we said well, we gotta help Mark [Warner] get elected governor. Speaker 1: And you're talking about Mark Warner? Speaker 2: So--Mark Warner--so we were on the road with Mark for about a year. And the fire trucks are not gonna bother us. And we got Mark elected, but we're neglecting the studio again. So, yeah, we have to start all over again, basically, once he gets elected and build up momentum again. So we've been doing different things: music videos; we are now working with TV One [Chicago, Illinois] doing some original programming-- Story_ID: 202986 Speaker 1: --We helped (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of programming are you doing with TV One [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: We do a show called 'Cowboys of Color,' a reality kind of show called 'Gospel Challenge,' where different church choirs compete against each other for a final prize and a Sony recording contract. That went very, very well. We did a show called 'Then and Now,' with sportscast--with our friend, Brown, James Brown-- Speaker 2: J.B.-- Speaker 1: --as our, J. B. interviewing and doing kind of documentary stories on black athletes like Dominique [Margaux] Dawes and Jair [Lynch], whose last name I can't remember. Speaker 2: Yes, the gymnast, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yes, the gymnast--lots of stories like that. So, we've been doing that for them. And we license them our programming that we do, 'American Legacy Television,' which is a documentary program-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that we do here on black-- Speaker 2: Can you-- Speaker 1: --history. Speaker 2: --tell us, yeah, about the 'American Legacy' project? Speaker 1: We approached our friend, [HistoryMaker] Rodney Reynolds, at American Legacy magazine and said your magazine is such a fine quality, and [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] has such a great interest in black history, could we do a television version of your magazine? And we have a handshake relationship with him and have developed an award-winning program that's on syndicated television. We're now going into, I think, our fourth year of programming for 'American Legacy.' And this year we're doing--we have just finished with Reginald [F.] Lewis' story that was sanctioned by his wife, Loida [Nicolas-] Lewis. And we're doing a story on, we've done the black military. We've done the Red Ball Express, the building of the Alaskan-Canadian Highway, the Triple Nickel, who were the parachute jumpers. We've done, what else, a woman named Valaida Snow, who was a jazz singer, trumpeter, who was held in a prison, a Nazi prisoner camp in Europe and released in a prison exchange deal, very interesting stories. So we do little stories that are unknown or things that should be talked about, the bombing of Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1921. And now we're doing a story on the Independents of Color, the first black political party that started in Cuba in the early 1900s, so, lots of little things like that, very interesting project. Story_ID: 202987 Speaker 1: And is the studio [New Millennium Studios, Petersburg, Virginia] what you had envisioned? Are you all doing all that you had envisioned when you first had this vision of what Millennium Studios would be? Speaker 2: When we first built New Millennium Studios, we built a sound stage, and a post-production facility, and a back lot with a standing White House facade, and a back lot of a city street. We used the city street in 'Linc's.' We used the White House facade in many pictures. And we had movie companies come and rent the facility. 'The Contender' was shot here. 'Hearts in Atlantis,' parts of that was shot here. Television network things that need an Oval Office shoot here. So it was a rental facility, and that was our motto to begin with. As the vertical integration of the industry has happened over the past seven years, independent producers have been pushed out now, and they don't do a lot of independent shooting. So we found that our best revenue generating is in distribution. So along with the products that we have created and maintained ownership of, we find other products and have found a new distribution channel--excuse me. So we have lessened the dependence on the rental facility and more on the creation of product, like 'American Legacy' and some of the smaller movies that we've done, 'For Real,' and then distributing them ourselves through a special screening process that we go through, independent screenings, and then fundraisers, and then distribution on video and DVD. We do comedy concerts. We've done Paul Mooney. We've got a Paul Mooney videotape out that we sell on DVD. And then we compiled some of our 'American Legacy' product into DVDs. And we have Blacks in the Military that's out right now, and we'll be doing some more of those. Story_ID: 202988 Speaker 1: What type of show or movie or, what would you really, really, really like to do that you haven't done yet? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid] is in the process of doing it now. He has created a movie that will transcend cultures, and it shoots in Brazil. And he's down there in Brazil scouting right now. We believe that the funding will close for that this week, so he'll be able to go full bore. But what we would like to do is to establish financially a fund that will allow us to create this product and not have to go out and raise funds every time we have to create a product so we can get a ball rolling, and the distribution will take care eventually financing the new production. So, that's the big picture. That's what we would like to, is have, be financially stable with a fund to create this product for this distribution company and then sit down-- Story_ID: 202989 Speaker 1: And of all the roles that you've played, which has been your favorite character? Do you have a favorite? Speaker 2: I really enjoyed the refreshing, the refreshment of playing a hooker on 'Linc's.' I had the best time playing a bawdy hooker. It was like some little inside piece of me was able to express itself. And as I said during 'Linc's'--I say it now, every woman's got a little hoe in her. And some of 'em express it more than others. But it's, it's refreshing to be a distinguished woman for a long time and then be a hoe. 'Frank's Place' was one of my favorite characters, playing Hannah Griffin was fun. And I think the, the most fun I had in film would be 'Snoops,' playing that character; I liked Micki Dennis. And in a working situation, I really enjoyed working on '[The] Fresh Prince [of Bel-Air']. Story_ID: 202990 Speaker 1: I've heard you refer to yourself as a meanderer. Why do you consider yourself a meanderer? Speaker 2: Because I haven't decided what I want to do when I grow up. I've had so many careers, I've done so many things from so many different angles and have enjoyed the experience of each one of them that cumulatively, I can't, like a corporate person say, "I've been at IBM for twenty-three years." I've been with me for all these many years, and I have been so many different things in my life that I, I feel truly blessed. I've been able to express so many sides of me and able to, to realize so many talents that I didn't know were buried until it go time to delve in there and find them. It's been an extraordinary, extraordinary journey. And I loved being a mother most of all. My son [Christopher Tubbs] just is my pride and joy. But he's gotta fight now with my grandchild (laughter) because I just adore her (laughter). Story_ID: 202991 Speaker 1: 'Cause your career really has evolved, I mean, from editorials to acting, movies, sitcoms, that kind of thing, what haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do in terms of your acting career? Speaker 2: Oh, in terms of acting career. Well, I, I think I've done all that I, I wanted to do the first of, you know, I'd love to do more of all of it. I got to be on a show called 'Crossing Jordan,' and I got to actually act and, and feel, and delved deep, which I haven't had a chance to do in quite a while, since 'Linc's.' I'm doing a little show called 'Eve,' where I get to play somebody's mom again, which is a blast. It's a lot of fun, but it's a little easy for me to do, being somebody's mom (laughter). Speaker 1: And how do you like working with the folks, the cast of 'Eve?' Speaker 2: They are wonderful. Oh, Eve is just a doll, an absolute doll. She is bright. I love working with these little bright children. That's what impressed me about Will Smith when I first got on there ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'], was he was so bright, just intelligent in the way he thinks and processes things. And I like that they give 150 percent. They're a great example to me. Speaker 1: And when you look at Will Smith now, what do you think? Speaker 2: I feel the pride of a mother. I really feel the pride of a mother. I am happy for his mom [Caroline Bright Smith] because I know the pride that she feels. I feel blessed to have crossed his path. Story_ID: 202992 Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why? Speaker 2: When I look back over my life, the light in my child's [Christopher Tubbs] eye is what, what means more to me than anything. He's bright (laughter). I like bright people, okay. He's bright; he's independent; he's got varied interests; he's a biochemist, who's a diver, who sells real estate and redevelops houses. Hey, I appreciate that kind of eclecticism because that's who I am. He's married the most wonderful woman who's just like me. She cooks, she sews; she's interested in--she's bright; she does computer stuff; and she's beautiful. So, that's my joy. Speaker 1: And is that the ultimate compliment? Speaker 2: The ultimate compliment is to have your son marry your mother, marry his mother, yeah, it is (laughter). And I tease him because he says, you two are so much alike. We spent a, a vacation together, and he said, "She is more like you than I thought." I said, "I always knew she was like me, and I knew you would do that," (laughter). Speaker 1: One of the things we didn't talk about that I'd like to really quickly is just some of the pressures of being a mother, a wife, and having this career. What--was it tough? Speaker 2: It was tough when I left my child. It was a decision that I had made because I didn't know where my life was going to lead me. And his father was tending him well, and he was established in his schools. I didn't want to interrupt that. Once his father deteriorated, and I had to take him into my home with [HistoryMaker] Tim [Reid], I selfishly didn't want him there. He was going to disturb the relationship I had with this new man. But Tim, in his wisdom, was insistent, and I appreciate that from him. And when my son came to live with us, he blossomed into another human being with Tim's guidance, and I just really, really appreciate that. Story_ID: 202993 Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I wanna be remembered as a joyful person, as a person who lived each day as if it was a gift. Story_ID: 202994 Speaker 1: And what would you like for your legacy to be, which is a little different in terms of how you're remembered? Speaker 2: I want my legacy-- Speaker 1: Or what do you believe your legacy is? Speaker 2: I think my legacy will be the accumulation of the work that I've done and the maintenance of integrity in the work that I've done. I'm very aware that there's a line that I should not cross in bending over backwards for something. As they say, some money cost too much. And I want to maintain an integrity of which my family can be proud. When I'm gone, they can look at granny and say, "(Laughter) But she was cool," (laughter). Speaker 1: And is there anything that you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on? Speaker 2: I have the most beautiful granddaughter in the world (laughter). Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Skylar Talia Reid [ph.]. And she just turned one last Monday. And she's, of course, brilliant. Speaker 1: And will soon be learning how to sew. Speaker 2: I hope so. I hope so--..