 Story_ID: 97521 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, my full name is Denise, D-E-N-I-S-E, Rolark, R-O-L-A-R-K, Barnes, B-A-R-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). One, there's a name that's missing, which was really my birth middle name, which is Vercal. And-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: V-E-R-C-A-L. And that's a combination of my mother's name, which is Vera [McGlassom Rolark Abbott], and my father's name, which is [Dr.] Calvin [Rolark]. So, some person, I can't remember whether it was my grandmother or my mother, decided that they wanted to combine the two names and call me Vercal. I was also (clearing throat)--My mother had a great admiration for Denise Darcel, some French actress, and so that's where the Denise came from. And, of course, Barnes is my married name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is December 26th, 1954, and I was born in Washington, D.C., Georgetown Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm publisher of the Washington Informer newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 1, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Present-- Speaker 1: You don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: Okay, presently we're in my home in Washington, D.C., Southeast, Ward 8. Story_ID: 97522 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, green. I sound real confused. It's green. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It used to be blue, but it's green, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any place hot. Any place hot. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I probably so--say, "Well" all the time. That's always my, my, my phrase, but one that I share--yeah, one is, "Keep hope alive." That's--of course, I borrowed that from [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson. And then, "If it is to be, it's up to me," which is a phrase I borrowed from my father [Dr. Calvin Rolark]. Story_ID: 97523 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Vera McGlassom, M-G-C--I'm sorry, M-C-G-L-A-S-S-O-M. Speaker 1: Wait a minute, M--M-C-G-- Speaker 2: G-L-A-- Speaker 1: L-A (clearing throat) Speaker 2: S-S-0-M. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rolark. And the last name is Abbott, A-B-B-O-T-T. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 11, 1933. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: In Tennessee, someplace outside of--no, she was born in, I believe in Holly Springs, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe that's where she was born. Speaker 1: It's actually near Tennessee, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. She's got family in both places. She was raised in Detroit, Michigan, but--so she was only there until she was around three or four years old. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: Not very far. We've had these conversations a couple of times and most recently probably was around Christmas. My mother--my mother's--my grandmother was--her first name was Sweetie, S-W-E-E-T-I-E, and-- Speaker 1: Is that her given name or is that what they call her? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was her given name (clearing throat). And, my--she, my mother--that's--when my mother was born, not long afterwards, she was raised by grandmother, whose name doesn't come to me right now. So she went to live with her grandmother for awhile, and then her grandmother sent her to live with her cousin in Detroit (clearing throat). Her father, whose name was Henry I believe--My mother didn't have, I don't think, much of a relationship with him. And, actually, I don't really have the story quite right. Because I think, actually, my mother was raised by his father--went to live with his, his mother--went to live with his mother. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I'm gettin' you--I'm, I'm (clearing throat), gettin' you confused 'cause I'm confused. But I think my mother went to live with his fa--his mother for a little while and then went from there to--to an aunt in Detroit. But I'm not real familiar with that side of the family. And I keep having these conversations with her to see if I can lock it in. I probably need to write it down. Once she moved to live with her aunt in Detroit, I mean, there was really not much of a family relationship. Her mother moved to Detroit later, which I didn't meet her until I was--my grandmother--until I was probably in my teens. And my mother has two brothers: one that lives in Tennessee and another one in Detroit. She never lived with either one of them. And, so, that's about it. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know what your grandfather did for a living? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother didn't have much of a relation with him and-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not a lot is known about him? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 97524 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, there any stories that are passed down in the family about Holly Springs [Mississippi] or--that seems to be a historic place. One of the black Senators, Hiram [Rhodes] Revels came out of Holly Springs, right. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm. Speaker 1: And there's Rust College [formerly Shaw University] there. Any--any stories about any of that? Speaker 2: No--I mean, just personal stories that my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott], you know--She always talks about, you know, living on the farm and, you know, playing with the chickens, and just how--I think that was probably a very happy time for her (clearing throat) and--you know, just the relationship. She felt, you know, very loved by her grandmother. I think that, like I said, that was a very happy time for her. But otherwise, no. There's--there's--that's probably the extent of the stories that I know about that period of time or where she lived. I mean, it's my hope, 'cause my mother will turn eighty this year, that maybe we'll--I'm going to Nashville [Tennessee] in June, so I'm thinking about taking her with me. And maybe we'll just kinda ride South and get a chance. I know there's, like, a family cemetery down there and, you know, some other things, so we might do a little roots trip. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 97525 Speaker 1: The exciting thing, though, I will add that, you know, I did my DNA. I don't know if you've talked to the folks with African Ancestry or not, but I did do my DNA. And, as a woman, you know, I can only do my maternal side. So I found out through my mother's line that, you know, we're considered, you know, descendants of folks that came from Cameroon in West Africa. My mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott], not trusting whether this was really, you know, gonna be accurate, she did hers at the same time without telling me, and she came up with the same results. So, I've ha--had a chance to make that trip; she hasn't, but still, you know, because I can't go beyond my grandmother [Sweetie McGlassom], and my grandfather don't know much, really, history about them, there's a big gap (laughter), you know, between our American history, you know, and how we got here. So it's an interesting opportunity to try to fill that gap. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you been to Cameroon? Speaker 1: Twice, um-hmm. Speaker 2: Twice, okay. Okay, well, wh--what did you think in going to Cameroon? Speaker 1: (Clearing throat) You know, I don't know if it was just because of the DNA or--but I felt a real connection to the folks there. I looked and I could see similarities, particularly in I think characteristics, you know. Maybe it's the French influence in Cameroon, but they're very--it seems like very quiet, very modest, very, you know, just a interesting sort of group of people. You know, unlike their neighbors in Nigeria, you know, it's--where they're very aggressive (laughter). And I don't wanna put everybody in the same category, but Nigerians are, you know, much more assertive; I'll put it that way. The Cameroonians seem to be a lot more laid back and--I mean, that sort of fit my personality and--and a bit of my mother's. And then the--the wideness of the faces, you know, that I could see some similarities there. We come from a group called the Tikar, but I call them the, the nomads. You know, they sort of were all over the place. They never really st--which is why we ended up, I think, being the ones that the--the larger group of the Cameroonian community that was enslaved, because we just kept moving around. And it was just easier, you know, to sell us off, you know, to the slave master than some of the other groups that had real, I think, structural ties to--to their tribal communities. So--but otherwise, you know, I mean I--I like the culture. I really did like the experience. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know I see some of the beadwork here, you know, around, you know, from Cameroon--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Well, actually most of this is South Africa. Speaker 2: Oh, is it? Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, 'cause I've been there several times, but my husband [Lafayette Barnes] loves South Africa. So as a matter of fact he's trying to figure how to get there in the next month or so. So all of this is, you know, South African--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --art. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, only thing that may be Cameroonian is probably one of those masks on the wall where you're--on your side of the wall. And there's some art upstairs that's Cameroonian. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I know they're famous for beadwork. So anytime that I ever see beads I think of them. But South Africans do beads too, so. Speaker 1: Um-hmm, yeah. I'm trying to think of the--N--Ndebele-- Speaker 2: --(Unclear). Speaker 1: --do a lot, which is where these dolls are from, yeah. Story_ID: 97526 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so now did your mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] --now did, did, did she have a chance to finish school in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: She finished high school. She went to--I believe it was [High School of] Commerce, which was a business school. And she felt very privileged to go to Commerce. It was a very integrated school. So, you know, one of the things that she always talked about was--not really even during her era--at that time not feeling the--not feeling the racism or segregation that so many of us experienced across the country. I mean, you know, she's in Detroit, went to a predominantly--was predominantly white but integrated, high school and, you know, pursued business there and then was part of that first migration of, I think, African Americans that came the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] to work for the federal government. She--I think her first job here was with the State Department. She came to Washington, you know, caught a train, ended up at the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA and--and worked at eighteen years old. Speaker 1: So this would have been in the 1950--(unclear). Speaker 2: Um-hmm, probably--I think it was, like, '51 [1951] or '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: '51 [1951] or '52 [1952]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 97527 Speaker 1: All right, so, well let me, before I have her meet your father, I'm gonna go to your father's side and then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So she [Rolark-Barnes' mother, Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] worked--she started working for the State Department and then--anyway, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: [Dr.] Calvin, C-A-L-V-I-N, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Rolark, R-O-L-A-R-K. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 11--I'm sorry, May 18, 1927. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was born in Texarkana, Texas. Speaker 1: Texarkana, Texas. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, (unclear) Tex--oh, I said that, on the Texas side (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can only go back to his parents--my grandmother, who was Beatrice. Her maiden name was Block, Rolark, and she was originally from a town in Arkansas. And--pretty well-educated--I mean, she--they say she went to college but, you know-I--I will assume that, that's true. But she had some education beyond high school; I'll put it that way. And fa--my grandfather, who died when I was one--actually, he's credited with teaching me how to walk, but I don't remember him; his name was Ross Rolark. Speaker 1: R-O-S-S? Speaker 2: R-O-S-S, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his family originated in that area of Texarkana [Texas] and--I forget the county. I've done some, you know, research on that part of the, the--of Texarkana, so I know that he came from--actually, his--his father's name was William. My grand--my great grandfather's name was William. And I think he had several brothers and one sister. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, now what did Rolarks do for a living and what--what did your grandfather or your great grandfather do? Speaker 2: Not sure about my great grandfather, other than--I'm not sure what he did, but I know that my grandfather--there's a joke that my father used to tell was: an oil man--he worked in a gas station; he was a mechanic; and he used to change oil (laughter). My father makes it funnier or made it funnier. But anyway, yeah, that's what he--he did, he was an auto mo--auto mechanic. And--and my grandmother didn't work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did they have their own gas station? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked for other people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as a mechanic? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And any stories from that side of the family about how they got out there to Texarkana? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure-- Speaker 1: Texas. Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure how they got to Texarkana, just--I just know that a lot of the family lived in Texarkana. A lot of his family lived in Texarkana--my gra--grandfather. So I don't know if it was just--I don't know; I'm not, not really sure; and how he met my grandmother, I'm not sure (clearing throat). But I know that they--you know, they--my father talks about how they owned a house, and at some point my father--my grandfather lost his home, and they ended up living in public housing in Texarkana until my grandfather was able to move out of public housing back into--I guess they--they purchased another home and-- Speaker 1: Public housing in those days was usually pretty good housing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well he--they talked about the--the shotgun houses. That's what my father called it. I don't know-- Speaker 1: That's kind of pub--public housing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause we--we went down one time and he showed me--Of course, where he lived was gone, but at least the type--the type of housing that they lived in was still there. So, he didn't complain about it as it was bad, but, you know, it's just that was, I guess, an experience that he--he remembers, you know, them losing their home. Story_ID: 97528 Speaker 1: And my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] had a brother, so it was just the two boys--an older brother [Ross Rolark]. Both of them went to Pra--Prairie View A and M University [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And graduated and left Texarkana [Texas]. Speaker 2: Now what was your father majoring in at Prairie View? What was his major? Speaker 1: Business--business administration. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: He went out for the football team, he says, as did his--in following in the footsteps of his older brother. And Uncle Ross was the football star. My father says that once he got tackled the first time, he decided to go and become the, the, the sports announcer (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter)(unclear). Speaker 1: So that ended his career in football. Speaker 2: Okay, now, so--so when your father left Prair--Prairie View, did he come directly to [Washington] D.C. Speaker 1: No, they both joined the military. And, you know, a lot of military men came out of Prairie View--a lot of generals--folks that I met over the years that were there when he was there. But no, he--he left to join the [U.S.] Air Force. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think he spent two years in the Air Force as a paratrooper. Speaker 2: This would be--he would have been around--the Korean War ear? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Said he was a paratrooper. Did he leave the country? Speaker 1: He did. I can't tell you where he went, but he did leave the country. Speaker 2: So he served overseas somewhere? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: So you not--you never heard where he served? Speaker 1: I don't remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't remember. My husband [Fayette Barnes] my even remember that more--'cause I know they have--used to share military stories, so. I need to get your questions so that I know what to do for my (laughter)--for myself. Speaker 2: Okay. So (unclear) a lot of fathers don't talk to their girls about where they served. It's like--it's interesting, I--I know and my family is like that. My father talked about the war with me a lot, but he never talked about it with my sisters. Speaker 1: Yeah, we--you know, we talked some because at one point in my life I thought about going into the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and--and I was really fascinated with the fact that he had actually jumped out of airplanes. And he, you know--you know--dads talking to their daughters-"Yeah, you know, I jumped out the plane into the ocean" and--You know, but where all this happened I don't know; I just don't recall. And I know he filled in the blanks 'cause it's probably, you know, a sensational story for him. And as-- as a matter of fact, he had an injury. Because I think at one point, you know, he ended up in a tree and falling out of a tree somewhere. And I think that was--that was an old injury he used to complain about all the time. But there are still--there are still some gaps in my memory, you know, about what--what he told me, so. Story_ID: 97529 Speaker 1: Okay, so when he [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] came back, what did he do when he got back? Speaker 2: He came back to Washington [D.C.]. My father kind of followed his brother [Ross Rolark]. And my brother--his brother had also been--I think Uncle Ross was in the [U.S.] Army. And when he came back the states, he came to Washington, D.C. So my father followed him to Washington, as did my grandfather [Ross Rolark] and grandmother [Beatrice Block Rolark]; they came to Washington as well. My uncle started a family. My grandfather came and got a job, again working at a--as a mechanic. And then my father came back. He got a job at the Pentagon and, you know, not long after met my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott]. So my grandmother was here really to help both of--both of--her sons with their children. Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what did you father do in the Pentagon? Speaker 2: I don't exactly remember the job that he held at the Pentagon. Speaker 1: Okay, but it was like a--he was some sort of-- Speaker 2: I wanna say it was something in communications. And he worked for--one of the stories he used to always tell is--I mean, for him it was--for us it was very special. But he worked on the fourth floor for--I wanna say it was General Rickover, or--I can't remember the name. But he worked with this general and--that he, you know, was an African American that worked on the--it's like the floor. I worked on the highest floor where African Americans were, because most, I guess, were working on--in other offices that were--were not--the higher you went, I guess, the higher the rank of the people in the Pentagon. And so the--I can't think of-admiral--Admiral Rickover I think was his name. Speaker 1: Hyman Rickover, I think, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And don't ask me how I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause I don't even--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Hyman Rickover, he is a big admiral, right? Speaker 2: Right, he worked for him. Speaker 1: Hyman Rickover. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And I don't even know what context I--but he was a big--he was a big shot, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Of the [U.S.] Navy. Yep, Admiral Hyman Rickover. Story_ID: 97530 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now is there--is there a story about how your parents [Dr. Calvin William Rolark and Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] met? Speaker 2: Yes. My father--and he--he only--let me say, he only worked at the Pentagon maybe about two years, and then he left. And it was at that point in his life when he just decided I can't work for anybody and wanted to be independent. So, he found a career in--in insurance. He worked for North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company], Richmond Beneficial [Insurance Company], you know, the black-owned insurance companies. And he was their traveling insurance man. And so he--you know U Street [Washington, d.C.] was like our--was the "Black Wall Street." And at the time, my mother was also working for someone who owned a real estate company on U Street. And so I think that they met either attending meetings or--or some social event. And my mother says that when my father met her, he just automatically said to her, "I'm gonna marry you." And my mother, who had just come to Washington--I guess she was maybe 19 or 20 at the time--just didn't know him and thought that was meant--rather presumptuous of him. But then a few months later they were married (laughter). So, that's how that--I don't know if you'd call that much of a romance, but that's how it all started. Story_ID: 98850 Speaker 1: Okay, so--so your parents [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] met over on U Street [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Basically, which was a big, bustling street in those days. Speaker 2: Right, the Black Wall Street. That's where all the black attorneys and accountants and real estate owners, you know, that were over there. Speaker 1: So this is the area--a lot of the area over there was destroyed in the riots, right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: In '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: A lot of that area was burned up. But this was like a thriving business-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Black business--there are other kinds of businesses there too. Speaker 2: Right, the, the Howard Inn is right off of U Street and Florida Avenue. There was the Lincoln Theatre. I mean, black folks couldn't come to downtown Washington, so this was our downtown and our--it was our everything--our downtown, our--you know, like I said, business corridor. Anybody who was sort of in black business, black entertainment--this was the Mecca--the U Street, 14th Street and 9th Street Corridors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of--And it's above--right above downtown Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And near Howard University [Washington, D.C.], which was the other thing that, I think, fed into, you know, the vibrancy and, and economics in that area. Speaker 1: So what--what year did your parents get married? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Story_ID: 98851 Speaker 1: Now I don't know about your mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott], but--so much, but I know that [Dr.] Calvin W. [William] Rolark is really--has really been celebrated here in [Washington] D.C. So could you tell us something about him and what--why he was so important here. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, again, moving from the insurance business into the newspaper business, my father was one of the former editors of the Capitol Spotlight newspaper, which was one of the older black newspapers in Washington, D.C. And, as editor, you know, that gave him an entree into the local politics of Washington. And he was very fascinated with politics here. I think at some point wanted to even become a politician, but this was during the era of--before we had an elected form of government. And so there were a lot of things in D.C. that, that, that bothered him. And the newspaper allowed him and the black community a voice in what was happening. After being at the Capitol Spotlight, he later went on and started the Washington Informer, a newspaper. But at the same time, he was very involved--I said, like in the Civil Rights Movement when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] did the March on Washington. Our paper was started in '68 [1968][sic, 1964]. So between '52 [1952] and let's say '63 [1963], that's when he started getting his traction. He sort of realized that black folks were beginning to organize in Washington, and they were organizing on various fronts. Again, like I said, in the national Civil Rights Movement but also in the movement in a District for self-determination. So voting rights--you know, here we couldn't vote for president; we couldn't vote for anybody. And so he got involved with, you know, [HM] Marion Barry when he came to Washington [1965]. So many of the folks that he had met along the way or along the road while selling insurance, you know, had come to Washington as well. So there's this growing sort of what they called--eventually was called the Black United Front, black leaders of Washington. Story_ID: 98852 Speaker 1: And so, you know, after that with the newspaper, and then he [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] started the United Black Fund [with HM Wilhemina Rolark in 1969], which was the counterpart to--the black counterpart to United Way and the first black organization to be a part of the United Way federal campaign--combined federal campaign. So he pioneered in these areas of-- Speaker 2: So--so is he the originator of the Black United Fund? Speaker 1: Of the United Black Fund and is-- Speaker 2: United Black Fund. Speaker 1: --there was also a Black United Fund, which came afterwards. And, you know, they negotiated an agreement--they sort of bumped heads in the beginning--but negotiated an agreement to respect each other's territories. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: United-- Speaker 2: So they never merged or anything? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Okay, so he start-- Speaker 1: And Black United Fund was a national organization, where United Black Fund was--were lo--were local chapters, local affiliates, so they had more of a grassroots, I think, approach to the way that United Black Fund operated compared to--to Black United Fund. Speaker 2: On Black United Fund, there is a chapter in Chicago [Illinois] and in other cities where there are chac--chapters of Black United Fund, but I don't know how they network themselves together--you know, if they have national mo--you know, gift program or if they just do it on a local basis; I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, again, a lot of people get the names mixed up as well, so. But, you--the--for United Black Fund, the "National" was just made up of all of the affiliates. With--I think with the Black United Fund, it was just this national group. I don't know how--really how they operated, but it wasn't--it was formed a little differently. And then United Black Fund also had International United Black Fund, which were chapters, interestingly enough, in Cameroon, Togo, Cote d'Ivoire [Ivory Coast], and a couple in the Caribbean. So same thing--I mean, they raise their own money, and they--you know, the model was given to them. You raise your own money. You support your own organizations, but you're just a part of our--you're an affiliate of our--of our group, but we don't take any of your money, and we don't give you any money. You know, it's just kind of like creating an affiliate-- Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: --program. Speaker 2: --what he came up with was a model of how to do it, I guess, and how to put it together. And if you're gonna be United Black Fund, this is how you do things. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And this how you raise your money, and this how you, you--you know, this person? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Exactly. Story_ID: 98853 Speaker 1: And it's interesting now it's inter--that it's [the United Black Fund] international. I guess Washington, D.C. is a good place to--I mean, it's a place where you can actually spin off an international, you know, model of something. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I guess-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because of the proximity to, you know, the embassies and their foreign students that come to--they go to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] and other schools here. Is that--is that (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well I think--I'm not--I'm not sure if that's--I think--well, for international because of the embassies. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know and so you get an opportunity, which he [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] did. He had close relationships with a lot of the ambassadors here. And, so when their officials would come in, you know, he would meet with them. And he was in a position to travel to various pla--various countries and meet with the--meet with officials there to establish these United Black Fund chapters. And then there were projects that he explored. I know that they're in--I don't whether it's Cameroon or Togo. But they helped to fund a rice field. So, you know, if there were particular projects and needs, you know, that would really--you know a specific--For example, United Black Fund here wouldn't go there and say "This is what you need." It's just--you know, they would say, "Well, this is what we think our need is." And--and that's UBF's motto, actually, filli--"Meeting Unmet Needs." So, you know, this is--if this is what it is then this is the model and this how we can make, make this thing work. Sometimes because of--My father was a philanthropist to heart. And so if there was a way to support a program--I know that in--I can't remember the city in--in the Caribbean, but he was able to transport a--a fire truck from Washington, D.C., to a community that didn't have one in--and I can't remember the name of the country, but it was in South America. So there were lots of different projects that he helped to pursue. He ended up having a pretty good relationship with the Black Hebrew Israelites in, in Israel. And they're--you know, they were trying to--having difficulty working with the Israeli government. They had provided them this land. You know--these were African Americans who sort of adopted their--these Hebrew--the Hebrew culture and their Hebrew roots--roots and moved to Israel. And so the Israeli government gave them a--a lot of--a plot of land in a place called Dimona. But there were certain needs. They were self-sufficient, but there're still some needs they had. So he went to Dimona [Israel]-- had the group meet with the Israeli government. They were able to negotiate some more services, but he helped to build I think it was a swimming pool over there for the kids. And there's another facility that United Black Fund supported in Dimona. So it's an interesting kind of projects that he would come up with based upon people coming in his door, once they knew that there was this United Black Fund--you know, "Dr. Rolark, I need." And if he could, he would find a way to fulfill those needs. And I think that's another thing that propelled him because he rarely told anyone "I can't help you." And another thing he always said was, you know, "If there's a will, there's a way." Story_ID: 98854 Speaker 1: Okay, na--na--now, your father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], he passed in what? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994]. Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], okay. Now, this-well, maybe I'll tell you about (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Passed in '94' [1994]. Okay, so--so he was involved in a lot of different projects, you know, around the world? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: You know. So--so he established the paper in '68' [1968] [sic, 1964]? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm. Speaker 1: All right. And, okay, so the paper was established--this is right around the time of riots, in '68 [1968], right? Was it--was it before the riots had started or-- Speaker 2: It was after. Speaker 1: After. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the riots were in April, and we--You know I've got that all wrong. I'm so sorry. We started in 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we'll be 50 years this year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98855 Speaker 1: Yeah. So it [the Washington Informer] was '64 [1964]-October [16] of 1964. So, it was right after the March on Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, after the March on Washington. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, did--you would have been about eight years old, I guess. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Did, did you go-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --to the March? Okay. Speaker 1: No, no, no. And at the time, you know, my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] and father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] had divorced, and so I was living--you know, being raised by my mother. And, she went. And even to this day, she says she just regrets that she didn't take me, but she thought, you know, it was just gonna be too much confusion and so she left me home (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she and her girlfriend went. And her girlfriend's son and I--I don't know where we were, but I know we weren't there. Story_ID: 98856 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so, now did you--so, so the paper [the Washington Informer] was established in '64 [1964]--now, when did your pla--your parents split up? Speaker 2: It was probably, like, 1956, when I was about two. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. I know we, we interviewed your stepmother, [HM] Wilhelmina Rolark. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Ten years ago. And, so, did, did you work with the newspaper and all when you were little? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep, everyday. That was my summer job. And, you know, the arrangement my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] had with--Once he married my stepmother, the arrangement he had with my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] is that he would have me, like, every other weekend, and I'd spend the summers with him. So when he would pick me up, you know, right after school ended, usually, we would go one of two places: first, either to--to the grocery store to buy a whole bunch of food because he felt like he needed to fatten me up or something; or go to his office. And, you know, I started working there at the age of nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 98857 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott and Dr. Calvin William Rolark] personalities, their dispositions, their habits, the way they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Neither (laughter), neither. My mother was--that's why when we talked about Cameroon, and I said that I sort of see my mother's personality. But my mother was pretty--she's very sociable, very talkative--liked--you know, really parties, you know. She was a socialite kind of person, and she was very high strung, you know. I mean, she reacted to things. She would, you know, speak her mind, and my father was pretty much the same way. That may have been the clash in personalities. You know, maybe he was looking for somebody different; I don't know. But my father was the same way, you know, very sociable, very talkative, very charming, and spoke his mind, you know. And I mean, if he was upset you'd know he was upset. And he had no problem tel--neither one of them--telling you what they thought. You know, sometimes I think I may have gotten my personality from my grandmother, my father's mother [Beatrice Block Rolark], who was to me sort of, you know, pretty quiet, you know, and--and more thoughtful, I guess. And then watching them as a child, you know, and seeing the clashes and--and knowing even if I came to my father with something, he would react, even time--at times when I didn't want him to. You know, you just wanna share a story; you don't want him to go to--go to war for you because it's--this is my battle. So, you know, I became a little bit more, I think, introverted and--and being just the opposite of them--of the both of them. I know when my dad passed a lot of folks said, you know, are you gonna be able to, you know, fill his footsteps, you know. I don't have that personality that he had, so I've had to create my own in my own way. So I think what I did get from them--both of them, though, is that innate feeling about justice and what's right and what's wrong and that, you know, there's a way to--to tackle it. And, you know, my father--like--like from the civil rights area--I mean, he would--era--he would in a minute go out and demonstrate, you know, call a press conference or what have you. And, you know, I just use the tool that I have or that he gave me through the newspaper [the Washington Informer] to address issues that I think need--need to be addressed. So, you know, I may look like my mother--my mother's fairer than I am. I got my dad's complexion. And, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 98858 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I mean, I have a lot of them-- Speaker 1: Well, an earliest. Speaker 2: Yeah. There--yeah, you know, I maybe have suppressed some of them because I think--Because my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] and mother [Vera McGlossom Rolark Abbott] had such a volatile relationship, you know, during those early years that, you know--that's--those are the kinds of things that I remember, you know, just challenges that they--they had. And so, yeah, I've got a lot of those kind of memories, you know, from an early age. You know, just things that happen when parents don't get along, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and how that sort of disrupts the household and impacts--and I was an only child in the household. My father has a son. But, you know, those are the kinds of things that--that I remember from early on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were--they were only together--you say you were born in '54' [1954]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so they were--they were-- Speaker 1: You were two when they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they separated and then they got back together, and then they finally divorced. And, you know, in that time when they separated, you know--well, for the, the first time I remember, you know, my mother and I moving to this apartment in, in--you know, I guess with the area they call Shaw [Washington, D.C.]. And so a pleasant thought about that was, you know, we weren't far from what is officially called Meridian Hill Park, but at the time it was called--now we call it Malcolm X Park. And that was in the days when, you know, you have this big flowing fountain, and at the bottom of the fountain was this big pool, and that's where my mother would take me swimming, you know, at Meridian Hill or Malcolm X Park. You know, I also remember the fact that, even though they were not together, my father was very conscientious in making sure the--the connection was there. So we would go to--at the time, the Hot Shoppes were still open, and I was always fascinated with going to the Hot Shoppes. There was a favorite hot dog that I used to get that he would always get for me with this kinda sauce that Hot Shoppe had. And this was, I guess, the early days of drive-ins when you would drive in to this--to the parking lot, and then you'd pull this--you know, this tray-like thing over to the car, and push the button and tell the people what you wanted, and then they would come out and, you know, just bring you a tray of food. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the carhop. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the carhop. And, you know, we'd sit in the car and eat and talk. And, you know, if--and before my father remarried [to HM Wilhelmina Rolark], I remember one weekend spending the night with him and the next morning him trying to figure out what to do with my hair, which was, you know--It, it didn't matter to me, but I could see the frustration on his face, just not knowing what to do with this hair of mine. And so he put--told me to pull it up. And as I had it up--you know, you take a pony tail, you kinda tie the ribbon at the base. Well, instead, he tied it at the top, you know, 'cause that's what was sticking out. And I walked around (laughter) like that all day long, which was fine 'cause my dad did it, you know. So those are, you know, little things that I--I can remember too about that--that period, just how they juggled me and, you know, what they tried to do to make sure that, you know, things were okay, you know. Speaker 1: So they'd cooperated really-- Speaker 2: They were very-- Speaker 1: --at a high level. Speaker 2: --Yeah, they really did cooperate, yeah, quite a bit. I don't know everything about what went on with them after the separation because I fortunately wasn't pulled into that. But, you know--just making sure I was okay. Story_ID: 98859 Speaker 1: And they [Dr. Calvin William Rolark and Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] had me enrolled at nursery school at Shiloh Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.]. And the only thing I remember from there was that I hated to take naps, you know. And--and they disciplined you when you didn't take naps (laughter), you know; they--they made sure you went to sleep. So I didn't like that so much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I'm so glad that the--that church ended up being my father's home church. He wasn't there before we went to--I can't remember the name of the church that he used to go to, but we would--whenever we were together, we would go to church together, that church over in Northeast. I remember this Reverend McCoy that was a pas--pastor, and I liked going there. It was not far from the last pla--one of the--it was not far from the place where he and my mother used to live together. We were at--lived at the Rhode Island Plaza, which was--now you're triggering memories here, but, yeah, I used to--I liked the Rhode Island Plaza because to me it was like a big hotel; it's, like, thirteen stories and, you know--There was a person that used to work at the switchboard. And I used to love to see how the switchboard--You know, you'd push the buttons and you could dial up to people's apartments, and that's how the phone calls got to apartments. And I was very--I just knew a lot of people in that building. You know, that was like a family so they sort of took-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --care of us. Speaker 2: And that's how--is this when your parents are together or-- Speaker 1: They were together then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when they--where we--I don't remember where we lived when I was born [1954], but they moved to this plaza--Rhode Island Plaza, together. And it's interesting 'cause I would return to the ro--after they divorced, my mother and I returned there when I was in the third grade because she remarried, and her husband brought us back to the Rhode Island Avenue Plaza (laughter) for a minute, yeah, so. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so when your parents divorced you were about--you, you, you were what, five? Speaker 1: Between two-- Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: Like I said, they came back and forth together, so I'm gonna say between two and four. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, by the time I was five they were divorced. Speaker 2: So in '58 [1958], '50 [1950]--I mean '57 [1957], '58 [1958] or so. Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm. Story_ID: 98860 Speaker 1: All right. All right, so now--so you--did you grow--so, so you grew up in between the two, right? In-- was ba--basically on the Northwest Side of [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Mostly Northeast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but near the, the border. I mean, the plaza [Rhode Island Plaza] was in Northeast. When my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] and I lived on--I think it was Clifton Street; that was Northwest. And then we moved back over to--we moved back with my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]], I think, off of 5th Street, Northwest. And then, then my mother and I moved to Delafield Street, Northwest, then across the street to First Street, Nor--f--what was it--Third Street in Northwest. And then from there we moved to--it must--then we moved to Northeast. And so the different places we lived from there were in Northeast, and then I went to college. We lived in North--came back to Northwest a little bit later. But they were all, you know, close to--close to the North Capitol Street area. Story_ID: 98861 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I feel really fortunate because, you know, by this time my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] was working for the newspaper and had started either with the--the Capitol Spotlight or, you know--when he started the paper [the Washington Informer]. So hanging out with him was always--Like I said, Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.]--there was a--the newspaper office on Florida Avenue. I spent a lot of time there, so I was around newspapers and, and, and entertainment. We used to go to--I think it was Saban's [ph.] or some record store on the corner of North and--North--9th and Florida--or 9th and U. So I got a chance to--very early. I was really excited, which I've lost now, but, you know--had a record signed by Nat King Cole. And I got a record--and I mean, records (laughter), you know, signed by Sarah Vaughan and, you know, just got to meet a lot of folks there. Collard greens, neck bones. My mother [Vera McGlossom Rolark Abbott] traditionally--she didn't do it all the time, but it was pretty regular that on Saturday morning she would get up and clean the house. And I had to do my chores, and then she would cook. It was just the two of us, but she would just, you know, cook her greens and cook her neck bones. Every now and then she'd cook some chitterlings. But that's what she would do on, on, on Saturdays. And I always liked it when she did that because to me that meant, you know, she was in a good--a good place, you know. And then lots of jazz 'cause my mother played a lot of music. So when she was cooking and cleaning, we always had music playing, and I grew to really like Frank Sinatra, Sarah Vaughan--oh, gosh, I'm ha--drawing blanks now--Dinah Washington--I'm trying to think of the guitarist--the jazz guitarist who died--Wes Montgomery. Speaker 1: Oh, Wes Montgomery, all right. Speaker 2: And there is a woman who I just--to this day I always think she was black, but she was white, but--her name will come to me. I mean, I sang those songs all the time 'cause I--and I would play them over and over. You know, I wasn't really much into--later on I got into, you know, our music, you know, the young folks music. But, you know, when she wasn't home, I would cut on those albums and, you know, grab the broom, and stand in front of the mirror and just sing, you know. Dinah Washington was my favorite, so. You know, that's what I really liked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, those are--those are the sounds that I remember. And the sights, of course, some of--you know, like I said, the U Street Corridor. I think the thing that really resonates with me most, again, about that era was, you know, right after the riots or right--right when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated [1968], where my mother and I lived at that time, you know, our schools were closed. I went and sat on the sidewalk on Riggs Road and watched all the National Guard, you know, come into the city. And a couple of days later, my father came and got me and brought me down to U Street and 14th Street, so I'd have that experience of teargas. You know, 'cause when my eyes started burning, I'm, like, "What is this?" He said "I just want--want you to see, you know, what's happened here, and that's teargas." You know, I just kind of, again, followed him around that era--area. So those are some of the--some of the earliest things you asked about (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 97543 Speaker 1: All right, so, now, now where did you start school? What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: My first school was Rudolph Elementary School [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I did in Northwest. Like I said, we were--my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] and I were living on--on Delafield Street, so I went to Rudolph for half of the kindergarten, and then I transferred from Rudolph to Barnard [Elementary School], which was a little--couple of blocks closer in Northwest. And I went to Barnard from the other half the kindergarten to the end of the second grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then from Barnard, I went to Benning Elementary School, which was in Northeast, Washington [D.C.]. Interestingly enough, I left Bernard because my mother remarried. And I ended up in Benning because my mother separated, all within a year (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I went to Benning for the third grade, and then we moved back, you know, kind of in a area where we were before. And I graduated from Keene, K-E-E-N-E, Elementary School. Speaker 1: Is that on the Northwest Side? Speaker 2: It's in Northeast, but it's-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: yeah, its. Speaker 1: And that was--so we went back from the fourth through the-- Speaker 2: Sixth. Speaker 1: Sixth, okay. All right, okay, now in your grade school days--I mean, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. Yeah, I loved it. I loved most of my teachers. And, you know, they tell me now for some reason I always gravitated towards older people, so, you know, I jut--I just gravitated towards, towards them. And, you know, just communicating a lot and--you know, spending time in class had changed a lot when I--after the--probably after the sixth grade, but--Yeah, and so I was--you know, I tried to get involved in things. I remember in the third grade, being in spelling bee. When I was in--at, at Bernard, that's when my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] started the paper [the Washington Informer], and so, you know, I would tell them, you know--tell him aback--about activities to--going on at that school, so he would come to the school and take pictures of the class and--I actually found some letters from--I think it was our second grade teachers. He had them in his file of thank you letters that the students wrote him for covering some program that we did at the school. Third grade, I remember Ms.--Ms. Collins was my third grade teacher. And, you know, not having come up in the school, she paid a lot of attention to me, and I think what happened is my parents must have gone and talked to her. Story_ID: 97544 Speaker 1: So, you know, I participated in the spelling bee, which now the Washington Informer is the official sponsor of the spelling bee for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Right, I read that and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --so does it have its origin in you being involved in the spelling bee? Speaker 1: Not really. Now, it is the same spelling bee that--that leads to the national-- Speaker 2: That's the Scripps-- Speaker 1: --competition. Speaker 2: --Howard--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Scripps How--yeah, it's Scripps [Scripps National Spelling Bee] now, but yeah, it is the same spelling bee, but how that happened was, you know, a lot different. And we've been doing this for 30--like I said, 31 years. Our spelling bee, we held in a couple of months. But I didn't really make--I didn't know about this National Spelling Bee at the time that I participated in the third grade. And I always remember--and it's funny because Scripps has changed the rules now. But when I was in the bee, I lost on the word "Indian." And it was because I didn't say, "capital I." Scripps has now eliminated that rule, where you don't have to use capital letters--I mean, you spell the word. You don't have to say capital. So I came in second place and won a great big old Hershey bar; it was great. I was excited (laughter). Speaker 2: So this was city-wide, you got (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: No, I just--I got it-- Speaker 2: That's just--that was a school spelling bee? Speaker 1: Yeah, that was just a school bee. Speaker 2: school bee, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. If I had won, yeah, I may have gone further, but no, that was--that was just the--the school bee. Speaker 2: That's a tricky thing, capital I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I know. Yeah, capitals, apostrophes, all those things that they used to have they got rid of, which was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I think helpful. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I do think it is important to know, as a journalist now, that, you know, certain words have to be capitalized. Even though, you know, with this Twitter and Facebook and all that, we just--those rules have gone out the window. But I still think it's important to know because, you know, Indian is supposed to be capitalized. So, I learned that rule (laughter). Story_ID: 97545 Speaker 1: So you had a favorite teacher in, in third grade--said, said your third grade teacher [Ms. Collins at Benning Elementary School in Washington, D.C.] really kind of looked out for you? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think my favorite--most favoritest teacher was a lady, Ms. Richardson, and I had her at Barnard [Elementary School]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I just liked her. I thought she was beautiful. I just thought that she was the prettiest, most classiest woman I had ever seen in my life. And I said if I- "When I grow up, I wanna be like her." And as a matter of fact, I saw her not too long ago. I visited a church, and she was there. And I was just shocked because Ms. Richardson had not changed at all. So--but then she was a great teacher, you know. And I had her in the--she was my--I believe she was my first grade teacher. Speaker 1: (unclear) first grade teacher made a big impression. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she really did. And Ms. Collins did too, you know, in, in the third grade. Because I think at the time we had a third and fourth grade--I was in this merged third and fourth grade class, and--which I thought--I guess, you know, my mother [Vera McGlossom Rolark Abbott] may have pushed for that, so that gave us an opportunity to be exposed to what some of the older kids were being exposed to. So, Ms. Collins was very focused on making sure that children, if they had-- did appear to be somewhat advanced, that they got a chance to participate with the fourth graders, so. And again, very stately woman, you know, dark, kind of tall, you know, was just--she was just a presence and, and just a good teacher. And I, I was still fortunate to have always had good teachers, even my--when I went to Keene [Elementary School], which was probably the first that I can remember having a white teacher, which was a lady named--I can't remember her name--Ms. Frank was her name, and she was an older woman but a great teacher, as well. Story_ID: 97546 Speaker 1: But then I had this teacher named Ms. Job, that was my fifth grade teacher, and that was my first exposure to the word "racist." 'Cause I don't remember hearing that word before, particularly, as it related to me. And while I liked Ms. Job, she was very mean (laughter), we thought, as students, and she had said some things to a couple of my classmates that I shared with my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]. So-- Speaker 2: What kinds--what, what did she say? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know if she called us "pickaninnies" or, you know, some--some word. One of my closest friends told me that, actually, my best friend in, the fifth grade, Cheryl Santiago, who was, you know, part Hispanic. But--and so, we went on a class trip, and my father decided to accompany us on that trip. He was gonna be the parent chaperone. And he had a conversation with Ms. Job which changed the way that she dealt with us, at least this class, that year. I don't what happened later. But that's when I heard the word "racist," because he accused her of being racist and just acknowledged or had her to understand that, that was unacceptable. After that--I'm trying to figure who my sixth grade teacher was. I don't remember who my sixth grade teacher was. It may come back to me. So, yeah, she was--she just--she just had an attitude about, you know, these black kids that she was--was teaching. And Keene was a predominantly black elementary school, you know. And, and--actually, it was all black. I don't remember any white kids that may have gone there. Speaker 2: Had the neighborhood changed recently or within the last five or six years to, you know, black? And there's somebody else we were talking to earlier in the week--was talking about Northeast changing, you know, population at one point. When they moved there from the area around Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], they moved over to Northeast and said it was all white when they got there, but within four years it was all black. Speaker 1: Well, from my perspective, all of D.C. was all black. Every place I lived was all black. You know, like I said, I didn't have my first white teacher until--that I can recall, until I was in fourth grade. All of my classmates were black, I mean, elementary, junior high, and high school. And the neighborhoods were all black. So I don't know when, you know, in the areas where we lived when the transition took place, but it had to have been much earlier than when we got there. But in the schools, you know, teachers are--they kind of hold over a lot longer. And so I think that's probably, in this case--even though our principal, Mrs. DeSay (ph.)--and it's funny I can remember all these folks--I loved her. She was great. I met her son, you know, a few years back. She understood, you know, the importance of making sure that the children in her school had a quality education. And at the time, nobody, really, that I can tell looked at these people as white people, you know, until we met Ms. Job (laughter), and that was sort of the wake-up call. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 97547 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--so sixth grade, you're about eleven. So, so this is about 196--what is it? Speaker 2: About '65 [1965], '66 [1966], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Maybe '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay, so we-- Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: --we talked about them. So, now your father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], he's writing about-now did, did you meet any of the Civil Rights activists in those day--in those days, in '65' [1965], '66' [1966], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was really strong. A lot of the leaders came out of Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], you know, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure], and [Charles] Charlie Cobb, and a lot of them, you know. So did you meet a lot of them activist? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, in different ways. I met--my mother was--became a secretary for the organization called Club Internationale [ph.] and, again, you know, she'd work at state [the State Department]. So these were mostly--and I can't say they were--it was a black organization. I just know it was an organization of people who were interested in international affairs, and so they were different--from different walks of life. And one of their speakers--I went with her to meeting. I was always so excited about this--was [HM] Dick Gregory. And I had to-it was my job to make sure Dick Gregory had his glass of water. We've become very good friends now, but I always have that recollection of giving this man, who was evidently very important, a glass of water. And so, yeah, my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] took me to--when, when [HM] Marion Barry came to Washington [D.C.], you know, as a member of SNCC, and he started Pride, Incorporated, my father took me with him to the opening of Pride, Incorporated's headquarters, which was at the corner of 14th and U, and, you know, I got a chance to, to meet this man who was later to become, you know, a three-term--a four-term mayor of Washington, D.C. I met Reverend Ben Hooks [HM Reverend Benjamin Hooks] very ora--early on. Ended up, when I graduated from law school [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.], working at the Federal Communications Commission [FCC], during my internship there, when, when Dr. Hooks was FCC commissioner. You mentioned Charlie Cobb. I was at--had met How--Charlie at--when I was a student at Howard, and he was working at WHUR. And I was a broadca--I was a journalism major, broadcast journalism a minor, and so that's how we met and become--became friends. I got a chance to, you know, meet [HM] Julian Bond--again, very really early on-[HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson--you name them. If they came to Washington, D.C., at some point, you know, I got a chance to meet these folks. Stokely Carmichael used to spend time at my father's office, particularly when the--he and a group of Washingtonians started a--started the Black United Front, which came out of right--came--right out of the--right--followed the riots, which my father refused to call "riots." He, you know, called it an "economic rebellion" because he just thought it was, you know, black folks sick and tired of the mistreatment by store owners and the lack of a lot of things: resources, jobs, police brutality, which was rampant during that time. And so, you know, they started the Black United Front, which included, you know, Channing Phillips and, like I said, Marion Barry. I'm trying to think of some of the folks that were in that group. But, you know, got a chance to meet all of them. Speaker 1: That was a Reverend that was nominated for president at one the Democratic Conventions [1968]. It was a symbolic nomination, right--Channing Phillips? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Reverend Channing Phillips--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm, exactly, um-hmm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember that, but yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was--I think it was a '72 [1972] [sic, 1968] campaign and they did a symbolic nomination for him. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so Black Uni--so, Black United Front and all of that, that comes a little bit later, when--when I guess you're high school--I guess high school, all right. Speaker 2: I'm in junior high school. Speaker 1: Junior high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was '60 [1960]--the riots were in '68 [1968] or the-[Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968] and the follow--riots followed. So that was that year. Story_ID: 97548 Speaker 1: What was the--what junior high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Rabaut, R-A-B-A-U-T [Junior High School, later Capital City Public Charter School]. And I'm probably one of the few people who, you know, read the plaque on the wall to find out who Louis Charles Rabaut was (laughter)-- Speaker 1: That is spelled R-A-B-- Speaker 2: A-U-T. Speaker 1: A-U-T. And who was he? Speaker 2: Louis Charles Rabaut was a, a congressman. He may have been a Senator, actually. I'm not sure. But anyway, he was the one who introduced--had the legislation passed to add "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance. Speaker 1: Okay. So we have him to-- Speaker 2: Huh (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we have--yeah, we have him to thank. And the thing about it is, you know, every since then there have been members of Congress that have been trying to take it out. And so yeah, our junior high school was named after him. And it's one of the newest junior high schools in the city. At the time when, when the city went through this building of new schools, Rabaut was--I was in the--I was the second class of students to enter Rabaut, and it's also the school that Roberta Flack--where she taught. She never mentions Rabaut, though, and the students--the alumni there are very upset about that because she doesn't talk about that. Speaker 1: So Roberta Flack, did she teach music there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she was Mrs. Novosel at the time. Speaker 1: Novosel--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't even know how to spell it. I didn't have her, so. Speaker 1: I know there're stories that she didn't think that she could sing really. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She could play the piano and she didn't think that she was a good singer. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But she taught music, and everyone said she was a great music teacher. And they knew that when she left there, she was gonna perform in some nightclub someplace, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think out of that, they--she gained a lot respect as a teacher. Speaker 1: So this is 1966 when you started junior high school, right? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] I think it was. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay. All right, okay, so this is like seventh, eighth and ninth grade? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Story_ID: 97549 Speaker 1: So this is a time [1968], as you--as you were sayin' where-- when the re--urban rebellion took place-- The "economic rebellion" that your father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] puts it. A lot of pe--pe--pe--people do say that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And said it then. You know, people, you know, it's always written down as a riot. That's what people say. So, do you remember where you were when it started and what--I mean--I guess it was triggered by the assassination of Dr. King. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: April 4, 1968. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, what--tell us where you were and when you found--when you first heard about it? Speaker 2: You know, I, I compare my recollection to the history, and it's something that's a little bit awry. But I remember being a--and I have a classmate, a good friend of mine--we all remember being on the playground during lunchtime at Rabaut [Junior High School in Washington, D.C., later Capital City Public Charter School] when we heard that Dr. King had been assassinated, and while there were only a couple of white students at Rabaut, there was this young--one of our white classmates had the audacity to holler out, "I'm glad they killed him." And, you know, I never saw her again after that day. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean, did that mean that she was-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, let's say I--she must have left the school, you know, because folks did react. And then, you know, I guess it was within a couple of days, that's when the city erupted. Story_ID: 97550 Speaker 1: One of the positive things, I think that came out of that for the students at Rabaut [Junior High School, later Capital City Public Charter School], and I don't know--and, and at schools around the city [Washington, D.C.] was that, you know, there was this demand for black history. So, Rabaut brought in a teacher, a guy out of--I think he was out of Massachusetts, but he'd been in the Peace Corps, and he came to teach black history to us, and I loved him to death. And he was one of the first teachers I--that-- knew that had changed his name, so he went--his last name was--we called him--I mean he was--Mr. Henderson, but his first name was Chaka (ph.) or Chako (ph.) Henderson. And, and the fact that he'd been in the Peace Corps was also fascinating, because not only was he teaching us black history, but he did it from a global perspective. And so, I mean, I think some of the kids didn't quite appreciate him. And he would come, you know, dressed in his dashiki and, and all that. It was just sort of eye opening for me. It's also the time when I changed my hair. My mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Barnes] had started me really early, I guess around in the sixth grade, of gettin' these permanents. And my hair never held a curl. I don't care if you straightened it or put a relaxer in it, it just would not hold a curl. By the time I would walk from the beauty salon to the house, it looked like normal (laughter), like it's supposed to look. Speaker 2: It would go--what they used to say, "go back"--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It would go back, right. And so, to me that was a--that era provided me with some freedom. And I washed my hair one day. My mother was upset with me 'cause she said you--"I didn't give you permission to wash your hair." And it was just this big ball of, you know, stuff. And she said because, you know, "You didn't ask me, you're gonna have to walk around like that." And I had seen these people wearing something called a bush, and I heard all you needed was a kitchen fork to comb it, so I went in the kitchen, I got a fork, and I tried my best to, you know, get it through. And I was a happy camper for several days. And so my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], when he saw me, he said, you know, "If you're gonna wear your hair like this then we need to get it done right." So, he took me to a barbershop and got it kind of shaped up. Speaker 2: Trimmed. Speaker 1: Right, right. So when I graduated from Rabaut, there were, I think, eight or nine of us that had afros. And, this may sound bad, but I thought it was pretty special. They put us in a special section in the year book with these circles, you know, around our heads, so we were like the bush kids or something. I don't know, but--bush students, the afro students. Of course, it grew into a very popular hairstyle from then. But Dr.--I mean Mr. Henderson, you know, sort of reinforced all of that with me. He helped--I think for me, it just made it feel very special to be able to be black, you know, to hear James Brown talking about "I'm black and I'm proud." And-- and in the music, all the things that I had sort of been exposed to growing up sort of began to make sense to me. You know, it all came together after the rebellion and with his teacher who was--was giving us black history. To this day, I'm still trying to find him just to say, you know: I appreciate what you did. And where are you? What have you been doing all these years? So-- Speaker 2: So he was a Peace Corps member. The last name is Henderson. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and I think it's--I don't remember what his first name was, but-- Speaker 2: But they called him Cha--Chaka or Choko? Speaker 1: Chaka, yeah. Speaker 2: Chaka Henderson, okay. Speaker 1: Chaka Henderson, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. I probably met him somewhere (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so. Speaker 2: But I don't know. I can't--I can't be sure, but--but that's--okay so this is a time of cultural change. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know. Story_ID: 97551 Speaker 1: Now what was your favorite subject in school, when you were in school--I mean, in those days? Speaker 2: What was my favorite subject? Well, it wasn't science, even though I love my science teacher, Mrs. Roundtree, because she was tough and she me stay--you know, I had to come back to class in the evenings just to make--I mean, after school a lot of times with her. Probably--I'm gonna say probably English. And I'm just sayin' that because I don't even remember who my English teacher was. But I liked to read, and that was during the elementary school and, and junior high school, especially junior high was when I--maybe it was black history. I can't--you know, that was probably it, that year. I remember finding in the Rabaut [Junior High School, later Capital City Public Charter School] library a series of books on America's famous heroines. First of all, I didn't know what heroine meant. So I started reading books about these women and what they'd done. And so, you know, Mr. Henderson helped me to kind of begin to appreciate a little bit about history. Although I didn't like history, you know, the class, history class; I didn't like that, but I did it but I wasn't--I didn't appreciate history. So, I'm gonna say probably English. And one of my English teachers, who was also my homeroom teacher, was Mrs. Balkisoon. Speaker 1: How do you spell--and this is-- Speaker 2: B-A-L-K-I-S-O-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay and she taught English? Speaker 2: She taught English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I kind of--you know, during the time that I was at Rabaut, you know--and that's why I can relate to young people now because I was kinda losing interest in school. I felt the importance of going, you know. I was very involved. I was, you know, class president all the way through. I spent a lot of time with the principal, Dr. [Lawrence] Graves. You know, I used to go and visit and talk with him a lot. And so those were the kinds of things that kept me sort of connected with school. Classroom was just something I had to do. At the same time, I was also, you know, athletically involved. You know, I was tryin' to, you know, participate in the girls track team. They started a track team at Balou within--I mean at Rabaut, and then they couldn't get a track coach, so we didn't have track, but I was involved in, you know, activities with the local recreation center. So I played powder puff football, and I was a third baseman on the, you know, girls softball team, and I was a cheerleader at Rabaut. That kept me interested (laughter). You know, it was anything that was sort of sports related I liked. But, you know, other than that black history class, I can't really think of any other favorites. Story_ID: 97552 Speaker 1: Okay, so Calvin Coolidge High School [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--by this time, now you've been, you know, spending some time working on--with your dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] at-- at the paper [the Washington Informer] over the summer? Speaker 2: By this time, I'm writing a column for the paper. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the name of your column? Speaker 2: It's--well, in junior high school [Rabaut Junior High School] it was called, "The Junior High School Scene," and the idea or the concept was for me to write about activities at junior high schools, you know, across the city. Of course, I didn't know what was going on in junior high schools across the city, but because I'd been to all these different schools, I had friends that were in different schools, and--and then my father and stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] lived in Southeast, D.C., so I had friends, you know, in--in Southeast who--so I would talk to them about what's going on at your junior high school. And so sometimes I would add, you know, information about their schools, but most of it was about things going on at Coolidge. And he wanted me to do this on a monthly basis. And I probably did it about five or six times. And then when I went to high school--became "The High School Scene." Story_ID: 97553 Speaker 1: So--now, so he [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] started a pa--paper in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And that's when you were in--actually, in elementary school? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And so you started working with--what in '68 [1968], '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: I actually started in '64 [1964]. I was nine years old, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when he--when he started it, 'cause my birthday's in December, so I started it, you know, that year. And--but then, you know, I would do--My job at the paper during the summers were typing up the mailing labels for the subscribers for the year. You know, my father was trying to find busy work for me, so he figured if I had to write up--type up 52 labels--52 sets of labels for, you know, the subscribers, that would keep me busy all summer. But I learned about carbon paper (laughter) and that you could get four sets of--four sheets, you know, to type on a manual typewriter. And he had bought me a Gregg typing book, so that is how I spent a lot of time. I never could pass a typing test, but, you know, that was a lot of fun for me, you know, tryin' to teach myself how to type. So, at four times--you know, four of these sets of labels and maybe ten pages each--I was usually finished within a week, and so that kind of frustrated him because he couldn't get--and so the other job then was to go through each paper-- 'cause it's been a year--go through each paper and write down all of the ads that appeared in each newspaper. That would take me about a week. And then I had to go to the--make the bank deposits. So once--when any money came in, you know, write out the deposit slips, and then go to what was then National Bank of Washington, which is the building right next to where the National Council of Negro Women is located, on that--Pennsylvania Avenue. Now that should have taken me maybe twenty minutes to walk to the bank and back, but by that time, I knew everybody on 7th Street, I mean every store owner, every store clerk. So I would stop in these on the way down and stop on the way back, and sometimes I'd get treated to lunch, something to drink, you know. I mean, it was like a community. Downtown was--that 7th Street Corridor was like a community, from 7th and G to 7th and D, yeah. But that's what I did during the summers, you know, as a little young child. And then in--af--afterwards, you know, the responsibilities became greater. So, yeah, when I got to junior high school, I was writing this--this column. Speaker 1: So in high school [Calvin Coolidge High School] it was "The High School Scene?" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which rarely got done (laughter). It rarely, rarely got done. Story_ID: 97554 Speaker 1: Now the paper [the Washington Informer], was it a weekly? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A week, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm. Speaker 1: It's a weekly. And about how big was the staff? I, I guess--I mean, give us some sense of the growth of it. It starts in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: With your father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], and who else was working on it? I know your--your stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] worked on it, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. She actually helped him to start the paper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know--but she was, you know, an attorney, so that took up most of her time. And, at the time that he started, it may have been maybe three or four people. Yeah, that's it, a photographer--a couple of photographers. He had a couple of columnists, but, you know, they did other things. I mean, we still kinda operate under the same motto. We never really had much of a staff, but-- Speaker 1: So, in terms of permanent staff, is there any--I mean, I guess he was the permanent staff-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all the time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Full time. Then the rest of the people were kinda plugged in as they-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And see, within a matter of, of--Maybe about seven years later is when he started working on United Black Fund. So the paper, in some ways, became the stepchild because he had this new focus and this new direction that was, you know, more, definitely, broadly established locally. But then--now there's national and there's international presence. So he was maintaining the paper but--and he brought in a--a gentlemen, who used to work for the YMCA, who is retired. And essentially, you know, he, Mr. Smith, and I were in--In the early days it was the two of us in the office. He shared my stepmother's staff, so the woman who was her receptionist was the receptionist for the paper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She also did all the billing and she maintained all of the subscriptions. So, their offices were together as well as United Black Fund. They were all in this--this, you know, this four--let's see, it's probably--it's a five-office kind of--I don't wanna call it a suite, but, you know, that's what it was, I guess. And so they shared each--shared each other's staff. And--and Mr. Smith actually stayed there and kept the paper going until I finished law school [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.], yeah. Speaker 1: And when--when was that? Speaker 2: '79' [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was there about ten years. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his first name? Speaker 2: M--initial M, Paul, P-A-U-L, Smith. Story_ID: 97555 Speaker 1: Calvin Coolidge High School [Washington, D.C.], now this is--is this a regular high school or is it-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I was wondering-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --if it was a magnet school or something, or. Speaker 2: We didn't have any magnets then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I think Duke Ellington [School of the Arts in Washington, D.C.] started not long after that, out of Western [High School]. But, no, it was probably one of--the three last schools, I think, in the District to really fully integrate were: Coolidge; as I said, Western; and [Woodrow] Wilson High Schools. But by the time I got to Coolidge it was predominantly black. I think it was at that time that I was really sort of getting bored with school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader at Coolidge; that kept my interest (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Was kind of bored with the school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you said this now a couple times now. What--what was it about school that was just--were your teachers just weren't interesting? The subject matter didn't really, you know, stretch your-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: --knowledge? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just think--I don't know what it was. I--I ju--I was just losing interest, you know. Again, that's why I can kinda relate to--but I knew I had to go. I knew I had to graduate, you know. There were certain goals that had to be accomplished, but getting to that goal was becoming more and more challenging for me. And so what I did while I was at Coolidge, I got permission to go to night school for my senior year, so I graduated a year early. I went to the eleventh grade during the day, and I took my 12th grade classes at night and at [Theodore] Roosevelt [Senior] High School. Because I had really all the credits; the only thing I needed was--yeah, I think it was, like, six credits to graduate, so it didn't make sense to me to spend an entire year in the twelfth grade knowing that I probably only had to go to school for half a day. And, you know, I could just--if I could go to college, let me go ahead and do that as opposed to wasting this year. So, that's why I took night school classes. And it's very interesting 'cause I did well. And the principal almost pulled me out of night school 'cause he said, "You're doing well there, but you're not doing well during the day." And-- Speaker 1: Were your--your grades suffering because you didn't like school, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You know, gettin'--I wasn't disciplined, you know, that's really what it was. I wasn't disciplined; I wasn't studying like I should, you know--you know, I wasn't focused on it. And I was becoming more sociable, you know. And, so I did just enough, you know, not to fail. And it's really interesting, I have to admit, you know, two days before graduation--Again, I would have graduated. I graduated a year early although age-wise I was still on par 'cause, you know, I had to start school later 'cause of my birthday, you know. So I was graduating age-wise with the same kids, but, you know, I was supposed to finish in '73' [1973]. But two days before graduation, I went to my math teach, because her class would have determined whether I graduated or not and what I did on that final exam. And I made it by two points. She said, "Denise, you know, you passed." And that's all I needed to know. I mean, that's kinda tough, you know, you got your gown, and you got--your invitations have gone out, and all this other stuff, you know, and you're not sure the day before or two days before graduation if you're gonna walk or not. But I did--had already applied to college--gotten accepted. Story_ID: 97556 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of col--did you have advice from your--ha--how did you choose Howard [University in Washington, D.C.]? Was it because of your--was it influence from your parents or your--or your counselors or--or you just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I actually didn't choose Howard. Speaker 1: You didn't choose Howard? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I chose initially the University of Hawaii (laughter). I wanted to figure out how far away I could get from Washington, D.C. And-- Speaker 1: So you don't sound like you were happy in, you know, in high school. Speaker 2: You know, I just--I just wanted a break, you know. I wanted to go someplace different. And, again, Mr. Henderson had told me there's this world out there. And I didn't get any advice. I didn't get any, you know--I didn't know from my guidance counselor or anybody. What helped me come back to earth was my stepmother's [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] secretary or law--well, I guess it was her secretary for the summer. She went to Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University], and she told my stepmother, you know, "You shouldn't"--and my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]--"You should send Denise down to Hampton. Let her take a look at that because it's a great place." And so we packed up and went down to visit, and I loved it. I said, "Well, this'll work" It's--it's far enough away from home for me not to be in D.C., but it's not so far that I can't get back home, you know, if I--if I need to. You know, it's just a bus ride. So I went to Hampton. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started out there. And--and then later on I transferred to Howard. Speaker 1: So Hampton University--this is 1972-- Speaker 2: I was at Hampton Institute. Speaker 1: Hampton Institute. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--institute. Speaker 2: Yeah, I got there in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: In 1972. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 97557 Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what was was Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University] like? I mean--wha--wha--what--how did you like it? Speaker 2: I loved it a little bit too much (laughter). Got down there and some kinda way ended up being the freshman class sweetheart, you know, I was in the coronation and all that kinda stuff and, you know, a lot of people from [Washington] D.C. were down there, you know, so that was--that was--that was pretty cool. But, again, I just--I was a very undisciplined student. I had this crazy notion that, you know, on Tuesdays and Thursdays--no, I had the crazy notion that on days that it rained, I didn't go to class, and that just happened to be on Tuesdays and Thursdays. And those were--those two classes, you know, I failed, and by the end of the first semester at Hampton, they put me on academic probation, and by the end of the first year, they asked me to leave. So, my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] and stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] went back down there, and we had a conversation. That was a real wake-up call for me, you know. It should have been when my principal at [Calvin] Coolidge [High School in Washington, D.C.] was gonna pull me out of night school, but it didn't. But that year, when I felt--when I got--you know, was told that I was gonna be expelled from Hampton--And I knew that there was nothing that they--that I had experienced in a classroom that I couldn't do, it's just that I opted not to. So, they let me back in. I had to go to summer school. I took two classes. They let me take art classes. I took a ceramics class at 7:30 in the morning and a basic design class at 9:00. And at 10:00 every day I was through with school (laughter). And I got an A and a B. A great time--my--well, A and a B and my first jellyfish bite, because the rest of the day we'd spend, you know, at Buckroe Beach in Hampton [Virginia]. And I had a great time. A couple of my best friends were there. You know, we socialized or partied. I burned myself out. And by the time school started, I was--I was--I was there; I was ready. You know, I had gotten all of that out of me--out of my system. So, I went back in the fall, changed my major 'cause I had started out in political science, that was my major, and I changed my major to mass media. Because I said, you know, if you're gonna make this successful, if you wanna graduate from college, you need to do something that you like and that comes natural for you. So, what have you been doing all your life? You been working for a newspaper, you know, so you know a little bit about media. You've been exposed to this. Change your major to mass media. And--and--and that was probably the best decision I could have made. Pulled my grade point average up from a 1.65 to a 2.4, you know, in a--in a year and then decided that I wanted to come back to [Washington] D.C. Story_ID: 97558 Speaker 1: My first choice was American University [Washington, D.C.], but then I said, "Denise, you wanna graduate, you don't want a culture shock, you haven't been around--you haven't been in predominantly white institutions, so don't use this--these last two years to try to fight that battle, in case it's gonna be one." You know, Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] finally--I heard from them later, and so that's where I went. Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1974 I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah, '74 [1974], right. Speaker 2: Okay. Howard University, 1974. So this is--Okay, so Howard in '74 [1974] was--there was a lot of political activity on campus and a lot of stuff in the news-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in '74' [1974]. Speaker 1: And here, you know, in D.C., the--I voted in the first election in the District [of Columbia], that was in '72 [1972], the first presidential election, and came back and that's when, you know, the commissioner form of government had changed. We had our first--we were having our first local elections. My stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] ran for the city council that year [1974] and lost and came back the next year because it was the first council--I'm sorry, that was in '72 [1972]-'bout the first city council. So, the person who won in Ward 8 [James Coates] only had a two-year term, and then--because he pulled the shorter straw, that's how they figured out the staggered terms. And so, the next election [1976] she ran again, and she won. Again, United Black Fund, you know, was taking off. And my father, I'd work with him in organizing students at Howard to, to raise money. You know, we had these cans, and we would walk around campus raising money. You know, the [District of Columbia] home rule battle was going on. I mean, it started in the early sixties [1960s], but, you know, even with the limited home rule we had, you know, there still was a struggle here to now get blacks more involved in some of the--in running--in running local government. You know, [HM] Marion Barry--Walter Washington left as mayor--not left, but, you know, was unseated by Marion Barry. Speaker 2: That's in '74 [1974]? Speaker 1: Yeah [sic, Marion Barry was elected as Mayor of the District of Columbia in 1978]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Actually, that may have been ss--I'm gonna say in '74 [1974]--'72 [1972] or '74 [1974], yeah. Story_ID: 97559 Speaker 1: Your father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] and the paper [the Washington Informer] had a close relationship with [HM] Marion Barry, right? Speaker 2: And Walter Washington. Speaker 1: And--and Walt, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, very close with Walter Washington. Speaker 1: Walter Washington was appointed, right, by the--was it the [President Lyndon] Johnson Administration [in 1967] or-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Right, way back Speaker 2: And then he was elected. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, when they changed, he was--he was elected mayor [in 1974]. And, you know, he was, you know, mayor at the time of the riots or the rebellion [1968]. And, you know--so yeah, my, my father had a close relationship with, with him and then later with may--with most of the mayors (laughter). Speaker 1: Wha--What was your impression of Marion Barry in those days? Speaker 2: He was a man for that time. You know, we needed--I mean, he wore his dashikis. He had his afro. He was--I mean, the people who were sort of outcasts of--of the--of the prior administrations, you know, a large number of folks who were unemployed, you know--I just thought he was a man for his time. He empowered a lot of people. He gave them that start that they needed, with regards to jobs. And he--you know, like [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], talk about--talked about being a street sweeper. You know, he gave some pride to--"pride" to people who were cleaning up the neighborhoods and cleaning up the streets. I mean, they--I just thought he was--he was a good force and influence. And then when he became mayor--when he took the dashiki off and started with the suits and ties--I mean, he was bringing people from all over the place to Washington [D.C.] to run this city. So, it was, I think, what we needed at the time, to know that we could be what we always knew, you know, that we could run cities, we could run governments, we could run agencies, we--we--You know, the only thing that was keeping us back primarily was the color of our skin. And--and then, of course, he was a former school board member and president of the school board. So I think that had--began to have a positive influence on the schools and the people within the education administration in D.C. Story_ID: 97560 Speaker 1: And we sort of--I think that's where things probably fell apart quicker than anyplace else. Speaker 2: Schools? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I know what-[HM] Barbara Sizemore was one of the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She, she was appointed [in 1972]-- Speaker 1: Superintendent. Speaker 2: Superintendent-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --(Unclear) there's some much promise, a lot of people were really excited about that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. As a matter of fact, when-- when the board voted to let her go, my father led several demonstrations against the board because he was a supporter of [HM] Barbara Sizemore. And to me, some of the things that she said--because of--you know, I kept thinking about Mr. Henderson, you know, and the influence he had on his students to sort of understand history and culture, and Barbara Sizemore came out of that, you know, school as well. And she was--you know, when she talked about education, to me she was talking--you know, black kids and what black kids needed and how the ed--the education system needs to support, you know, our--our generation. And--and it just--it didn't fly, so. We've let a lot of good superintendents go, you know, who came to [Washington] D.C. You know, I always say, we bring people here, we, you know, chew 'em up and spit 'em out, and then they go someplace else, and they're very successful. So I've not figured out how or why, but-- Speaker 2: It's a tough--it's really a tough place for superintendents, as you said. I mean, they come and go, and the problem is--Does the problem have to do with the federal--I mean, it's the only school--it's the only city that's gotta report to Congress and that sort of thing. You think that's part of the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, a--you know, I-in--in another way, yeah, yes. I mean, it might be because, you know--the more I look at it now, the more I feel like the District is becoming the guinea pig of Congress. So whenever there are newer--any new initiatives, let's try 'em out in D.C. And so you have to have a school leader like Michelle Rhee who--who is kinda on the same page where Congress wants the system to go. So that's why now we have more charter schools, you know, this huge number of charter schools in the District. It's almost--and to me it's almost beginning to be, like, privatized education because you got these corporations now that are gonna come in and run charter schools as opposed to traditional public education. And I don't think it's happening in such a large scale as it is in Washington because this is what--you know, where the direction the federal may be going in, and so let's test it in Washington. And anybody that's gonna fight against that is not gonna be on our team--can't play with us and--and whether it's good or bad for the students. You know, you got mostly lower income students in the District who are a part of the public school system, so, you know, they don't have a say, we can--we can experiment with them. And, that's my conspiracy theory, and I'm sticking with it (laughter). Story_ID: 97561 Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1974. I remember coming here [Washington, D.C.] in the spring of '74' [1974] for African Liberation Day where thousands of African Americans came-- Speaker 2: I was there. Speaker 1: --to D.C. to, you know--I think-Imamu [Amiri] Baraka was the keynote speaker. But people were concerned about, you now, Africa and the rest of the black world outside of America, which is something that you didn't see as much of in any other city. I mean, D.C. was the center for that kind of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --activity. Speaker 2: Now it was--it was--and, actually, that's where I met Stokely [Carmicheal, also known as Kwame Toure], in my father's [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] office. Because they came to him, you know, United Black Fund, to help to support that African Liberation Day and a couple of others that--that followed and--you know, I was--I was there; I marched. Because we marched, as you know, from the placed I used to swim, you know, Meridian Hill [Park] or Malcolm X Park-- Speaker 1: Malcolm X Park, right. Speaker 2: --you know, to--to L'Enfant [ph.] Park right, to the White House and down 16th Street. You know, coming back to Washington now, you know, from Hampton, where I'd partied for a year, and now really finding, again, my gr--my--my grounding, you know, and--and this whole--from cultural, you know, and sort of--I wanna call it revolutionary, but cultural experience, I think was really, you now--this is where I was supposed to be at the right time. Everything in its own season, and this was a time and season for me to be here. And then, you know, that was--it--the--you know, everything--I mean, we just did an interview with Baba Zulu [Dr. El Senzengakulu Zulu] who started the-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --you know, African-centered school [Ujamaa School]. The oldest is forty-two years old in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], it's still going. And, you know, the school started, you know, around that time. There were other African-centered schools that started-Roots [Public Charter School] and some others. And all of their--their students--I mean, he can feel himself, you know--really proud--beat himself on the chest, because most of his students have done extremely well, you know, in, in, in, you know, college and their careers. So, you know, there's--there's something to be said, I think, for that period and, and what it helped to do. It also probably was the--you know, [HM] Marion Barry and folks out of that area probably is what grew this middle class that we have now, which unfortunately, I think, has turned its back on, you know, some of that, you know, and has not passed it on to the next generation. Story_ID: 97881 Speaker 1: Okay, so Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the mid-'70s [1970s]--We were just talking about African Liberation Day, that must have been--what, six and seven of those from '70 [1970]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: to '70 [1970], you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember how many, but it was--yeah, they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was a huge turnout of people from all over the African world. Speaker 2: Nah, it was--it was great, you know, and I--I just--you know, and I can only say that the time to do that again is now. You know, I think the time is ripe for--for--for that kind--and it's--and it needs to happen now because, you know, when you talk about all the different cultural groups that were there, African folks from the Diaspora, we all need--this is such a--because now we have access. We don't look at the world as big as we did then. And so through internet and what have you, you know, there's just so much we could do if we would just all kinda--the question is whether, you know, NPD would allow it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 97882 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers and mentors or maybe people that influenced you in Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] from '74 [1974] until you graduated? Speaker 2: Well I'll start with [HM] Samuel Yette, who wrote the book, "The Choice" who taught my introduction to journalism class, who was I think the greatest teacher any journalism student could ever have. He had such a distrust of the system and because of that, he taught us to question everything. And so, you know, first thing in the morning, 9:00, if you walked into Samuel Yette's class at 9:01 it was not gonna be good. So, you know, he taught discipline; he taught discipline his journalist; he taught us, you know, about the importance of reading newspapers, the importance of--I mean all of that--I mean--I thought was really great. I also had Wallace Terry, who was a great writer, and he wrote, I think, the book on blacks and--black soldiers in the Vietnam War. I can't remember the name of the book. Speaker 1: "Bloods." Speaker 2: "Bloods," exactly. Speaker 1: That's the author of "Bloods." Speaker 2: Right, he wrote "Bloods." And because I--because of my transferring to Howard from Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University], I had to double up on my credits, so my last year at Howard I had to take 21 hours both semesters. Fortunately, I took them--several classes from Wallace Terry. So that experience was--was really great. I also took a court--a course called Black Thought from Don L. Lee or otherwise known as-- Speaker 1: [HM] Haki Madhubuti. Speaker 2: Haki Madhubuti. And, you know, that was--I knew who he was, which was one reason why I wanted to take the class and gain greater admiration and appreciation for him, you know--following that class. So that was great. And then, you know, right--right after leaving--I mean, I think I got there at--Tony--gosh--Brown--was his last year--[William Anthony] Tony Brown's last year as dean of the School of Communications. Because he opened up the school, and then served as dean for a couple of years and then moved on, so--you know, having had that one year, you know, as him--with him as dean of the School of Communications. Story_ID: 97883 Speaker 1: It's funny because we had a very small school; I had transferred to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], but a lot of folks had transferred to Howard that year; and we were in trailers. It was before they had built the school, so a lot of our classes we dispersed and it--across campus was also the early days of WHUR. So-- Speaker 2: That's Howard? Speaker 1: --Melvin Lindsey-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Howard University. Speaker 1: Yeah, Ho--Howard University Radio. And--and also W--which is now WHUT, Howard University Television. Speaker 2: What was it called then? Speaker 1: It was--I don't remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'll come back to me. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: WHUT? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but it changed the name and they--you know, that was sold to Howard University by Graham, Dorothy Graham [sic, Katharine Graham], of the Washington Post-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for a dollar, so long as it became a training institute and--'cause I think it was pr--probably part of the Post/Newsweek family, so they sold it Howard. WHTT, I think is what it was before. WHTT, I think it was--nah, I think that's what it was. So, you know, we--and--and as a result of the request from the students, they started a student broadcast--radio broadcast facility. But before then, you know, we took our classes--our broadcast classes in the radio station and--and again, that's where you mentioned [Charles Cobb] Charlie Cobb, that's where I met Charlie-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --while I was a student--a student there. And so he was always very helpful. Speaker 2: I heard--I used to have a set of tapes when Charlie Cobb at FESTAC--he interviewed every--all the intellectuals at FESTAC for a Howard show. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: The programming was--I heard the programming in those days and it was really unbelievable. I mean, the kind--if you'd have, like, portions of the speeches of Malcolm X, you might have Ferrell [Pharoah] Sanders and Stevie Wonder and everything, you know, it was an atypical black radio broadcast. Speaker 1: Right, it was. You know, now--now it's--you know, it's a commercial station, you know. But the jazz and--like you said, the cultural programs that were there, was just--it was something you would keep your ear plug into because, you know, it was so much information there. So those were primarily the--the professors that I--at Howard that I had that, I think, also kind of, you know, added a little fire to all of the other stuff I had been exposed to over the years. And they were great. I mean, just, again, with [HM] Samuel Yette, having that opportunity was just--he was just--he was just a great instructor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right, yeah, Samuel Yette wrote "The Choice: The Issue of Black Survival in America." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, now-- Speaker 1: Which you'll find in a bookshelf around here somewhere (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, you just--he passed about two years ago , I think it was-- Speaker 1: Right, Right. Story_ID: 97884 Speaker 1: So, now did you write for the--did--did you as a journalism student write for Howard's [Howard University in Washington, D.C.] newspaper. Speaker 2: I did write for the Hilltop. Speaker 1: Okay the Hilltop. Speaker 2: Yeah. And (laughter), I got to Howard--You know, it's funny, there was this, like, battle going on between these two student organizations, the--the HUSA, the Howard University Student Association, and the Howard University--I don't--I can't remember the other one, but there were two student--competing student organizations that were gonna represent the university. And so my first story--at the time, Hodari Ali [Hodari Abdul-Ali]--I don't know if you know that name, but Hodar-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who started Pyramid Bookstore, and we were classmates, but Hodari was the editor of the Hilltop. So he brought me on, and that was, you know--I didn't know anything about, you know, Howard po--school student politics. And to me--I mean, going from Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University] to Howard was like going from the country to the city, you know. And I'd, you know, written for Hampton's newspaper as well, but, you know, we had a staff of maybe five. The Hilltop was huge, and students got paid. I couldn't believe a student get--would get paid for writing for the school newspaper. So I did a series of stories on that, which--that was the first story I had to do for them. Speaker 1: That's--I mean, you got two competing student organizations-- Speaker 2: Right. We had to meet with the presidents and the--try to figure out, you know, who is who and how they were gonna lead. And--and I think there was gonna have to be some decision on what organization--what--was actually gonna be the one to--you know, the--the "real" student association. But, very different presidents, very different missions. One was a little older than the other. Both men--one--And so in the end--I mean, I kinda wrote--in order--My thing was to diffuse the battle. And in order to diffuse the battle, I figured I needed to give both of them an opportunity to have their say and not in the same story. So, I spent time with one; I spent time with the other; and then in the end, I talked to students and, you know, to see if there could be some resolution to this. I really don't remember what happened (laughter) as a result of it. You know, I think the SGA won out, and that became, you know the official student association for the university. But, you know, after that I talked to Hodari because I was working--when I came back home, I ended up really nearly working full time for the [Washington] Informer as well, so what I tried to do was stories that I ended up doing for my father's [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] paper. I would just give or feed to the Hilltop so that--you know, it was--it seemed a better match to bring community news to the Hilltop as opposed to really taking student news--just focusing on student news, so. And, actually, the--my job at the Informer did end up consuming more of my time. So, in addition to tryin' to get through these twenty-one hours for both semesters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 97885 Speaker 1: I had always had this desire to go to law school because of my stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark], who is an attorney--had been practicing--She was a Howard University [Washington, D.C.] graduate. From undergrad, she went to [Robert H.] Terrell Law School in Washington [D.C.], which was the only night school for--only--yeah, only night school in Washington. So a lot of the lawyers out of her era graduated from Terrell. It's no longer in existence. And so when she and my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] married, I--we used to spend our summers--you know, every year we'd go to the national bar convention, and it's interesting that most of the--my peers, the young people that were at the bar, most of them ended up going to law school, and many of them became lawyers. So I--that's where I understood that term, "beget," you know, "Doctors beget doctors"--"Dentists beget..." and, you know, "Lawyers beget..." so I figured they were gonna beget (laughter) an attorney. Again, I had no desire to go work for the Washington Informer when I became an adult, I just did it 'cause it's what I had to do as a child. But, so my desire was to go to law school and that's what I did-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --went to Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law]. Story_ID: 97886 Speaker 1: Now, [HM] James Cheek was president of Howard--Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law] at that time. Now, who, who, who, who was at the law school? Who was in charge of the law school? Speaker 2: Dean Duncan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [HM] Charles Duncan. Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Duncan? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind--did you see yourself as a particular kind of lawyer when you went to law school--a criminal lawyer or? Speaker 2: At first I wasn't really sure. I did--no, I didn't wanna do criminal law, but once I got there, I learned about this thing called communications law, so I thought, well, you know, maybe I could do that. I didn't know what it was, and as I tell people today, you know, this was prior to cell phones, internet, computers, you know, all of that, and I just didn't know what was down the road. But that's what I wanted to do, which is how I ended up at the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] doing my internship. Let me back up. The Dean of the law school when I went to Howard was Wiley Branton. Speaker 1: Okay, it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --wa--wasn't Charles Duncan? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Duncan came, I believe, after Branton 'cause I remember writing my--no, let me back up. Now I'm confused. Wiley Branton wrote my letter of recommendation to--'cause Duncan was the dean, and then Wiley Branton later came and became dean of the law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But Charles Duncan was the--was a dean. Speaker 1: Well, that's a--well, you know you had a powerful letter of recommendation from Wiley Branton. Speaker 2: My mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] was his secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --you know, I used to go to his office, you know, because she was his secretary at the time and--you know, got to know Dean Branton-I mean, yeah--Attorney Branton, and, you know, learned about his history and what have you. So when he found out I wanted to go to law school, he said, "Sure, I'll write you a letter." Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause Charles Duncan was a part of the Thurgood Marshall group-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that--I mean that Charles handled in Houston [Texas]. He trained groups, you know, Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson, III] and all them, and (unclear), you know. We interviewed him back in 2002. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So--so what was--so you were focusing on communications law, so--I mean, you were kinda drawn to that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, and why, I don't--I can't really tell you; it just sounded interesting. And, again, while even though I majored in undergrad in journalism and minored in radio broadcasting--because at the time Howard required that you major and minor in the School of Communications, I was still taking political science courses. So when I got to Howard, I think Professor Smith--J. Clay Smith, was one of the ones that helped to, you know--helped me to focus in a little bit more in this communications law. Story_ID: 97887 Speaker 1: Funny thing about Howard [University School of Law in Washington, D.C.]--the law school, the day I--I mean it's, like, the second day of, of classes. This guy named Charles Patton, who is now an attorney out of Cleveland [Ohio]--but he was a third-year law student, came up to me--I mean, he said he--he'd had been looking for me, and he said: I heard that you're coming over here from the School of Communications and that, you know, your dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] owns newspaper [the Washington Informer] in [Washington] D.C. And normally, we only let second year law students become editor of the Barrister,--which was Howard University's school newspaper--the law school newspaper. He said: "But I'm graduating this year, and there's nobody in line to become editor after me, so I want you to prepare yourself to become editor." I said, "Okay"--you know, that sounds good. So actually, the second semester of that year, I began to take on that role of editor of the Barrister. That's where Dean [Wiley] Branton and I--I mean, Dean [Charles] Duncan [HM] and I ended up having a little rub. Because he--my focus--a lot of my focus was how do you we, you know, revitalize this--this publication. And if I could get him to see how the newspaper--the student newspaper could help to lift the profile of the law school like it had been many years back. But I ne--it would--it--he might see the benefit of it, but I needed his support to do that. The law school newspaper had no budget and no resources. And at the time, Dean Duncan was on the board of [Eastman] Kodak. But he--he didn't see the necessity. I mean, of course, the Law Journal is the prestigious, you know, publication of any law school, and I wasn't a Law Journal. Again, I was still a very average student, you know. I wasn't raising any flags with regards to my academics. I just was more--a little bit more disciplined. But I was really trying to do some things with the--with the newspaper, so I got the support of the alumni director, who gave me the names of--and addresses of all the alumni of Howard, and wrote all these folks letters and asked them for a mere--I think it was $12.00 to help to support the newspaper. And some folks came through. Story_ID: 97888 Speaker 1: But I think what really changed Dean [Charles] Duncan's [HM] mind was when we [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.] built the moot courtroom. And Judge--Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall was our keynote speaker. And this got international attention. Speaker 2: So the--now who built the moot court that (unclear)? Speaker 1: The university. Speaker 2: The university, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I was a brand--it's--you know it's--I mean, much of the law school has been rebuilt. And, you know, the la--the law school--after the sixties when the lawyers--the law students led the sit-ins on campus. I mean, I--I wasn't--I hear some of them say that's when [HM James] Cheek decided to move the law school across town to the Dumbarton campus over off of Connecticut Avenue. He said let me get those students over there 'cause they're raising too much ruckus over here. So they put us--put the law school over there, which is where I went, on the Dumbarton campus in D.C. So, you know, it was an old, I think, Catholic school for girls [Dumbarton College of the Holy Cross] or something. I'm not sure what it was before we got there. But the university bought the property. It was a beautiful facility, but it was an old, old building. So they had to erect this--wanted to erect the moot courtroom with the--within the building. So the--at the dedication ceremony, as I said, Thurgood--Justice Marshall was our--was the keynote speaker; and the quote, unquote student "student" leaders, you know, were asked to participate in the program. If nothing more, to sit on the stage. So I needed to find somebody who could actually write the story about--you know, for the--for the Barrister because we were gonna put a paper out that week on this event. So I--one of my classmates said: "Well, Denise, I'm a reporter; I can--I'll, I'll do the story," and I got somebody else to take photographs. So right after that event was over, I asked him when he would have the--have the--have the story for me. He said, "I'll have it to you in the morning." You know, I had already talked to the printer. We were gonna have this thing done--full-page photograph. It was gonna be really nice. And then he--he delivers me a transcript. And I'm saying "This is a transcript. You know, I was looking for a story." He said: "Well, this is--you know, I'm a reporter; this is what I do." I said, "What do you mean you're reporter?" "Reporters don't do this." He said, "I'm a court reporter." (Laughter). I said, "Okay." I said: "Well, then we're run Justice Marshall's speech--entire speech in the newspaper, and then we'll just add some other stuff to it." When that paper came out, Dean Duncan had received requests from around the world for copies of Justice Marshall's speech, which he hadn't prepared a written speech. So we were the only ones that had it. And that's when the light went on for me with regards to what my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] had been doing all this time with journalism. You know--he who controls the medium controls the message. And I'm, like--you know--divinely, you know, I got this idea to just run the speech. And Dean Duncan said: "Denise, whatever you need just let me know, you know, because I need papers; I need to get these out to people and, you know, you were just-" you know, I mean, he didn't give me any of those kinda accolades, but--you know. So as a result, I ended up with cases of Kodak Film and cameras and money from the Dean, which was a good thing. And so after that, you know, we sort of rolled along as a newspaper. Story_ID: 97889 Speaker 1: I struggled along as a student. I worked at the Federal Communications Commission [FCC]. I got my internship there. J. Clay Smith was--was there as well, as I said--[HM] Dr. [Benjamin] Hooks. And I still--I ended up working in the broad--in the broadcast bureau at the FCC. And my job that entire summer--I had two jobs. And we were--actually, there were no African Ameri--there were twenty lawyers in that division. None of them were African American. So the only, only black people in that office were me and the secretary. And I got my internship from a classmate who had preceded me that went to Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University]. And he was also a law student. So I spent my summer learning about payola. And I had to listen to tapes mostly of black Baptist ministers' radio broadcasts from the Hampton (laughter) Newport [Virginia] News area, you know, where I'd spend time and buying--What do you call those things--Dream Books. You know, whatever those books are. You know, I don't remember numbers back in-- Speaker 2: Dream Books about the numbers? Speaker 1: About the numbers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. And I had to listen to tapes to figure out I these ministers were giving numbers during their broadcasts--you know, hours and hours of tapes. Speaker 2: That's what the FCC was tryin' to--I mean, that's the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --FCC project. They're tryin' to figure out if-- Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause it was illegal. Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, to do payola; to pay--not payola, but it was--there was--payola was one, but this was also, you know, the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Payola is-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was- Speaker 2: --paying a disc jockey to play-- Speaker 1: To play--play music. The--that's not what I was doing. I was--I was listening for illegal numbers--a broadcast of the illegal numbers. So this wasn't interesting to me, you know. And I wanted to be on the side of helping people to get their licenses and not taking licenses away. Story_ID: 97890 Speaker 1: And the only folks that I knew that were actually practicing communications law were a guy, Curtis White--Hayes and White was the law firm--[Edward] Ed Hayes and Curtis White. Curtis and I, you know, became--I mean, he sort of mentored me a little bit, but I just didn't see a future in communications law because I wasn't really thinking globally, and the one class project that I wanted to do was in the area of international communications law. My international law professor didn't quite get what I was talking about. And I knew that there was a--a big issue that was going on with regards to some of the Middle Eastern Muslim countries that were concerned about--which was--ended up being my paper--about broadcasts coming into their--their countries that they didn't want. And one was "Sesame Street." They did not like--because of the way Muslim children were raised compared to American children and what "Sesame Street" represented. They were trying to bra--figure out how to block it. And to me that--you know, if--if there was not some kind of agreement, again, there had to be conversation and dialogue with regards to this global messaging or communications because it might not--it could help to bridge relationships between counties. But it also could diffuse battles between countries, and that's kind of where I saw--that was my argument to my professor who finally got it. And I got a good grade on that paper. But it, it just--it just seemed like a long shot for me. Who was gonna hire me to do this kind of work? And I didn't wanna work for the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]. So I wish--today, sometimes I wish I had, had that--you know, just tenacity to stick with it. Because internet--you know, cellular communications, all that came later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can I just--nobody saw it. Speaker 2: But--so when you were on the verge of graduating, you really didn't see how you were gonna use--then you weren't interested in be--becoming a communications lawyer? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And that situation with the newspaper--with the school paper [Barrister] --And, again, I was still working with my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], and my father was doing much better, you know, with United Black Fund, and there was a chance that he may have just--if I didn't come back to the newspaper [the Washington Informer], there was a chance he may have shut it down. And so, you know, I just had to make some decisions. So when I got out of law school, he and I sat and we talked, and I said, you know, "I wanna do this; I wanna work with the paper and see what I can do, you know. I would much rather do this, and see if I can make it work as opposed to going--" the communications--FCC had offered me a job. I would have gotten paid really well for, you know, that time, but I don't know if I would have happy, you know, doing what I was doing. So I said let me see if we can make the paper work. If it doesn't work, then I can switch. But I just didn't see myself, you know, getting into--I didn't see the opposite happening. So he was very happy that I decided to do that, and that's where I've been ever since. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1979, right? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Story_ID: 97572 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so 1979--so you grad--you graduated with a J.D. from Howard University Law School [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And started work--working full time, really, with the paper [the Washington Informer]. Speaker 2: Right. I took time off to study for the bar. After a couple of times of not passing, I said this is not gonna work. Maybe I'm just not supposed to do that, so. You know, I--I stayed with the--the paper. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so 197--so what was going on in 1979 in--that was in--I know--[HM] Marion Barry's the mayor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of [Washington] D.C. Did--so were--the paper I suppose was focused primarily on local issues (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. And, you know, we were--you know, again, I'm--how was I-twenty-four, you know at the time and still trying to get my bearing and--You know, it's funny because just like a lot of young people in--Washington or in journalism schools today, I can relate so much to them. You know, we're--we're focused on entertainment--you know, what's entertaining going on in D.C.? It took a little bit of a moment to try to get us understanding the local politics and to cover politics and what have you. But there were things that--that did happen. For example, I think that was the year of the 25th anniversary of the March on Washington--sometime, you know, in--during--during '79 [1979]. It couldn't have been the 25th. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Let's see--eighty--eighty-- Speaker 1: I know that '83 [1983]-- Speaker 2: What happened in '79 [1979]? Speaker 1: --was their 20th anniversary that, they had that in '83 [1983]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that was a big deal. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The summer of '83 [1983]. 'Cause [HM Samuel] Sam Yette was really involved in that. Speaker 2: Yeah. So '79 [1979]--I don't know. I was studying for the bar--'79 [1979] and '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I went to the paper full time in 1980, and that's when we were trying to sort of build us a little staff. Speaker 1: That's the year [President] Ronald Reagan was elected president. Speaker 2: Okay. I should know all this history, but I don't, yeah. I know that we were working hard to get the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] holiday passed. And so, you know, those--that cold--I think January, when everybody went down the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.], and Stevie Wonder did the big, you know, concert there; we were there, and it was cold. But it was--actually, the concert afterwards was really great that he did at--which was then--not the Verizon Center, but the--or maybe it was out in Maryland. I can't remember what--yeah, it was the former--the old coliseum in Maryland. And so, you know, people then knew they were all they were all there for the same purpose, not only just to see Stevie--Stevie Wonder, but to get this national holiday named after Dr. King. And, again, thousands of people, you know, out for that. Speaker 1: This is when D--this is an era that D.C. was--you know was typified by George Clinton as "Chocolate City." Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Eighty-five percent black, the population, and it was a place that-one of the centers for African-American power in the country. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Story_ID: 97573 Speaker 1: Yeah, there was--you know, but there were--there were some things happening in [Washington] D.C. I think, you know, one--and I can't remember. This was in the early '80's [1980s] but--you know, when the Hanafi Muslims--Muslims took over the--the District Building [now the John A. Wilson Building], B'nai B'rith and the--one other building in Washington [the Islamic Center of Washington]. This was the-- Speaker 2: I had heard it was-- Speaker 1: It's the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: '77 [1977] I think. That's was '77 [1977] or a little bit earlier. Speaker 1: You're good at years. I don't know--(simultaneous)- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--and that's where a student from Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] was actually shot. Speaker 1: My-- Speaker 2: Did--did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Maurice Williams and I went to high-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --went to [Calvin] Coolidge [High School] together. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were--we were in the same class at Coolidge. Speaker 2: He was the student that was shot. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Just kind of--let's set this up. There was a--the Hanafi's took over the Israeli Consulate or something [the Islamic Center of Washington]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And B'nai B'rith and the--the District Building, which was all the--you know, the dis--local district government. And the--I think Maurice was on the elevator with [HM] Councilmember [Marion] Barry, and they were coming or down the elevator. When he elevator opened, they shot into the elevator. Maurice was killed and Marion Barry was shot. I mean, he survived, but a billet--I think a bullet entered not far from his heart. And--or it may have been his stomach. But anyway, he was shot. And this--they held folks--this--you know, this hostage situation for several hours I believe it was. And this was all, you know, as a result of--I think of the massacre at their facility up in Northwest where another group had come in and shot up, you know, babies and some children in their Mosque up on 16th Street. So I don't know if there was just some--I don't really remember why, but I don't know if there was just some concern about the lack of interest by the local government, police authorities, and what have you. But they came in and decided that they wanted to make a statement. Speaker 2: And it seemed like it was some kind of internecine war within the Nation of Islam. Cause the Hanafi's-- used to be--was founded by a gentleman [Hamaas Khaalis] who used to be a member of the Na--Nation of Islam, and that was the organization I--I think that--that Kareem Abdul-Jabbar joined. Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: He--he was a Hanafi, not a member of the regular Nation of Islam-- Speaker 1: (Unclear), right. Speaker 2: --like Muhammad Ali was. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But it was some internecine struggle that they had. And I--I still don't understand why they took over the Israeli Embassy [the Islamic Center of Washington] and that they would shoot the--probably the two most sympathetic people that were sent to talk to 'em. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so. Story_ID: 97574 Speaker 1: Right, right. And actually my stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark] was on the [Washington, D.C. city] council at the time. And--you know, so that--that--you know--we--we, you know--sort of almost changed the tone of the district at some point, you know, where at the--and then, of course--well, again--early '80s [1980s]--you know, now got stuff coming into the district--crack cocaine and PCP and--you know, all the drug craziness that was impacting neighborhoods. And it just--it's just like things just went downhill really fast. And it wasn't enough--you know, the cultural influences that were--we were talking about with the--you know, the expectation of the growth of black-owned businesses and what have you. Everything sort of dissipated. And then, of course, you know--thanks to [HM] Marion Barry who had all this growing middle class in the district that, you know, followed, you know, the white flight. They left and started moving out into Prince George's County [Maryland]. And so the--the district, you know, just sort of fell into the mud. I mean, it just got messy. Speaker 2: It seems like certain key parts of the district--correct me if I'm wrong, were heavily gentrified at that time too. I mean, just in visits I heard people talking about that--you know, gentrification of certain pa--parts of D.C. that had previously been all black. Speaker 1: Well, I mean, I think--I think--'cause I don't know about that. Because in the '80s [1980s]--I mean, we were--I mean, Southwest probably may have been the only area that once was all black that became, you know, gentrified in some ways because they, you know, built all of those, you know, high rise apartment buildings in Southwest and started pushing what were, you know, public housing communities further east. So--I mean, I think it was still pretty much, you know, black with the exception of maybe Southwest and a little bit, you know, in the Shaw area--not much. But, you know, most of the white folks were up in--in Ward 3. I don't think the real gentrification started until, you know, probably ten years ago, and it's (finger snap) happened like that. But, you know, when people started moving out, you know, it just--it just left empty buildings--you know, a whole lot of empty communities even the house here, you know, that--that we live in. I mean, this community was--I think we bought this house from the last white family that lived on this block. And, you know, this whole community where we are in Southeast was largely an all white community. The families that live here bought from those people--the white residents who moved out or died off. And who knows what--who knows who we'll end up selling our homes to. At some point, if we, you know, decide to do that, you know, it might not be--you know, it might turn--it might flip again. But--yeah--I mean, the '80's [1980s] were a rough time in Washington. And it was hard as a posi--a newspaper [the Washington Informer] that printed positive news to find positive new stories to write about, but we did because that was what my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] wanted us to do. That was the kind of publication that we were, so. Story_ID: 97575 Speaker 1: Now was the--I know--I know it was important to [HM Samuel] Sam Yette 'cause he--he wrote a book about it. The twentieth anniversary of the March on Washington [D.C.] held in '83 [1983], did you cover that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were there. You know, again, I was able to pull together a staff of folks that were like me, you know, really young, had some exposure but, you know, not a lot of--you know, in--in current events. I mean, they were either good photographers or they liked to write. But we made a field day out of that, and we covered it. It's funny--this photographer that I have who's now left photography and gone into, you know, medicine. But I'm--we're going down to--you know, watching the march, and I look up and he's in a tree, you know--I mean, got phenomenal shots. And then the opportunity because we had our credentials to--to get close up and personal in some of the early press conferences that we went to, which has always been what we've, you know, been able to do from--from the--the 20th anniversary--25th. One of those marches--and it may have been the 20th. That's what it was; it was the 20th. It was an interesting sort of approach because the--I think the organizers wanted people to feed into this march. So at the time I was a member of Union Temple Baptist Church, which is very activist church in Washington [D.C.]. And they gathered at the foot of the 11th Street Bridge in Southeast. And we marched from--which we covered--but marched from the 11th Street Bridge all the way over to where we fed into the--the march at the--at the monu--at the Lincoln Memorial. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and--and people did that from I think about five different locations around the city. So you had all these marches that--that fed into this--you know this one gathering. And so we did, you know, a whole photo spread of--of the marches. 'Cause my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] always said, "You need to use lots of pictures"--we're gonna use lots of pictures. So we had great photographs and then, you know, the story itself. Story_ID: 97576 Speaker 1: Did your father have a favorite photographer for the [Washington] Informer back in the days? Speaker 2: It was a man named Sam Courtney. And Sam Courtney was everybody's favorite photographer. He shot for the [Baltimore] Afro American [in Maryland] for many years. And then I guess because--you know, if you are shooting with my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] for the paper, you followed him, you know. He wanted you everywhere because, of course, he wanted to be photographed in all these different places. And--and he--you know, he paid pretty well, you know. And--and--and Mr.--he ended up being Mr. Courtney's son's godfather. And so Sam Courtney was his favorite. And he was legendary I Washington. Mr. Courtney was the--you know, he shot everything and everybody. He really liked shooting the young ladies (laughter). And he actually had a very young wife. And he--you know, we were using film, of course, in those days, so Mr. Courtney was famous for running out of film or the batteries in his camera--you know, running out of batteries. So Dr. [Calvin William] Rolark always, you know, just kept a pocket, you know, with a little change in it for Courtney in case he--you know, it was a need. But he shot actually for--like I said for--sometimes for both publications at the same time. And--I mean, he stayed in the street all day and all night just shooting. And so that was his favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he eventually passed. And the sad thing about that is other than the photographs that the Afro may have and that I have that Mr. Courtney shot, a lot of his work ended up in big green trash bags, and nobody knows where they--where they are. I mean, from the film--you know, the rolls of film-- Speaker 1: The negatives too, huh? Speaker 2: The negatives. You know, nobody knows where it is. So he had a lot of--a lot of--I mean, he shot from--from the [Washington, D.C. Mayor] Walter Washington days all the way through to--I believe to [HM] Sharon Pratt Kelly. Speaker 1: So when he passed away-- Speaker 2: All his work went with him. Speaker 1: Basically, pro--probably thrown out even. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 97577 Speaker 1: Okay, so 1980s--now wha--what happened in the mid-'80s [mid-1980s] here [Washington, D.C.]. I know in the late '80s [1980s] crack was the big story. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But in the mid-'80s [1980s] what's going on? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I have to think. I need something to trigger my memory about the mid-'80s [1980s]. You know, I think--I think what--for the most part, again, [HM] Marion Barry was building the city. I think that's when the Metro came to Washington [sic, the Metro was opened in 1976]--the map--ma--rapid transit system here in Washington which hired a lot of African Americans as a per--as a matter of fact the first African American to head a national--to head a--you know, a transit system in--in a city was Carmen Turner, who later went on to work for the Smithsonian Institution. But she, you know, made her mark at that time. Again, there was a lot of uproar over, you know, school leadership and--but I really think the biggest--the biggest challenge then was just the--the--the shift, you know, of--of people leaving the city. And, you know, the impact that that was having on--on local politics. And then--and--and the political jockeying--I mean, we had some great--I mean, John Wilson I think that--who was chair of--of city council. I don't remember what happened but, you know, what--when it happened but, you know, he became chair of the council. And Dave Clarke and others who was loved by--he was a--ended up being the chairman of the council as well. He was Caucasian but very much loved by the black community. So the council itself started growing. There was a lot of focus around the school board and its ability or inability-- Story_ID: 97578 Speaker 1: So we were talk--talking about the mid-'80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what was going on here [Washington, D.C.]. And I know in the late '80s [1980s] for some--some--by 1988 I know there was a crack epidemic in D.C. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea, like, how that happened. I mean--or why D.C. was one of the first places in the country to get this crack epidemic. 'Cause it wasn't in Chicago [Illinois] then, and I don't think it--it may have been on the East Coast; I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, I--I don't--I don't know how--how it happened so quickly. You know, before then there was a lot of focus on PCP, and, you know, every--that's even with, you know, United Black Fund and the newspaper [the Washington Informer] and everybody. They--there was a lot of messaging out there about this--this PCP, but crack sort of, you know, shifted and--and--I don't--dodged that bullet and sort of came around the corner. And next thing you knew, it was--it was everywhere. You know, it was everywhere. And the violence that--that came with it, you know, was tremendous. It didn't help that our leader of the city, you know, was caught up in that as well--[HM] Mayor [Marion] Barry. Story_ID: 97579 Speaker 1: There was a--I remember a speech he [HM Marion Barry] made before the National Press Club; I heard it on public radio. I was at home doing something, and I heard it on the pub--he's passed--he was making speech, and he said, "[Washington] D.C. is not the murder capital of the country." "These aren't murders," he said. "These are just killings." And he assured tourists they would be safe if they came. And I said who could tolerate a mayor like that? You know, that's what I was tha--thinking 'cause we--we had [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington at the time who seemed like a genius by comparison to this kind of talk. And I was surprised at the answers I got from pe--people from D.C. who talked about all the good works he did in terms of connecting black people with jobs and other things. It was a whole different perspective 'cause I didn't know a lot about what he was doing other than that statement on the radio, you know. But what did--what did people--Is that about right? Pe--people saw him as someone who could--was bringing resources that had never been brought before. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean--you know. Like I said, people from all over the country--black folks, you know, came to Washington and, you know, thought they made it to the mountaintop. You know, this was the place that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been talking about. You know, this is where black folks could, you know, get jobs, you know, make a decent living, buy a home, you know. Schools may have been in question but, you know, this was it--and--and can come and do that here and then move into the suburbs, which is what happened. So--I mean, if you ask anybody who came to Washington during Barry's era, they are very appreciative. Don Peebles [HM R. Donahue Peebles], you know, who has made millions in the development area credits Marion Barry for--for that. The former secretary of--of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] was a good friend of my father's [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]. And--and his name will come to me in a minute, but had it not been for Marion, he wouldn't have come to Washington, D.C. and become--you know, eventually become secretary of HUD. So a lot of folks' careers were launched because of the opportunities that Marion Barry made for them. And--and--but--what he's mostly credited for is, you know, this summer jobs program where he put a lot of young people to work. And so his thinking is, you know, you get these kids to work, you're getting them off the streets, and it becomes a very productive environment. Well for some reason this crack cocaine or the--or drugs and--period, you know, just drugs and the access to weapons. And those are the two things that just destroyed it all. And then like I said, secondly, just recognizing that even some of our top officials were kind of caught up in that culture of, of, of drugs and--and violence in--in other kinds of ways. So it--it was--I mean, true, if Marion said that or--yeah, if he said that these are not--What did he say these are not? Speaker 1: Murders. Speaker 2: These are not murders-- Speaker 1: This isn't-"This isn't a murder-"(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --these are killings. Speaker 1: "These are just some killings." Speaker 2: Yeah. And it was sort of random, and it was sort of directed towards, you know, certain groups of people against each other as oppose to--and I don't know the difference between a murder and a killing. I mean, I, I--you know, I--I'm not tryin' to justify that answer. But, you know, with these--these territories that were being developed--you know, because if this is my corner and that's your corner, if you come over to my corner, you know, to steal my business--you know, I guess that's kinda how this whole thing developed into a--like a street war. You know, later on--I mean, what we've experienced in--in the latter years I think is more random. But then I think it was--it was just--it was like a--a real territorial-- Speaker 1: Turf battles--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --gang turf battles, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 97580 Speaker 1: Then, now in '88 [1988] after the Super Bowl--when [Douglas Lee] Doug Williams won the Super Bowl with I think five touchdown passes in ten minutes or something. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Which was (laughter)--The town [Washington, D.C.] was still delirious. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And I--I--and I was here for a week. I mean, every night--I was here for a training--a grantsmanship training. Every night there was a killing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And every night there was a story about it on the news-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Channel 4. And they--one young man was shot, like, twenty-five times at the corner of Florida Avenue. And this car--his car was riddled with bullets; they showed it. And people were calling for--policeman calling for larger--I mean, bigger guns--you know, more powerful guns that could shoot more bullets. And one woman was calling for the National Guard and [HM] Mayor [Marion] Barry was trying to address that. But that was, you know, almost--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And--and from time to time they have brought in the National Guard. I mean, you know--you know, folks don't want to feel like it's--it's necessary, but they've had to--they've done some really interesting sort of--You know, a lot of the public housing that existed then is no longer--is gone. You know--what do you call it, Hope Six and all these other programs now have sort of dissipated--you know, the public housing communities that we used to have, so. And that was one way to address the violence. We've done a lot of different things to address, you know--These situations that were occurring seem--seem to be, you know, housed in certain communities--one in--you know, right here, you know. Because when we first moved here-- Speaker 1: This is Southeast D.C.? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, in 1980. We moved in this house in 1980. And, you know, there were lots of times when I did not wanna be here, you know, because that's what we would hear all night long. And, you know, on this street, you know, I guess we've had probably since we've been here maybe four--four murders on this block and mostly, you know, kinda up the street. So it's--but it's changing--and see, you know--think about the media at that time. You know, there were a lot of those movies that were out I think that sort of perpetrated that kind of street culture and the violence that came along with it. Story_ID: 97581 Speaker 1: You know, certain kinds of music was just beginning to, you know--to take hold. Speaker 2: [Washington] D.C. was--in the early '80s [1980s] was the popular rise of something called go-go music, which is not--didn't have the same kinda violent connotations. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But I remember that. Speaker 1: Right. I mean, out of go-go came--or--or go-go was brought, you know, by Chuck Brown and a group called Experience Unlimited. I mean, I was talking to someone the other day and just remembering about in high school when we used to do sock hops, it sounds so long ago but, you know, we did. I mean, at the--the tea--the principal would allow us to have a band in, and Experience Unlimited and some of the others would come and we'd meet in the gymnasium; we all had to take our shoes off. And I'm thinking that's a good way to, to deal with violence. You know, if you don't have your shoes on you certainly don't wanna expose yourself to, you know, situations. But, yeah, that--those were the early days of--now I wasn't much of a go-go lover, you know, myself, and I didn't really--I never heard Chuck Brown play until maybe about four years ago--the first time I actually saw him perform. So I was a latecomer to go-go. And it's a kind of style of music that is D.C., and I think it should always be D.C. We've got to, you know, find a way to continue that--that sound, you know, that--just like New Orleans [Louisiana] has its sound and other places. We--we need to keep that. But it--it even became more violent, you know, in order to keep up with, you know, what was more prominent I think nationally. And then again adding to that in the music--they started adding, you know, sort of the neighborhood or turf dialogue in--in the lyrics. And so, you know, it was--it became a little unsafe I think. Sometimes if you were from some neighborhood and your shoutin' out for the other neighborhood and you all involved in this battle, and you're in a middle of a--of a concert, and all of a sudden it just turns violent. You know, it--it took I think a minute. Our police chief--one of our former police chiefs [Charles H. Ramsey] just said--you know, he got so frustrated that he was reported as saying, you know, "We're just gonna have to let people kill themselves off until we can figure out a way to--handle this." I mean, it was that bad. And now we've--we've--we've turned the corner, you know. Story_ID: 97891 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so we're just talking about--why has the violence waned in Washington, D.C.? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people are, you know, asking that question. The Metropolitan Police Department is taking some credit for it because they think they--thanks to former chief [Charles H.] Chuck Ramsey who we were just talking about and some of the policies that he put in place. And then he, you know, almost sort of handed when he left to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--pretty much handed his position over to Chief Cathy Lanier, one of the few women police chiefs in the country. So she's kinda following the same motto. There've been a lot more--a lot more resources put in to policing--put into police department in Washington, so. And then their ability--they think to really sort of do a better job at community policing to-police-community relations have improved because at one point--and--and they're still having to deal it. You know, the police were considered as much as--of the enemy as some of these, you know, wayward folks on our streets; so that's changed. But then also I think that period required the establishment of organizations that came out of that like, you know, Concerned Black Men--mentoring organizations--the Alliance of Concerned Men, all of these groups that--and mostly male dominate--dominated groups that came in and started working in the schools and working in programs--a group called--here called the Peaceoholics to try to, you know, grab these young folks to prevent the violence as oppose to the police who were sort of arresting and incarcerating those who were--And a lot of people went to jail; a whole lot of folks went to jail. A lot of those folks are coming back now. And they're coming back as older men and women who are participating with these groups. There's an organization of returning citizens. I can't think of the name of it, but these are men who also do a lot of mentoring. And so I think that's made a difference. You know, we hate to say it but the dissolution of a lot of concentrated areas of poverty where folks lived in poverty-ridden areas, those have been sort of disbursed. So people are--you know, the turfs are not as well-defined as they once were because people have been displaced. And, you know, the job--the conversation is about jobs--and while--because of the--what was happening economically across the country where a lot of these programs were--lost funding. Now there's more funding for the Summer Youth Enjoy--Employment Program. And the things that [HM] Marion Barry put into place when he was mayor, some of those programs are coming back. So that means that, you know, the whole idea of, you know, hiring young people and getting them off the streets--We still have a long way to go in the city. I think that there's a--more of a need for, like you said, recreation programs, arts programs--You know, you--you tell kids what not to do, but there's not enough--there're resources being placed there, but the programs themselves are not as well-developed I don't think to--to get young folks in and to keep them there. You know, I mean, we're still having problems tryin' to get players for high school football teams and players for soccer teams and, you know, in our schools. You know, so there's still some work that needs to be done, but it's--I think those are probably--and--and a lot of these are children of folks who went through that. Story_ID: 97892 Speaker 1: One of the things I'm really happy to see today--and no one is talking about it as much as I've seen it, are young fathers who are fathering their children, you know. You can ride up and down the street in the morning and in the afternoons and you see fathers taking their kids to school--young fathers and--picking 'em up and taking 'em back home. Now I don't how they are--how involved they are in the schools. I don't know what happens when they get home, but that's something you didn't see, you know, maybe ten years ago. And so--and I don't know if the teen pregnancy rate is--I think it's declined, but not that much in the District [Washington, D.C.]. So--but you're getting more fathers who are involved in the parenting of their children. And that's--you know, that's what we've been striving for. So if we can kinda keep those balls rolling, it's making a difference, and I think it will continue to make a difference. Now across the border in Prince George's County [Maryland] where a lot of the folks were pushed out, I mean, they've had seven murders of high school students so far this academic year; that's troubling. But if they, you know--they're announcing "We've got to do something about it now." You know, black folks, you know, got a little money and moved out into the suburbs and said, oh, we left our problems in the District. Well the problems have followed them. And the--the--the resources to address those problems-the--the county government did not set up. That's what the county executive has said to us at the [Washington] Informer and other places. We think we moved out there and we don't need programs or resources to support programs to deal with some of the issues that they dealt with in the District. But now that they're beginning to surface, they realize they have to do that or else the problem will get out of hand. And it already is when you, you know, have seven teenagers killed in, you know, four months. Story_ID: 97893 Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of the issues over the years that the [Washington] Informer's, you know, taken the lead on, or was that proper for--Well, I guess the first thing I should ask you is that, what's the journalistic philosophy of yourself and the Informer? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I, I mentioned to you was--which is what my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] set up, was that we would be a positive newspaper. And so what does that mean? Because a lot of folks don't--you know, how can you only print positive news? And it's--it's a challenge for us in that--You know, my father's rationale when he started the paper was that, you know, the only way white--black folks got on the cover of the newspaper or in newspapers if--is if they raped, robbed or murdered somebody. And that--you know, that only represented those--those crimes and--and crime in general only represents the activities of maybe five percent of the black community where 95 percent of the black communities involved in what most citizens are supposed to do--I mean, regular, everyday positive things. And so let's focus on that 95 percent. My journalism training had me coming out thinking: we're a weekly newspaper; there's no way we can stay on top of crime because by the time we publish it, it's almost two weeks old. So, you know, it doesn't even make sense for us to do that. So what we do is, we take--of course, you know, the kinds of celebratory things that the Black Press has always focused on which, you know--maybe, you know, graduations, you know, community events where people are giving each other awards and all that--We, we celebrate or cover--traditionally cover that, but then we take some of these issues like we just talked about with regards to crime. Our focus is on those organizations that have set themselves up to address those issues; and to me that's positive. If out of a negative something positive happens then we've got to talk about--we've--we've got to talk about the negative situation, but what is the positive response to it? You know, what is the local electorate? The legislators, what are they doing to address it? What are they doing to address it? What is the clergy community doing to address it? What are the nonprofits doing to address it. What are the PTA's [Parent and Teacher Associations] and the school system doing to address it? What are the neighborhood associations doing? Because these create models for other communities, and they can--they can read these stories, get some ideas, maybe even network with each other, so that it's a growing response to--to the situation. Story_ID: 97894 Speaker 1: So one of the issues that we're [the Washington Informer] dealing with right now is truancy. You know, to me in the midst of this Black History Month of 2013, when we're talking about all of the achievements of African Americans. And we know how important education was in--in our struggle. And now we're dealing with a generation, not unlike my own or me, you know, who just got bored with school. But I never, you know, felt that education was not important; I always knew how important it was. For kids to be dropping out of school in the eighth and ninth grade at such great numbers that it's, you know, it--it's become such an issue; we've got to deal with this issue of truancy and dropout rates. And so, you know, that's the--that's the big issue that we're focusing on right now. We dealt--dealt with issue of--issues of teen pregnancy. We've talked about HIV and AIDS, you know--again, negative stories--you know, things that have negatively impacted our community, but what are we doing about it? That's what we wanna talk about. So if--if there's the story of the fact that, you know, black folks and, you know, Africa and, you know, all of this, you know, negative about, you know, how we have the highest numbers of--or it--rate--My daddy [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] used to--he always used to fer--used to use--use the phrase which he hated--the "N" word and figures. He used to say, "Niggers and figures drive me crazy"--and the way people use figures or statistics to--to talk about how things are worse in our community. So okay, we have the highest rate of maybe new infections of HIV/AIDS, particularly among African-American women, but there are a host of people, including the Black Press, that is working really hard to make sure that those numbers don't keep rising. And we've got to talk about who's involved in that and--and still deal with the issue of stigma, you know, as it relates to--to AIDS and the other STDs [sexually transmitted diseases], because we have a high rate of S--STDs in our community. And so there's this lack of education around--I mean, if you had--if that's the case, then there is still information missing among those who--who need it the most about how to protect themselves. And then how do we--how do we write stories--I mean, we've gone from writing stories about abstinence programs as it relates to young people. And we've shown situations of high schools across the city that have abstinence programs with people that think abstinence is crazy. We still have to talk about that. And then we talk about, you know, what women are doing to address how--again, how to protect themselves, how to--how to--how to engage in that conversation about the use of a condom. Domestic violence, you know, historically been a big issue, you know, in our community. And--and to deal with the--the prickly issue of, you know, disciplining your--your child. Do you--do you whip your child or how do you discipline your child, and does that turn into something that becomes even worse, you know, at a later point in life? I mean, it's--you know--those are some. Of course, the education just generally--I keep going back to education because that's, you know, what we tend to focus on quite a lot. Story_ID: 97895 Speaker 1: And then, you know, now that we're dealing with the issue of gentrification in the District [Washington, D.C.], there're neighborhoods that are on the verge of gentrification. We've seen what's happened in other communities. So how do you--how is it--wha--what's be--what's happened--how to identify the negative impacts of gentrification, and what are people doing to--to turn that into a positive? Minority owned businesses and--and, you know, opportunities for contractors--you know, to contract with the local governments and federal governments--you know, all this--you know, the president [HM President Barack Obama] talks about, you know, when he did the recovery and all this infrastructure building. You're still not seeing enough of us, you know, digging dirt and building roads and building buildings. And so that, you know, door--we have to continue to knock on that door to make sure that, you know, folks know we're looking and that ther--to make sure that there's no discriminatory practices that are--that are affecting that. And then --(unclear)-- say--speaking of discrimination, there's still a lot of legal issues of voting rights. You know, we are following what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League and other national organizations are saying about what's happening with the voting rights issue across America. And then even the immigration issue is one that we've looked at. Because when people think of immigration they're thinking of a certain group of people, but they don't think about, you know, just black folks across the Diaspora who come into the United States who are also affected or people of African descent who are also affected by these immigration laws. And why we need to be involved, you know, as well in that discussion or debate. And the last thing I'll just add which--you know, we challenged our--now our councilmember, former mayor [HM] Marion Barry--you know, has said that black folks, while they might be interested in the Green Movement, they don't really have time to deal with it because they're too busy--you know, we're too busy tryin' to--eat, to find-- Speaker 2: Survive. Speaker 1: --a job and survive. But what we're saying is, if we're not involved then we're digging ourselves deeper because if that's where the country's going, and the job--that's where the jobs are gonna be. The job train--What we need to be talking about now is job training, and how do we get our young folks who sweep streets to understand this is all part of, you know, the green economy and going from sweeping the street to tryin' to figure out, you know, ways in which to make our neighborhood safe. We're the ones that are in these neighborhoods that are close to waste treatment plants, and--and we're, you know, getting increased cases of cancer and asthma and everything because of the environment. You know, so we should be at the front line of that Green Movement. And so that's--those are the--you know. I mean, I could go on every issue you can think of we're [the Washington Informer] involved in-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and have been for years. We've been--these are the kinds of things that we try to get our--engage our communication--our--our community in the conversation on these issues. Story_ID: 97896 Speaker 1: Okay, so now in that regard in tryin' to get the, the, the word out, you were the host of--is it still going on--the Reporter's Roundtable? Speaker 2: No, it's not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the host of Reporter's Roundtable. Speaker 1: And that--that was on Channel 16-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --which was--wha--wha--now what is 16? Is that public access-- Speaker 2: Sixteen is it's-- Speaker 1: --or public television? Speaker 2: It's the District's [Washington, D.C.] municipal channel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The government channel. And, yeah, I did that for several years. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was interesting because it seemed as though some of the District officials that we challenged on the show eventually lost jobs. And we challenged the mayor--it's hard to challenge the mayor on his own TV show (laughter), so--on his own TV station. So I guess it got a little bit too hot (laughter). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So now what I do--we do have another show that we do on the public access channel, and that's called "Washington Informer News." Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the producer of that one. Are--are--are you the host too for that one? Speaker 2: Yes, sort of. But what--what we really try to do with "Washington Informer News" is to allow the reporters who cover certain stories to--to intro and--and do their own stories. I mean, I sort of intro the whole show, but the reporters are actually, you know, the featured journalists. Speaker 1: So is it like a--like a roundtable discussion or is it like re--reporters actually go out to the scene and talk about the story at the scene? Speaker 2: Right, at the scene. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I--you know the--one of my favorite--You know, I don't follow sports, but I like to hear people talk about sports. And I sort of fell in love with Bryant Gumbel's "Real Sports." And I like the format of that; I like the way Gumbel brings in, you know, a reporter. He tells the story and then goes, you know, out and then, you know, comes back, and then they sort of do the follow-up. So we're tryin' to create that kind of a format. We just started that within the last six months, and it's beginning to work; we're not quite there. But that's--that's the idea. Speaker 1: Now what about "Let's Talk?" Was that-- Speaker 2: "Let's Talk" was a show we did with reporters. And in this--that's the reporter format--we--we would sit around and talk. And, again, tryin' to find a way to make the show unique, I used women journalists. So we had Deborah Simmons, who was a--is an editorial writer for the Washington Times, and Nikita Stewart, who is a District reporter for the Washington Post, and then one of our reporters for--for the Washington Informer--a woman reporter. And so we would all--and then some guests--periodically would bring on other, you know, women reporters--not all African American--sometimes Latino--you know, white, to talk about the issues. I don't--I don't see too many shows where they're all women. And while the conversation can become as--you know, the battles and the conversations can be just like any other group. You know, it's just a different perspective. So we do that periodically. Story_ID: 97897 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, well tell us something about the staff of the [Washington] Informer. Like--I think I asked before--like they said it's not--there--there are not a lot of full-time pe--people, but there--is it still like that with--where you got-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we have seven full-time folks now. Speaker 1: Seven full-time --(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, today (laughter). You know, this economy gets crazy. But, yeah, we have seven. But we have folks that have been with us forever. So presently, my right-hand person is a guy named Ron Burke, actually. We went to [Calvin] Coolidge [High School in Washington, D.C.] but not together, and we went to Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia, now Hampton University] not together, you know. And he grew up--he's from, actually, Norfolk [Virginia] but grew up in--in Washington, D.C. And so he is our director of advertising and marketing and has been a real, real asset to the newspaper in taking us into some different directions with regards to sponsorships and what have you. He's been with me now almost ten years. And another--you know, we have a--you know, a bookkeeper and our two editors. One--she and I share the same name; she's Denise Barnes, so we get everybody confused. And the funny thing about Denise was she used to be a feature writer for the Washington Times newspaper. And my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] introduced us--oh, gosh, almost thirty years ago. And every time he would see her name in the Washington Times, he would call me up--you know, I could tell he was a little angry--"Denise, what's this Denise Barnes in the 'Washington Times?'"--you know, I was a Barnes then. And I said, "Daddy, you know that's the--the Denise you introduced me to." He was like, "Oh, okay." So clearly he didn't want me writing for any other newspapers. But now she's our--our editor, and a woman who's working on her Ph.D., Shantella Sherman, who has worked for us off and on for maybe about twelve years. And then, you know, we have a couple of photographers: [HM] Roy Lewis, who--if you all haven't done one on him-- Speaker 1: We have interviewed Roy Lewis. Speaker 2: You have? Speaker 1: He's one of the iconic photographers in the country-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Everyone knows Roy Lewis. Speaker 2: Exactly. Roy, you know, started out with Johnson Publishing. He shot for Ebony and Jet and also has photos in his archives of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Elijah Muhammad, and, you know. So we are really blessed to have--to have had Roy has a freelancer for us for--I don't know--over twenty years. And same thing with another gentlemen, John DeFreitas who shoots sports and--has been with us almost thirty years as a freelancer. So that's the thing that's been really interesting about the Informer. Some of these--some of the folks that work with us had great relationships with my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] and say that they came to the paper because of my father and have stayed. I'm sure they all question what was gonna happen when my dad passed [1994]. But thanks to them, you know, and their ongoing support, you know, it was no question what we were gonna do when my dad passed and that was to keep publishing. Story_ID: 97898 Speaker 1: Now has there been a time when it looked like it [the Washington Informer] was gonna go under? Speaker 2: Yesterday (laughter). You know, and I--I laugh about it, but I'm very serious, yeah. I mean, we've had some really, really, really, def--difficult times. And when my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] was living it was a lot easier 'cause I could call him and say: daddy, I can't make payroll; I can't get the printer paid, and he'd write a check, you know, without--I mean, he'd always say you gotta pay me back, but--And the thing about it was he could come in and write himself a check anytime, if he--you know, if he wanted. But he did want us to pay his back--him back. But anyway, yeah, then--But I think the most interesting and probably the worst--it was a year of going through--I mean, we'd go in and out, but this didn't look like we were gonna come out at all and that we would have to sell. So it was--I had heard that Don King, the boxing promoter, was interested in buying newspapers. And he bought the paper in Cleveland [Ohio], the--it'll come to me in a minute; but he bought that publication. And-- Speaker 1: The Call & Post (unclear). Speaker 2: The Call & Post--the Call & Post." He bought the Call & Post in Cleveland. And so I was really anxious to meet him to find out if he would be interested in the Washington Informer. So there was a fight being promoted in Washington, D.C. And one of our freelance photographers, Tereke [ph.] Bell, who is, you know, now deceased, knew Don King and went--was going to this--what do you call the--the press conference--before the fight. And he had told Don King, you know: "my publisher would like to talk to you because she might want you to--you know, see if you'd be interested in--in her paper." So I went to the press conference, and we chatted briefly. He was gonna take me to lunch and, you know, talk about this. So when I went to the press conference, he had me sort of waiting for him. And at this time that he--we were waiting, the printer called me and told me that, you know, if you--Denise, unfortunately, if you don't get us $2,000 by noon today, we will not print your paper. So I'm torn--Do I stand here and talk to him, you know, or wait for him to go to lunch and have this conversation? Or do I miss this opportunity and leave and go to the bank and beg them, you know, for $2,000 which we didn't even have in the account? So I told him, I--I went over to him and said, you know, "Mr. King, I'm really gonna need to leave. The printers called so I need to take care of an issue." He said, "What's wrong?" And I said, they--I need to send them some money. He said, "How much?" And I said, "Well, they're asking me for $2,000." He said, "Do you have it?" And I said, "Well, really, I don't." He went in his pocket and peeled out 20 one hundred dollar bills. And he said, call a cab or call somebody, and you can have them to, you know, take this money up to the printer. So I called the printer back and--you know, said okay, I can get you $2,000. I didn't know what to do with this money. I didn't wanna stick it in my pocket; I didn't wanna put it anywhere. I didn't want him to think that I was not being honest. So I just held this money in my hand so that he could see it was in my hand. And then finally someone came, they took it, and we went to lunch. He invited me to a fight in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. We kept talking--we kept talking. I made him an offer. And this hap--this went on for about six months. And something happened within that six months, and things started getting better. And we couldn't come up with, you know, an agreement on a price. Actually, his--you know--I just--I don't know how really interested he was, you know. So I finally decided--I said, you know, if I'm gonna sit--'Cause at that time, if he had offered me ten cents, to be honest with you I would've sold it to 'em. Cause I was just that worried and concerned and broke. And so, you know, it just sort of fizzled, and things started picking up; they got better. I don't think I've been there, in that place, since, but we've been close. Speaker 1: About what year was that? Speaker 2: I'm gonna say it was probably--what is this 2013--probably about 2000--maybe 1998 or 2000; something like that. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, somewhere in there. It was after my dad passed [1994], but I know it was before 2001. Story_ID: 97590 Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you consider the greatest moment at the paper [the Washington Informer] so far? Speaker 2: Oh, well, every March, when we do the Spelling Bee. That was something that my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]--I mean, it was a fight to get into the Scripps Spelling Bee. Because at the time when the school system came to the paper to ask my father to help them to convince the Washington Post to sponsor the Spelling Bee, my father said, "Nah, I'm not gone do that..."--you know, "We're a newspaper; we can sponsor it..."--not knowing that only daily newspapers could sponsor, you know, the Spelling Bee. And so our first winner couldn't participate in the national because we weren't a daily. And because there were no black dailies in the country, he called my stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark], his, you know, unpaid general counsel, and they were gonna issue an injunction against Scripps, not allowing them to hold their National Spelling Bee because of this rule, which he thought was inherently discriminatory because there were no black dailies. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think at one--the [Chicago] Defender was at one time, but not--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: They had, like, a weekend edition; they weren't every day. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. And I--I don't--I think now we have publications that, you know, were--some four times a week, you know--like you said, maybe five times a week, but no dailies. And so they quickly changed their rule. And so ever since then, you know, we have--we've done that. And we'll be coming up again on this, which we--now we have a partner with NBC4. And so this Bee is televised, you know, every year for the whole metropolitan area to--to view. And when the movie "Akeelah and the Bee" was released [2006], there was, you know, a viewing here in Washington with the producer and the filmmaker and all those folks. And no one--while I was in the audience, I--I ra--raised my hand and talked about our situation with Scripps. Because when they decided to do the film, they weren't sure of whether Akeelah--I mean, the speller hadn't originally planned to be a black girl. And so he said to me when I told him this story--he said, "Oh, you're the one." And did--I said, you know, "What do you mean?" And he said, We heard this story about a newspaper in Washington, D.C."--or a newspaper, you know, a black newspaper--and, you know, the challenge that they had with Scripps Howard--"And that's why we decided to make Akeelah a black," you know. And so every time we have the Spelling Bee, while we don't always have, you know, a black child who's the winner, the majority of winner--of our winners have been. And we represent one of the handful of African Americans that do participate in the National Spelling Bee. So that's--you know, that's always a proud moment. Story_ID: 97591 Speaker 1: The proud--another one was when my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] passed [1994]. He passed on a Sunday night. And Thursday we hit the streets with I think one of the best publications that we had had. And the way the staff and everybody pulled together, it was a real keeper, you know, that issue that we did on my father and his legacy. And he died suddenly, you know. He hadn't been sick long, and we weren't expecting him to die. So to pull that together I think was phenomenal. And now we--the relationships that we've developed with the Congressional Black Caucus and others--we do these special issues. And so those are, you know--are really great. And last, but not least, for the Washington Informer to have this opportunity to be interviewed by The HistoryMakers, you know, means that I wouldn't be here had it not been for the newspaper. And so that means that evidently the newspaper is making an impact and, you know, I'm receiving some credit for it--that makes me worthy to sit here with you. Story_ID: 97592 Speaker 1: What are some of the other black papers in--in [Washington] D.C. now? How--how--how many African-American newspapers are--actually are in D.C.? Speaker 2: Someone said the number five the other day. So I--I started to try to count them. But I know there's: again, the [Washington] Informer; the Afro-American, which is based in Baltimore [Maryland], but they have a Washington edition; there's the--a paper that comes out of Howard University-- it's a community newspaper published by Dr. [Lawrence] Kaggwa, and I wanna say it's Community News, but I'm not--the name escapes me; and there is another local newspaper that's been published and really sort of reaches Ward 8--they're Capitol--Capitol Connection I think it's called. So otherwise--and then the Washington Sun, which has been around a long time, but they're--they're still publishing I believe. And so that's really it. You know, many years ago when the National Newspaper Publishers Association was celebrating one of those significant anniversaries--I can't remember what it was. But we--we pulled--I tried to organize all of the black newspapers and black publications in Washington; and there were about eighteen. And this was--see '94 [1994]--this was probably around '96 [1996]. And we put together a joint publication to distribute, so that the Washington community could see, you know, the wealth of publications that we have here. We got a couple of magazines now, but pra--a lot of those papers are no longer--longer here. And Washington has a really rich history of black-owned newspapers. You know, someone said--we were talking recently about three publications that were published here before the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, you know, in the early 1800s. And then there was a guy who, you know, I just really wanna learn more about him, William Calvin Chase, who published a newspaper for 'bout forty years it--in Washington, who was--seemed like a dynamic community organization--a community leader. That paper was the Washington Bee. Speaker 1: Right, that's the Washington Bee. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, well I was hoping you were gonna say that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't realize that was--he was the one. But the Washington Bee produced Timothy Thomas Fortune and Johnny (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and all these great journalists-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Ida B. Wells work for it--you know, I mean, just great. Speaker 2: Yeah. To have been publishing a newspaper at that time, you know, when Dr. Woodson was here, you know--all of--of ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History], Carter G. Woodson and all these folks were here in Washington. It had to be--and then he--you know, from what I read, he was--you know, always challenged, you know, this middle class concept, you know. He--he wasn't--he didn't seem to be on the good side of a lot of those folks (laughter), you know. And him with that sting like a bee--it was something else and sting like a bee--his phrase. And so he seemed to be quite a character. And I think his sons took the paper over, and--and finally they sold it and then it died, yeah. Speaker 1: That's--it's quite a stor--I mean, the Washington Bee--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Actually, I was able to purchase from one of his grandsons a CD collection of some of those newspapers. I have to--I'm not sure how many, but it's a--a lot of 'em. He was--he found 'em. We started a, you know, digitizing them. Story_ID: 97593 Speaker 1: Speaking of digitizing, have--have--you've got a-- a digital edition, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: www.washingtoninformer.com-- Speaker 2: Informer.com, um-hmm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, we were late on the internet because we just couldn't figure out how to--how to get there. And then when we got there--and I think our digital edition now is--oh, gosh, I'm gonna say maybe about 15--12--about 12 years old. And I think once we started, we got it right. But now so many things are changing with social media and all that, and trying to keep up is a challenge. And I always like knowing the fact that, you know, even the dailies are having--they--they look like they're doing a better job, but they're still struggling just like we are. So, you know, we still put a lot of effort into the--the print edition. While we're--you know, our resources are thin, so we're still tryin' to, you know, work with--wa--wa--work with what we can with our digital editions and at the same time just tryin' to figure out what to do with that archives, you know, all those issues, those newspapers, and photographs that we have prior to this whole, you know, digital way of doing things. I think we've discovered a model. Fortunately, with what I call--when we're friendly, we call ourselves "sister papers" with--with the [Baltimore] Afro-American because I think they've--they've figured it out. And so, you know, we want to be able to sort of spark a movement among the black newspapers across the country to get those old newspapers out of those boxes and to find a way to digitize them in a--in the right way. Of course, it's gonna take money to do that and grants, but so much of our history is buried in those pages. And--and I mean, not only nationally but local, like some of the questions you've asked; the local history is there. And unfortunately, a lot of it is boxed away. So you can have publisher of a newspaper--in some cases I'm one of those--who don't really remember--or who doesn't really remember, you know, what that paper did 20 or 30 or 40 or 60 years ago, because it's boxed away. So, you know, to begin to pull that out, not only for the--the journalists who work for those publications to have access to it to give things a framework, but to make it available to others who are really tryin' to understand our history and culture. It's--there's a need to get it out of those boxes. Speaker 1: There's valuable resource that people would pay for I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Definitely. Story_ID: 97594 Speaker 1: So, now, well, when you personally look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy as a journalist? Speaker 2: Keeping it going (laughter)--oh, and as a journalist? Speaker 1: Yeah. (Unclear) keep--keepin--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: As a publisher, yeah. I think it's more of being the--the--publisher who's been able to--not, you know--not just keep it--keeping the paper going but to make it more relevant, you know. People read the Washington Informer, and they, I think, supported the paper. But now to make it relevant--and so people don't ask us anymore: "Why should we support the Informer?" They know why-- because of the stories that we cover and--I mean, we've--we've just followed what the--the tradition of the Black Press has been about--and then also the press in general. And so, so long as people feel as though they can tell their stories or have their stories told through the Informer, and feel as though it's gonna be told, you know, in a well-written, well-edited, and visually appealing format, that's what we strive for. It's harder sometimes now to get, you know, writers--new writers and editors who were coming from different perspectives--to really understand what our role and our mission is. And we keep havin--I had that confis--conversation yesterday, you know, with them. I don't do it often, but every now and then I have to get on my--you know, my--what do you call that thing--a bully pulpit, I guess, and hammer it into them, you know--this is who we are, and this is what we do, and we can't poo-poo, you know, things that the black community does because we as individuals don't feel as though it's important. Because a hundred years from now, it is gonna be important. You know, folks are gonna wanna know what black folks said and did and what they thought about this situation. So--you know, other than that I don't know what my, you know, legacy will be. It won't be like my dad's [Dr. Calvin William Rolark]. It won't be like William Calvin Chase or others, you know. It won't be like Ida B. Wells. You know, I'm not--you know, there's not a--you know, I'm not tryin' to stop-- Now if it was happening now--and in some ways it is--you know, black men being lynched. But, you know, we are very involved in this massive incarceration. You know, it's--was it Michelle--I think Alexander, wrote, you know, the book, "The New Jim Crow." And we see what's happening with regards to black men and the-the--you know, this whole justice system. And so we--you know, we stay on that issue. And I'm very involved in that--that movement, but I'm not them. So, you know, I think my legacy is gonna be through, you know, "that woman--you know, I can't remember her name, but she used to publish that newspaper that was around for, oh, a long time in Washington, D.C. And that--I think it was the Washington Informer. I can't remember her name but, you know, that was a great newspaper." And--and that--that's my legacy. My father talked about building institutions; and for me it's the institution that's important. And as long as we can kinda keep this going and people feel as though it's--they need it, that's what's important to me. Story_ID: 97595 Speaker 1: Okay, and what--what are some of your concerns for the [Washington] D.C. community today? Speaker 2: Access to housing--affordable housing is--is a--is--mean, you know--We didn't talk about them, but I have two sons. And one who is--refuses--I don't care if he ended up homeless, he probably would never move back home. He just made it clear: "I'm not coming back home." And he wants to stay in the District of Columbia, and an affordable--affordable housing is not available to him. And I was so happy to hear a bank president say the other day to his--you know, his--the people who work for him--that banks--the bank--the banking industry in Washington has recognized that it has a large role to play in making sure that there is affordable housing. And he went so far as to say $175,000 is not affordable for people in Washington, D.C. We've got to do better than that. When the average cost of a home in the District now is about $500,000. So if you're saying $175,000, which the--the politicians and others may be saying it's affordable, a bank president or a bank manager is saying "It's not affordable, and we can do better." And so in order to keep a diverse community in the District of Columbia, that's what's got to happen. In addition, that mean--I keep going--I go back to that education. You know, we've got to figure out--we've got to create--become a community or a village that makes parents feel as though it's important for their kids to go to school. And we've got to have teachers believe that it's important for every child to have a quality education. And we've got to have children or students who feel--you know, who understand or feel what other people feel and feel as though, you know, school is an important place for me to be. Because if I get this education, there're opportunities available to me. I've got to make them happen but, you know, this is--this is--this is important. So ed--education, housing--see I'm at--this whole housing crisis that we've had, you know, reminds me of Reconstruction. You know, we've had the largest loss of black land, you know, even if it's a house on a block--you know, since then. And so, you know, all these people in foreclosure for the illegal acts of the banks and banking institutions and others, it's been our loss, and we've got to find a way to get that back. So--I forgot what your question was, but (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, just about your hopes and concerns-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and my--my--another hope, you know, is how we can connect the Diaspora, you know. With the wealth of the black nation in the United States and the brainpower of the black nation in the United States, if there was some kind of way we can use that wealth and brainpower to connect with the wealth, which is even larger, and brainpower of Africa and then other places in the Diaspora--I mean, it would be a scary thought for some, but there's so much opportunity there. And so, you know, I'm--we're always tryin' to figure out ways that we can connect and make--help our children to see the world more globally, so that they realize that if there's not an opportunity here--our athletes have understood that. You know, they can't play in the NBA, so they go to--they go to Europe; they go to other places to play--play ball, you know. Our businessmen now and women are tryin' to figure out, you know, how they can build schools and build bridges and build roads, you know, on the continent. It's this--that we have to go through this door--that's not the door that we control--in order to--you know, to go back and forth. But I just hope we keep that movement going. And as a newspaper [the Washington Informer], we're tryin' to figure out how we can--can promote that. Story_ID: 97596 Speaker 1: Okay, now you mentioned one--one son. You got another one too, right? Speaker 2: Right. He lives at home (laughter). And, smartly, he's saving his money because at some point he's gonna move, but we--you know, he's being--he's being very strategic, so--and we want him to be that way 'cause, you know, there's--you know, he has the opportunity. I mean, nobody's tryin' to push him out. You know, he's got a nice little job and--you know, working for probably another HistoryMaker, Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton; he works for her. And so, you know, he's a graduate of Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland] and--in communications--you know, wants to go into the music industry but has decided that if music isn't gonna be his forte, maybe he'll go to law school. So, you know, "keep hope alive." Speaker 1: And your married now. You--you didn't tell us when you got married throughout the--during the narrative. But--but--but let's go back in time to when you got married. Speaker 2: I got married in 1985. I actually have a wedding anniversary next week. And so I'm married to Lafayette Barnes. And he's actually the third Lafayette. You know, it's my--his great--his grandfather and father, and now he's a Lafayette; my oldest son is Lafayette as well. So, you know, he was born in [Washington] D.C., raised in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then came back to Washington, and that's when we met. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's in the mid-'80s [1980s]. That's after you started with the paper [the Washington Informer] in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was with the paper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And it's interesting--I mean, that's the other part. I mean, nobody really supported me working with the newspaper but my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark], you know. 'Cause my mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] said: "You got a law degree; you know, I don't understand why you're broke all the time; you should, you know, be out there doing such and such;" and, you know--my husband was the same thing, you know; "you got a law degree" and two kids, "you have a law degree, and, you know, you ought to be doing something else." And it--it's has finally take them--taken them a moment to--what I say, drink the Kool--Kool-Aid. So now they see why I've invested so much time. And I think they're--you know, the whole family now is pretty proud of, you know, what we've been able to do with this publication. And everybody has either written--My oldest son works with me at the newspaper; the youngest has delivered newspapers. My husband writes for the newspaper. My mother has, you know, served as a receptionist for us and tried to sell some advertising for the newspaper. 'Cause, you know, my--you know, my father owned it. My stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark], you know, wrote a column for many years and also supported the newspaper, so. My uncle used to write a sports column. My cousin used to take photographs. I have a brother. I said my father had another son; Calvin managed circulation for the publication, so. I mean, all the family has been involved in some point, you know, with the publication. Speaker 1: Okay, that's good. It sounds like the Murphys in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. Murphys--you know, I'm like, how did you--'cause I was with Jake [John Jacob "Jake" Oliver] the other day, and I said, "How did you all do this?" But, you know, the--the grandfather--I think it was five brothers and a sister, and they all worked for the newspaper [the Baltimore Afro-American]. So, you know--and we're invested in that. And this is like the early 1900s. So, you know, it's like a corporation--just, you know, every family member have--was involved. I mean, some have gone off into--done other things. But, you know it's--it's--our family wasn't as large. I mean, we've only had onesies and twosies, you know; they had six and seven (laughter). Story_ID: 97597 Speaker 1: Oh I didn't ask about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], but that--that formed in '75 [1975]. Have you been a member of NABJ? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, we--we are--and again, I encourage the reporters and writers, freelancers too, to be a part of NABJ. You know, NABJ has sort of a different mission because they're mostly reporters who have worked for-- Speaker 1: Mainstream, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: like white media. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, non-African-American press. And--and the NNPA, which is the National Newspaper Publishers Association which I am member of and--and involved with, it's been our job, even though it may have not benefited us--but to make sure that the doors were open for those journalists, you know. Because, you know, if--if they're good enough to work for us, they're good enough to work for you. So, you know, we would love to have them and to keep them, but, you know, we need black journalists everywhere. And so that's part of what we--my father [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] actually--J.C. Hayward, one of our stalwart anc--news anchors on a CBS affiliate here in Washington, D.C., will not speak to any crowd without giving credit to my dad for threatening a demonstration against the local affiliate when they were about to fire her 30 years ago. And here, you know, 42 years later--40 years later she's still there. So that's what we do, you know. Now--and so--and that's probably--you know--we--we--we are glad that there's a NABJ, but as publishers, there's just a different objective. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 97598 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about be--that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, if I can--because we didn't really talk too much about my stepmother [HM Wilhelmina Rolark]. And if I can just say--who was also a history maker and who married my dad [Dr. Calvin William Rolark] when I was nine years old, who was--while my, you know, mother [Vera McGlassom Rolark Abbott] was my mother, she was like a mother to me and always treated me as such and I think has a legacy, you know, of her own that I'm very proud of as the--you know, who worked within the National Bar Association--one of the early stalwarts of the National Bar, but recognized that these black lawyers were, you know, not--male lawyers were not as accepting or--of black women attorneys. So she founded the National Association of Black Women Attorneys, which I don't think exists; I haven't heard anything from any NABWA lately, but it was a great organization for--that--you know, supported particularly black--young black women that were going to law school and then, you know, those that were looking for judgeships and what have you. So I just wanted to, you know, add that part that--you know, I just feel very fortunate to have had her in my life as well. And--I think that's it. Speaker 1: That's Wilhelmina Rolark. Speaker 2: Wilhelmina Rolark, right. Wilhelmina Jackson Rolark. Speaker 1: Jackson Rolark? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yeah. Story_ID: 97599 Speaker 1: Well then the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Um. I think I just said it, you know (laughter). You know, as someone who cared about her community; cared about people; used the weapon that she had or the tools she had, which was her newspaper, to advocate for causes and for people; and, you know, a humble spirit but willing to--to go to battle, you know, if that's what's required; but mostly through--mostly as someone who--I mean, of course, as a mother I always like my kids to tell me, you know, "You were a great mom." And, you know--same for my husband [Lafayette Barnes] in that, you know, I've been a great wife. Neither one of those--you know, that I had role models for it necessarily--you know, the wife and--but, you know, we've--we've--worked through, you know, all of that--but mace--mainly, you know, someone who really cared about keeping an institution alive for the benefit of the people it serves and not for me--the staff, the community. You know, this is--this is--why the Washington Informer--I've worked so hard to keep the Washington Informer alive...