 Story_ID: 12305 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Herman Roberts, H-E-R-M-A-N, R-O-B-E-R-T-S, Roberts. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your date of birth? Speaker 2: January 21st, 1924. Speaker 1: And what's your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, hotel, motel--I'd say Roberts Enterprises. I have three or four different type of operations. Speaker 1: Okay, what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 24th, 19--I mean 18--(laughs) 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we today? Speaker 2: We're at 6630 [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive at Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois], used to be- Speaker 1: On the South Side. Speaker 2: Yeah, on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 12306 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, just basic--I really don't have a special food. I, I kind of like a variety of food, just basic meat and potatoes, so forth like that. I'm not a vegetarian, so I like just about--all type of food I, I like. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I would say more or less blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I'd say autumn. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Naw, I, I like--I don't like to go the same place all the time, just, just--that's the purpose of going on vacation. That's why I never bought a sharing place and I didn't want to go back the next year to the same place. So I, I'm a kind of person like to venture, go different places. If I go to New York [New York] one year, next year I may want to go to [Las] Vegas [Nevada], I may want to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I might want to go back to Florida someplace. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, the biggest thing I would tell most people, I tell them to do the best they can. That's right, do the best they can. They do that, that's all you can say. If they really know they done did the best they can, it ain't nothing else you can do. Story_ID: 12307 Speaker 1: Can you give us--give me the name, the name of your mother and father and the dates of their birth (unclear)--. Speaker 2: My mother was named Ella Todd. That was her maiden name. And she was born in Louisiana. And my father was James Roberts, and he was born in Texas. And she was--my mother was born in 1889, and my father was born 1887. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell their names for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, E-L-L-A, Ella, Todd, T-O-D-D. And James is James, J-A-M-E-S, Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did your-did your mother or your father or both have stories about their ancestors, stories about, you know- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of story did they tell? Speaker 2: Well, my mother, she was a Todd, and the old stories we hear about, you know, she's related to Mary Todd [Lincoln], like a cousin, distant cousin. Speaker 1: You mean Mary Todd of--, Speaker 2: Mary Todd of [President] Abraham Lincoln's wife, yes, because her father [Robert Smith Todd] was a Todd. And my mother was--her father was a, I guess a slave owner at the time. And that was her father, which he had two sets of kids, I guess, you know. But anyway-- Speaker 1: And this would be where at? Speaker 2: This would be down in Louisiana. And so that's part of it--and her mother was, I guess, part Indian, part Indian because they--she always used to tell me about her, her grandmother or something back at the time was when, I guess one of the presidents was on the train or something, he was passing out water pitchers. And she got a pitcher I think back, way back during [President] George Washington days. So you know that went way back. So that was handed down through my family. So, that's on my mother's side. And matter of fact, some of my uncles and my mother, they were light enough to, as we would say, to be able to pass if they wanted to. You know what passing means (laughs)? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean you may want to tell those who may not what that is? Speaker 2: (Laughs) Passing mean you could pass for white, and you could go in different places and get food where blacks couldn't go. And that's the biggest thing that's what really started a little prejudice between blacks and whites at the time because a guy a little lighter than the darker guy, he had a little something on him 'cause he could go some places that the black guy couldn't go. Speaker 1: So you mean within the black community, they (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In the black community, that's right. And matter of fact, truthfully, what it, really, if you--the slave owner, if he was, would know he was your father, you didn't have to go, maybe you didn't have to go to the field. Here's a little dark guy out there. He know he wasn't his father. So he would have to hit--go on to the field. And so the light little guy could be the water boy, just didn't have to go to the field. So that caused a lot of friction too. You know, a little jealously everywhere. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, you know, 'cause after all, you know, if you're my son, deep down, deep down in your own heart, you kind of give him a little break. Speaker 1: Right, I guess that's only human. Speaker 2: Yeah, human, that's right, sure. Story_ID: 12308 Speaker 1: What about your father's [James Roberts] side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, on my father's side, he was just, I guess his grandfather or so forth was, was in slavery back in that time. And the oldest thing he talked about is his father and so forth. They left from Texas, came up into Oklahoma with a cattle drive. That's how my, my grandfather came into Oklahoma, on some kind of cattle drive and my father followed them up there. And that's how they settled in Oklahoma, you know, Oklahoma. And that's, I guess he met my mother [Ella Todd Roberts]. That's where they got married Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Now, how did your mother's family get to Oklahoma? How did she get there? Did she have a story? Speaker 2: Well, truthfully, I really don't know how she got there because she, she had some sisters and brothers. And they--her brothers and so forth was much older, but, you know, maybe ten or twelve years older than my mother. And they--but one of my uncles was a carpenter, and like I said, and he was, looked like he was completely white. And he could get good jobs just about everywhere. And he kind of brought the family along with him, 'cause Oklahoma was like a new territory, Oklahoma Territory back in those days. Speaker 1: So did your mother and father have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Naw, they, they were--you know what, let me see, you know, kids today ask a lot of questions. (Laughs) Back in them days, you didn't ask a lot of questions. You, you didn't question your parents about too much. And back in them days, it was no thoughts and no ideas. Matter of fact, we never even thought about our roots too much until later on in the later years, after the book come out, 'Roots' and all that stuff. People started thinking about where their family come from. I knew more about my horses than I did about my family (laughs), true, which is truthfully, it's checking back see, because I can't no further than back, no more than my grandfather 'cause I don't, I never met a great grandfather, don't even--never had no pictures. I don't even know what they look like, don't even know if my--not any of my great-grand people look like. It wasn't no such thing as cameras and stuff. If it was, we didn't see it. Speaker 1: Okay, so, but the grandfather you knew was on your mother's side or your father's side? Speaker 2: Father's side, yeah--that's the only grandfather I ever saw was my, yeah, only one grandparents I ever, ever saw was my grandfather. Never saw a grandmother. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, was he the one that came up on the cattle drive? Speaker 2: Yes, he was the one came up from Texas, yeah. He was named Jake Roberts, yeah. And he was my, my--that was my father's father. He was the one came up on the, on the cattle drive. Speaker 1: Did he talk about that in detail at all, about--? Speaker 2: My grandfather? Speaker 1: Yeah, about that cattle drive? Speaker 2: Well, you see, no, not too much to me 'cause after all, I was--he died when I was probably five or six [1929-1930], so, naw. Like I said, we didn't, no, no more than I just heard my father talking about it, how he to got to came up. Story_ID: 12309 Speaker 1: Now, you were born, what year? Speaker 2: In '24 [1924]. Speaker 1: And you were born in--? Speaker 2: Oklahoma, in Beggs, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Can you spell Beggs? Speaker 2: B-E-G-G-S, Beggs, Oklahoma, that's south of Tulsa [Oklahoma], about thirty-five miles south of Tulsa, which--. Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you tell us what that town was like, and what it was like when you were growing up? I mean what were some of the sights and sounds? Speaker 2: Well, it was a little, real small town, real small town. And matter of fact, we didn't, we wasn't born in town. That was the closest town where we, I was born. I was born in the country. And the town was about four, about four, about four and a half miles from where I was born. And it was a small town, one-we had a white school and a black school. And they had one school around there for Indians, you know, the Indian school 'cause it was a lot of Indians around there in that area. And we had to, you know, walk to school every morning when we'd go to school, about four miles to school, you know. And the school was kind of in town. And they had some schools in, out in the country, but we didn't live close to the schools in the country so we went to school in the city, in the little town. Well, it wouldn't be city, but a little town. Speaker 1: Was that a public school? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was public school, yeah, sure. We didn't know about no private school. I don't know if anybody knew about private schools. Speaker 1: I know sometimes, you know, the Black Church, the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church or the Baptist church, would form a school because there was no other school to go to. Speaker 2: No, we, this was public school. We had all black teachers. And football, a black football team, and stuff like that. There was a black principal and everything, and in the white school, they had they team and all white teachers and all, 'cause matter of fact, the whole time I went to school, I never did see a white teacher until I come to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, so was the black community down there pretty close knit? Speaker 2: It was pretty, oh, sure. It definitely was pretty knit, had to be pretty knit (laughs) 'cause all blacks kinda lived in the same area, and they all went to the same school, all went to same church, you know. And you kind of got along a little bit with the white, but it was separate, completely separated, you know. You know, no, no--and you didn't go into restaurants, you didn't go into--it was just basically the same old story back, you know, during that time. And anybody of any age know, know the history of the South and, you know, and Oklahoma and all down through there, Arkansas and Mississippi. Speaker 1: Could black people vote down there? Speaker 2: Well, at that time, during the time--I guess they, yeah, they could vote, yeah, 'cause they, 'cause the guy would come out, running for County Commissioner and all that stuff like that. And he would come out and kind of have a little picnic or something for the people, have a little party, I guess, you know, political affair and they'd get some of the blacks to go in there. You know, and they'd have like a picnic out in the country. And, you know, but everything was did outside. Story_ID: 12310 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have? Speaker 2: I had-- Speaker 1: Or do you have? Speaker 2: --Two brothers and two sisters. I have a sister living at the present, and I'm the only boy, boy at the present. Speaker 1: Can you name them, and then-- Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, okay--, Speaker 1: --Like tell us where you fit in the order? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I'm, I'm the youngest of the boys. I had a brother named Colvin Roberts. And he was eight years older than I. And I had another brother, he was six years older. And I had a--. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Ira, I-R-A, Ira Roberts. Speaker 1: And Colvin. Speaker 2: And Colvin was eight years older than I. Speaker 1: That's C-O-L-V-I-N? Speaker 2: C-O-L-V-I-N, Colvin. And then I had a sister named Doris. She was younger than I. She was four years younger. And I had a- Speaker 1: D-O-R-I-S? Speaker 2: D-O-R-I-S, Doris. Then I have a sister Merral, she's four years older, and M-E-R-R-A-L, Merral Roberts. She was, you know, a real estate broker. And so it was--we were all very, very close because back in--when I say, I always back in those days because things has changed. When you had breakfast or had lunch and--which we never did worry about no lunch. But we had breakfast and dinner, we'd called it back, back in that time, supper, you had to be at the table. Other than that, you didn't get nothing. It wasn't no such thing as no McDonald's and no (laughs), no fast-food places to go. So you had to be at the table to get something to eat. And that's the way--that's what really kept families close together because when breakfast was put on the table, you had to be there to get it 'cause it wasn't no, no--if you wasn't there, you wouldn't get nothing 'cause it wouldn't be nothing left. It wouldn't be no seconds or nothing. You be first--be lucky to get some first. Story_ID: 12311 Speaker 1: Now, you grew up during the [Great] Depression? Speaker 2: The Depression, definitely. Speaker 1: What they call the, out in Oklahoma, the Dust Bowl. Speaker 2: Bowl Dust days, that's right. Yeah, that's, Oklahoma was, still had a drought there during in the '30's [1930s]. And that's when they made that movie 'Grapes of Wrath' with Henry Fonda and all that. But that's like a true story 'cause people's cows and horses and people themselves, all the water had dried up. And you, you know, you couldn't, you'd be just, be lucky to find some water just to drink. The rivers and creeks and things was all dried up. And that was going on for two or three years. So people left Oklahoma and just took off and went anywhere 'cause it wasn't nothing. Wasn't no money, wasn't no jobs, wasn't nothing. You'd be lucky if you could make fifty cents a week, imagine, if you could get any kind of job. Speaker 1: Okay, so times were-- Speaker 2: And that was before [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt came in and before Roosevelt came in. Roosevelt came in, and it did start making things a little, a little bit better 'cause he came in, and, you know, had the WPA [Works Progress Administration], you know, and started putting people to work. They wasn't getting but thirty--like I remember my father working. He was making about thirty-two dollars a month. That was with his horses and wagon and, and his self, getting up at four or five o'clock in the morning and going hauling rocks and all that stuff, you know. And that was big money. Speaker 1: So your father [James Roberts] basically was a farmer? Speaker 2: Was a farmer, that's right. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) But he did other things. Speaker 2: Did other things too, whatever's good, 'cause we lived near a oil field, and we did a little work on oil fields, so forth, not too much 'cause, just like I said, it wasn't, it wasn't no jobs to be handed out, you know. Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ella Todd Roberts] do anything special? Speaker 2: No, my mother was just a, a housewife all the time. She never, I never known my mother to have a job, period. Speaker 1: Did she do jobs for people you know (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, she ain't never did no, never did no day work or no nothing. My mother was fortunate that, I guess with my brothers and so forth and my father [James Roberts], the way we was able to keep things going, she never, she never went out on no day work. Story_ID: 12312 Speaker 1: Now, when you were a small kid, you know, what kind of things would you do for fun, for amusement? Speaker 2: Well, fun, we, you know, like naturally, go to school. And we would, you know, play a little football and stuff like that. But basically, we kind of, stayed kind of busy working, you know. And I, I was the kind of young kid, I liked to hunt a lot. I always liked to trap and hunt and stuff like that. And I had dogs and so forth like that, and I was outdoor type of kid. I, I loved to go out. I would, you know, I loved to set traps. I been trapping all my life, still trapping (laughs). Speaker 1: Different kind of game. Speaker 2: (Laughs) That's right, but it all add up to the same thing, all add up to how you gonna set your trap, yes, really. And it's, it works today the same as it did back in the olden days. Speaker 1: And so how did you like school? I mean how did you--. Speaker 2: Well, the school was, school was okay. It was all right. I really didn't like school that well, but it was okay, you know. It was-'cause you'd see your friends at school and so forth, but as far as the subjects and stuff in school and so forth, I wasn't, I wasn't breaking my neck to get there to, to read and to do all them math problems and stuff like that. But, you know, but you had to--back then, back where I went to school in Oklahoma, you had to do your homework and keep up 'cause the teacher back then would, she would give you, she'd, she'd give you some licks. Speaker 1: Okay, she wouldn't send a note. She would actually--. Speaker 2: She'd, she'd get on you, she'd, yes, she, she'd make you hold your hand out. And if you missed two or three words, you get two or three licks with the ruler or something. So back then, nobody--and my mother [Ella Todd Roberts] and father [James Roberts], they hear about it, they might want to get on you 'cause you didn't know your lesson. So it wasn't back, now, like it is today, where the parents go up there and want to whup the teacher. So it's a whole new ballgame. A matter of fact, if--you respected your parents and your teachers and so forth. And then, back in those days, you didn't know nothing about no narcotics and all that kind of stuff, never heard of that before. Story_ID: 12313 Speaker 1: Well, who were the people that influenced you the most when you were coming up? Who were your biggest influences? Speaker 2: Well, well, biggest influence, it wasn't too much in Oklahoma because I was too young. I left Oklahoma when I was about eleven or twelve. But after I got here, my biggest influence, when I got here, I just couldn't believe some of the things I was, could see, you know, like black people owning--I know one friend of mine was named, and had a big fleet of cabs and stuff like that. And I always tried to look and see what important people was doing. I wanted to get close to them, want to know how did they do it, you know, I figure if they could do something like that, I--maybe I could do it. And that was a thing that the, this one particular outfit had thirty or forty taxicabs and so forth, some owned some apartment buildings and stuff, you know. And that's who, that's who I would--like the Sewell brothers and different ones, you know, people that had, was, had some oil and stuff. And the Hansberry people and all that stuff and during my day. And that's what you try to follow, you want to get close to. A matter of fact, most of the time, if I got a chance, I would be talking to those people. And they was very, some of 'em was very nice, since I was such a young person, interested in what they, how they made it, they would--sometimes they'd take a lot of time to tell me about how they ventured in, how they--where they come from and how they made it. So that made me feel good 'cause some of them came, just like Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson] with 'Ebony' Magazine, he come from Arkansas, the same place like we come from Oklahoma up, which Arkansas is a border state. He told me a lot of times, a matter of fact, when my brother passed, he was at his funeral. And he told me, he says, "Listen, you know, me and your brother come here together. We both come here around the same time." He was coming here from Arkansas and my brother come here from Oklahoma. So they were very good friends. They graduated from high school together. So basic--these the people that you would want to, want to try to patent after. Speaker 1: This is your brother, Colvin [Roberts]? Speaker 2: Colvin, that's right. He was older, and so naturally I--he was a influence on me a lot too because I would be--go out in the street and, like I said, and I was kind of jumping the gun a little bit, but I got involved in the taxi cab business, you know, and so forth, and cab drivers and so forth. You know, they may be driving the cab with their hat turn on backwards or cap on backwards. So if my brother saw me with my cap on backwards, he'd be wanting to knock it off my head because (laughs) he figured that that ain't the way you should be, you know, driving or wearing your cap or so forth. And I, I--I would respect him as if, the same as if he was my father. A matter of fact, all my family, I respect him as, as if they my, you know, father or mother, you know, because I wouldn't want them to see me doing something that I would, felt that I was doing wrong, you know, like narcotics and smoking some kind of reefers or dope or something like that, 'cause I didn't, I didn't see nothing--all the people I could see doing that, going around scratching and rubbing they head and all that stuff, that wasn't, that wasn't nothing I wanted. And a lot of people going in gambling and having to--shooting dice and so forth in these little garages and all that stuff and losing their money, that wasn't any of my--I didn't want to--I didn't want to fit into that category at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so then--another thing, as you get up, and we were trying to do something and trying to move ahead, you got to carry yourself in a right type of situation in order for people to respect you if you gonna be a leader, you know. You, you can't be getting drunk and falling all out in the middle of the street and alley and expect people to do the--because they probably wanna might do the same thing. And that, those two things is not gonna work. Story_ID: 12314 Speaker 1: And why did your family leave Oklahoma in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, we were there, and during the '30s [1930s], like '37 [1937] and so forth. Like I say, it was no money and nothing to make it. My brother [Ira Roberts] was already living here in Chicago [Illinois]. He had left Oklahoma earlier, came to Chicago and he was working here and doing pretty good. My other, my oldest, other brother [Colvin Roberts] had left too. So they came down there for Christmas, come back to visit us. And, and we were living in a, at a place--where we were living, the people wanted forty dollars for the rent. We were living on a forty, forty acres of land and a house. They wanted forty, forty dollars a, a year for rent, forty dollars . That was too much money. So--, Speaker 1: A different time. Speaker 2: Yeah, forty dollars, we didn't have no forty dollars. So we upped and moved to Chicago . We left there and come here 'cause we all figured we could, you know, get a job and work or do something. So--, Speaker 1: How did you all move? Did you all take the train or take a car? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, my brother, no, no, my brother came down there in his car. And matter of fact, he was, he was dealing in the taxi cab business then, and he was operating those, what you call those big ole jitneys which was a big seven passenger car, a '37 [1937] Plymouth or something like that. And seven people could get in it. And my mother [Ella Todd Roberts], father [James Roberts], myself and my sister and all us got in there, packed our little stuff and got in there and came to Chicago . And so--'cause he was coming back anyway, so we just left. The little stuff we had, we just sold it, and it wasn't that much we could sell anyway down there, and we came to Chicago . And the first day I got here, you know, I, I went to work, wasn't no big job, but I got ten papers and sold them and made myself twenty cent. That was a lot of money, twenty cent. It was more money than I was making in Oklahoma. Speaker 1: So when you got here, you were hungry. Speaker 2: Oh, well, I was hungry, didn't mind working 'cause in Oklahoma you worked, you know. Anything you did down there, you worked, cut a tree down, cut firewood, worked in the fields, you know, whatever. You worked in, you, feeding hogs and horses and cows and everything, you, you were out there walking in a little of everything (laughs). So what people frown at, it didn't mean nothing to me. Story_ID: 12315 Speaker 1: That was a way of life, just, you know, just like going hunting and so forth. You stick your hand all up in them hollows and looking for squirrels and rabbits and possums, coon or whatever it is, just a way of life. I'd be scared to death to see young kids now scared to go outside the house. They, they scared of a spider. Speaker 2: I read about you sticking your hands in a hollow tree to see what's inside? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Yeah, that's right, that's right, you run your hand up in a hollow and feel up in there and see if you feel anything. Speaker 2: What would be in a hollow tree when you--? Speaker 1: Well, you might find a rabbit up there or something. I was, I was, I guess I was crazy (laughs) truthfully. I, I wouldn't do it now. No, but then I'd go there and run, and you can't see up in that tree. You didn't have no light or nothing. So you reach up in there and feel up there and see if it's anything up in there. Take a stick- Speaker 2: Did you find anything up there? Speaker 1: Oh, sure, a lot of times, you find or feel a rabbit or something up in the tree and things, you know, 'cause see, it's certain hollows where a rabbit will run, 'cause a rabbit can't climb, you know. Now, it it's a squirrel or something, you ain't gon' find no squirrel up there. You can't reach in no hollow and find no squirrel cause squirrel gone be up so high anyway, up, way up in the tree. He can move. But a, a rabbit is just gonna run to hide, hide his self. And you can find him, see. But a possum or a squirrel or the other animals, they, they can crawl. They go all up in trees and go way up in hollows. So that's the difference, and see, (unclear), you know, so when you figure you looking for a rabbit, you just about know where a rabbit's gonna be in the first place. Story_ID: 12316 Speaker 1: When you all moved to Chicago [Illinois], I guess, and you say you were eleven or twelve? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, about twelve. Speaker 1: In 1938? Speaker 2: Yeah, about '38 [1938], that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you live here in Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, I lived at 55th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue]. It was a kitchenette building there. And we got a kitchenette apartment there for about thirteen dollars a week or something like that. My mother [Ella Todd Roberts] and father [James Roberts] and my sister and, and myself. It was four of us stayed there 'cause my brothers and so forth, they already had they own places to stay. And we stayed there and paid rent, and the place was already furnished, with the furniture already in there and everything. It even had some pots and pans in there. So that's why they had, back in them days, they had a lot of kitchenettes. And that's why they come in handy because a lot of people didn't have enough money to go out and buy furniture and, and rent apartments 'cause you could rent apartment, it was--a two or three bedroom apartment for fifty-five dollars to sixty-five dollars a month. Matter of fact, even some of them was forty-five dollars a month. But you, you could go and shoot, shoot marbles in a lot of apartments 'cause it was just vacant. People didn't have the money to rent them. So people that owned those buildings, that's what caused them to cut them up and make, make small apartments and, and so the apartment wouldn't be vacant. They had like two or three families paying for, for that apartment. Everybody paid a little bit. If somebody paid twelve dollars this week, another one got to pay twelve dollars, when he put it together, he's getting his monthly rent and over. So that's how those kitchenettes came involved in, you know, broke down because all those buildings was great big ole, big ole apartments. Most of them was, you know, six and seven room apartments. Speaker 1: Now, what was the the boundaries of the black community when you--? Speaker 2: Well, when I come in here, it was from, like 31st [Street] to around 55th [Street], 56th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. It was, they was all from State Street to Cottage Grove [Avenue] was--that's how come the jitney situation was good at that time because everybody lived in little, little straight sections. And, and so you didn't have to go too far because you--back then, back then it was certain areas you could move and certain areas you couldn't move in. In other words, you know, and matter of fact, it was certain areas you could buy property and certain areas you couldn't buy property. It was what you called "restricted covenants," you know, where they wouldn't sell to blacks, you know. Matter of fact, when I first tried to buy some property, I couldn't buy it because of, they wouldn't, they wouldn't sell to blacks. Story_ID: 12317 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you what high school did you go to when you got here? Did you to go to school? Speaker 2: Well, I went to grade school first when I got here. I went to Burke Grade School [Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and that was at 53rd and South Park[way], which is [Dr. Martin Luther] King Drive now. Burke Grade School, and then after I graduated from Burke Grade School, I went to Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Preparatory Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. And that's at 62nd [Street] and Stewart [Avenue] over there, Englewood High. I went there about two years. And I didn't, never got--I didn't finish high school cause I just got involved in my operation working. And I didn't--wind up not going back, with the good intentions of going back. Speaker 1: Okay, but you-- Speaker 2: Never went back. Speaker 1: It's almost a case where you were too successful to finish high school, right (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, that's true enough. You know, like a lot of times I go and I lecture to kids a lot and talk to them. And some things I, I could, I could tell them, and some things I maybe don't want to tell them because, let me tell you something, going to school is to get a job, right? Now, if you out here with a job and making money, you gone school yourself to a certain extent if you, you know, if you're in business for yourself. But the only-est thing I can say about not going to school, if something happen to you, you're not qualified to get a job. Now, I'm gonna show you, and my situation is kind of unique, a little different because I went out and I, and I went in business for myself. Now, I'm gonna tell you what made me had to make it in business, cause I went on down, and I didn't go back to school, right? So I didn't have no school teacher's job, no Post Office job. I didn't have, I--if I had a good job, I may not would have took the chance in my business. See,-- Speaker 1: You had nothing to fall back on. Speaker 2: Nothing to fall back on, so I had to make it in business cause if I didn't make it in business, I couldn't go teach school. Now, I've seen a lot of people tell me, "I'm not gonna quit my day job." Now, you've heard that a million times, and a lot of people tell you, say, "Don't quit your day job 'cause you not gonna make it", you know, doing such--so if a guy got a good working at the Post Office, good job working as a school teacher, a good job with some place, he's not gonna, he's not gonna blow that job hardly to take a chance in business. Story_ID: 12318 Speaker 1: Do you think, Mr. Roberts, that people who say that they're not gonna quit their day job are gonna succeed in their other job? I mean are they likely to succeed if they're working full time for somebody else and then trying to do their own job on the side? Speaker 2: Well, well, that's, well that's what I say, but because--see, they--it's like buy an insurance policy. They, their job that they're working on every day, that's kind of like a sure thing. Now, just like, well, I'm gonna mention this here, like when I was dealing in the taxicab business, now, I had taxicabs where some guys could work on percentage and some guys pay a flat fee. Now, a lazy guy, he works on percentage 'cause if he go out there and he lazy, and he don't make but $10.00, he gets 40 percent of that. Now, here's another guy gonna go out and pay a flat fee for the cab. He, he know he want to work. So he's willing to pay that $8.00 and $9.00 'cause he gonna make a lot more money. You see, it--the difference? So his, see, he's smart. He's gonna want to work, so he want to pay a flat fee and work 'cause he, he's not limited how much he's gonna make. What if he go out there and $25.00 or $30.00. He's got $20.00 or $30.00 extra in his pocket. Now, if he was working on percentage, the company is gonna take 60 percent of that. So that's the difference. So it just depends on what leverage you want to take in, in your, in your way of thinking and in business. See, everything that's--you got to figure out everything and figure it out, what you think is the best return for you. Well, for you or for whoever it is. Some people, some people don't know. Some people--let me say, in business, some people don't know what to do first. I got a old saying, but I can't say it over here. Some people don't know what to do first. Speaker 1: Is there a way to say it without--is there a way you can euphemize it for us? Speaker 2: Well, okay, you know, in other words, I put it this way, I've had people that, say if they was working for me, and they owe, they driving my taxi. They owe the taxi fare, rent on, on the cab for that day. They lease fee for that day is, say, maybe it's $10.00. They come in, and they got a, some kind of bill or something they gonna pay. They go pay this bill for $10.00 and don't pay the cab fee for working. The next day they don't have no job, you see. So, now the first thing to do is pay the rent on the, on the cab, at you working. So the next day, you pay the other bill the next day. So that's why I'm saying some people don't know what to do first. Some people go buy a brand new car and don't have no place to stay. And sometimes they wind up sleeping in the car. Now, they don't, they don't--and some people, you know, want to impress somebody or so forth, so they'll go on to try to impress somebody, instead of letting that, forget about that. Now, you know, a lot of times, you--especially, with women getting their nails done, their hair fixed and all that stuff. That's not necessary, if you trying to get someplace. Like during my time, when I was operating, New Year's, Christmas, all those days, the holidays, people are out partying. Well, that's the time I made my money. So I wouldn't think about setting up no, no, no New Year's Eve party and that's the day I'm gonna make my money. See, so that's, that's, that's where I'm working at. Speaker 1: Okay, it's a matter of choices you make. Speaker 2: Well, a matter of a choice and the matter of the right choice and the matter of choice that you, you should take. But after all, you, you can't--some people you can't, you can't, like I say, you can't, you can't tell them that. And if you do tell them that, they--it's just the way that they, they think. And everybody don't think right, you know, like you, you know, you say, tell a person to take this house and treat as if your own. You can't tell everybody, 'cause some people, some people don't take care of they own self too well. Now, you know if some people using a lot of cigarettes and narcotics and drinking and smoking and all that, now, you don't, you don't want to do that to your body, right? So you can't say, hey, take my body, and use it like you want to (laughs), right? See, so this is the same thing. So everybody, you know, that's, that's right. You got a lot of people already in the penitentiary and jails and all that stuff, crack houses and nut houses and all that. So everybody is not the same. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: So, you got to be, you got to be kind of strong. Now, I been out in the street all my life, and I have the first time to--I'm not gonna be like the president or none of the rest of them, the first time to deal with any kind of narcotics or dope or anything, never, never. And I've been in all kind of operations. Speaker 1: You know, that's quite a statement to make because I know that running with-- Speaker 2: With entertainers, cab drivers and all that stuff and everything-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Unclear) yeah, cab drivers-- Speaker 2: --all, I been in all kind of business. Speaker 1: Motel business. Speaker 2: Motel business and all that. Now, not that I haven't seen it. And, and that's, that's the very reason I (laughs), very reason I'm not, didn't never get involved cause I could see what's happening to people. I've known a lot of business people and stuff have lost their business and, and got too far on the limb. Some people can't handle, some people can't handle success. Some people let it go to they head. Some people can't handle it. So you got to be careful. Story_ID: 12319 Speaker 1: Let's go back to when you first got started in the business. I think you were selling papers-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah, well, I was-- Speaker 1: --you washed cabs. Speaker 2: Well, like I said, when I first got here [Chicago, Illinois], that first Sunday I was here, I went on 55th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. I told you I lived right there at 55th and Indiana [Avenue]. I went around on 55th and Michigan on the corner and bought ten papers which was eight cent a--eight cent a paper and sold them for ten cent--eight and ten, so I'm making two cent off a paper. I sold ten papers. I had twenty cent. So next Sunday, I went and bought more papers. Then pretty soon, on that same corner, then I started getting me a guy to stand up on the corner. And then I started going to people's houses 'cause I knew the customers. Then after I got to know the customer, I said, "Where you come from?" I say, "I'll bring your paper to your door." So I started right off in business then, just putting stuff together. So I got ten or fifteen people already at home waiting on me to bring them the paper. I already got that money booked already. Now, the other guy, standing on the corner where I was, he's selling for people that walking up there looking for me. So I was already done start my operation (laughs), right there with that paper. Then I went up, went down, I had me a paper route and so forth and worked on that. That's how I did with the paper situation. And I sold the 'Chicago Defender', 'Pittsburgh Courier', 'Daily Worker', all those papers. But you had to get up early in the morning and walk and go up and down them streets and so forth. So I'm gonna tell you, if you don't drive to want to do--my mother or father didn't come shake me up out the bed every morning, telling me, get up, boy, you got to go sell them papers. That had to be something within me. Speaker 1: That's an interesting--well, what you just said was interesting from the standpoint that I didn't realize that--I knew about the 'Defender' and the 'Pittsburgh Courier' being the most popular black paper in the country, but the 'Daily Worker'-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Communist paper. Speaker 1: --that was Communist Party. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right. I'd sell that. I was selling everything. Story_ID: 12320 Speaker 1: Were people buying the 'Daily Worker'? Speaker 2: Oh, sure they was buying. You had people back there that, it was a of--back in those days, people was, the communist situation was more popular then than it is now. I don't even know about it now. I don't think so. Now, I don't hear too much about the communists, but back in those days, because after all, people, black people--let me say this to you, if, if you're not getting a part of the pie, it's nothing wrong with being communist cause communist believe in togetherness to a certain degree, dividing up and making sure everybody was, you know, had, can get on the streetcar and ride, could go here and get medicine and all that stuff, you know. So that's the purpose, my basic--I never was a communist, but that was my basic way of thinking, the way the Communist Party worked. And truthfully, what I see in the capital situation going now, it look like to me it's kind of going into the communist type of situation now, with, with Chicago [Illinois] right now, the, the city is doing so much and taking over so much and doing so much and giving away so much stuff free, it's almost adding up to the same situation; all these affairs and gospels and blues fest, all this free stuff and everything, right? You ain't got--it's almost putting a guy in business out of business. I got to go pay fifteen or twenty or $40,000 for an act, and then go downtown in, in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] and see it free. Now what I'm gonna be--book something in the summertime or book something anytime and you can go some, one of these places out, down there and see it free and don't pay nothing. And the tax people are paying for it. So just like we was in the skating business and whatever business I have, the, the park district gonna build a bowling alley and build a skating rink and a lot of things going on, so much they put, putting out for the people. It, it's hard to compete. Story_ID: 12321 Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to your- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Development as a businessman. Now, you're selling papers- Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --And then what did you do? Speaker 2: Okay, while I was selling papers and everything, I was living right near this cab garage place, where the cabs came in and checked and, and out. And so I found out the guys down there, the people be around there, like I say, I'm always very observant of whatever is going and the guys was coming. And they wouldn't spend no fifty cent to get a car wash. They'd get a car wiped off for a dime with a big ole jitney, it's a big ole seven-passenger car, sweep them out, wipe off the windshield, wipe off the windows, clean--you know, just wipe them off and everything. The guy give them a dime. So I started asking the guys "Could I clean your car up"? "Sure, go ahead and clean it up." And let me say something about that. After I started cleaning cars up--I'm gonna tell you something. You got to be truthfully and right with everybody because if I went in there and a guy give me a dime to clean his car up, and he come back and it's half clean and half wiped up, he's not gonna use me no more. He's not gonna let me clean his car. First thing, he gonna get--I'm gonna get to be--my name gonna be mud in there. You know, who mud is (laughs). Yeah, my name gonna be mud. They gonna run my can away because I'm, I'm shucking and jiving and I'm not cleaning up, getting a dime from a guy and half clean the car. Now, if I'm cleaning the car up right, he come back the next day looking for me. Hey, hey, Rob, you know--they didn't call me that at that time, they called me 'Jitterbug' 'cause that's during the time they had, jitterbugs was around with the zoot suits. Speaker 1: That was your nickname, Jitterbug? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, they called me, "Hey, Jitterbug," yeah, that's right. "Come here, hey, Jitterbug, clean my car up." So, but anyway, I'd come clean his car up, and then the next guy, as soon as I get through cleaning, "Hey, clean my car up." And they liked me 'cause I was a young kid doing the right thing. And, and basically, that's how I really, I really got ahead because people could see that I was sincere, and, and everybody would try to help me. So, and I--'cause I was helping myself. So they would--so I had, both car, I'd clean them. So one day, a guy come in there after I'd been around there for about a year, a guy come in there, and wasn't nobody to take him home. So he says, "Come drop me off, I don't live but right around the corner. It's cold, and drop me off." He, he knew I could drive 'cause when you hang around a garage, you learn how to back up cars and pull them in and, you know, and move them around. So you, if you know how to park a car and back it up and go around, if you can do all that, you can drive. So I took the guy home. And next day, he come and grab me again. Clean my car up and take me home. So it was a standard thing, me and him, taking him home. Then I'd come back and park his car and start cleaning up the rest of them. So one day I was taking the guy home, coming back, somebody hollered, "Taxi, taxi". So I picked them up, took them where they was going, still came on back to the garage. The next day, I went back and the same thing, somebody hollered "Taxi" again. So pretty soon, I stopped going back to the garage (laughs). I was working--I started using that cab, picking up people, taking them where they want to go. I didn't have no license, no nothing. The police wasn't, police wouldn't do nothing to you back in them days 'cause it wasn't that many police on the street, especially on them off streets, you know. So anyway, so I--he, he knew that, I told him about me, 'cause I was, like I wasn't lying to him. I told him about me picking up these people and stuff like that. So come to find out, his day partners--now this guy quit around 3:00, 3:00, 3:30 every morning, no later than 4:00, he quit. The day didn't come to work until 8:30 or 9:00. So he said, you dropping the people off, come and pick me up, 'cause I'd pick him up with a nice warm car, clean, gas in it and everything. I made sure he had his gas and everything. So I told him, I said, "Well you drop me off at school." So when he got through, he'd pick me back up at school. I had me a chauffeur taking me to school and picking me up (laughs). So I had a good deal. See, so that's like I say, you had to be, had to be right with them. So every day the guy come, he'd come pick--get me. I'd clean his car up, take him home. So I had the car for about two or three hours, free. So all that little money I was making was in my pocket. So I wouldn't charge them for cleaning up, right? So, plus I put the gas in the car. Then pretty soon, after I got real close with them a little bit more, the guy said, "I'm gonna be off that, I'm gonna be off on a Saturday; I'm gonna be off on a Sunday." I'd start driving in the daytime, all day long. I'm about fifteen years old driving, driving a cab. I had to put a pillow up under me and all that stuff. Sometime people would get in my car and see me, and sometime they would get out 'cause they knew I was too young, like what are you doing with this car? Let me get out of here. And then some people would ride. Most of the time they would ride, they wouldn't get 'cause I had a pillow propped up under me so I could set up real good. Then I knew how to drive real good so that didn't--I wasn't scaring them, you know. And that's how I started driving, driving a taxicab. That's, was my venture going into the cab business. So I dropped them papers (laughs), selling them papers, dropped the cleaning up the cars. I didn't have to clean them no more. So, after I started working doing that, then I come to find out, about how much I was making. Then I got involved with how much it cost me to own my own car and, and lease a cab license medallion, which was a, you know, a permit that, you know, give you the right to operate on--in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, that was during the beginning of World War I too, I mean two, right, World War II, and a lot of men were not around, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right, 'cause-- Speaker 1: A lot of men were at war. Speaker 2: --men was, was, yeah, was going on then, that's right. And the war was breaking. That, well, that was in the '40s, [1940s], yeah, '40s [1940s], see that was in the '40s [1940s] and 1941 when Pearl Harbor [attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii Naval Base], that was, that Sunday, see that's when really, when everything started changing, you know. Everything started changing because the people started going to these defense plants, places to work, you know, making ships and airplanes and all that kind of stuff, defense plants, they called it. And, and then all the guys that wasn't working, then all the people that could--they was drafting a lot of people. And I was too young to go be drafted. And plus, they were cutting back on gas and all that stuff, and you couldn't get tires for automobiles. And they stopped making cars in '42 [1942], they didn't make any more cars after '42 [1942]-- Speaker 1: They were rationing resources because of the War [World War II]. Speaker 2: Rationing, war, that's right. You had tires, the meat, sugar, whatever, clothes, shoes, you had to have stamps for it. And so I met a guy that was going into [military] service, and he had cabs. So he--so that's how I met him. So he wanted to sell me his cab license, you know. So I didn't have the money--I ain't never had the money (laughs). But I always had a way. So I made arrangements to give him so much money down and pay him off over a period of time cause he was going in the Army. And, because I was renting, I was renting these license any way and paying so much money a, a week for them. So I figured it's better to--to own my own license, you understand. So that's, so I made arrangements to pay him so much money down, and the amount of money I had to pay him for two licenses was like $10,000. That was a lot of money, but I didn't have no $10,000. But I had time. I wasn't but seventeen or eighteen. So I had plenty of time, where was I going? I wasn't in no big rush. So we made arrangements for me to pay him so much and I wind up paying the guy off within a year and a half. Speaker 1: So a cab, I mean a license, a medallion costs? Speaker 2: The license back at that time costs about three to $4,000, you know. So what he did, I'd give him so much for the license, which the license might have been $3,000, $3,000 a piece would have been $6,000 and rent them for a year. So rent them for a year and pay them, and, and buy them, see; rent them for a year and with an option to buy. So that worked real good for me cause I didn't have the money in the first place. So I had--and then I had to buy, had to buy a car, and I an old, I had enough money to buy a old, a used car. And I, and then I found another, found another fellow with a car and rented the license to him on his car. So, and then he paid me so much for my medallion. So that, that worked out. I, I was able to pay him and have some cash flow myself in that operation. So that worked out pretty good. And by that time, I think I was getting ready to get drafted in the Army. Story_ID: 12322 Speaker 1: So this puts you, right, in 1950--? Speaker 2: Nah, this put me, but nah, this put me around forty, '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: '45 [1945], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '45 [1945]. See, '45 [1945], I was, see in '44 [1944] I was twenty. Forty-five [1945], I'd be twenty-one. Matter of fact, two days after I got to be twenty-one, I had to go in the [U.S.] Army, January the 23rd, I went in the Army, '45 [1945], and I stayed in the Army a year and a half 'cause the war [World War II] was over the last of '45 [1945], and the rest of it was over in '46 [1946, sic] 'cause Germany surrendered and then Japan surrendered, you know, 'cause [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt was in. Speaker 1: And did you have to go overseas? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go overseas. I was, stayed in, I always say Southern Theater of operation. That's down in Alabama (laughs). Speaker 1: (Laughs) The theater of war-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, that's right. It was, down there it was, stayed in them ole huts down there. But like I said, nothing was too hard for me cause I'd, had, had been there, like coming out of Oklahoma. So I knew about living in situations like that, living with (unclear)--wasn't nothing modern down there. We living in ole, they had big ole wood, big ole huts and they had wood stoves down there. We--latrine, you had to go, leave there and go to the latrine down to the latrine and to take a shower and, you know, and bath and to go to the bathroom. Matter of fact, the first day I went to, the first day I got in there, I--took me two or three hours to find a, to make up enough courage to go to the washroom 'cause everything was wide open, just stalls right beside with no partition or nothing; hadn't been used to nothing like that, see. The same thing with, at the mess hall. They put food on the table in an area, ten people at a table. And it's supposed to be family style, but the family was a little rough. Everybody was grabbing the best thing off the, off the table, you know, like whatever kind of meat was on there, that would be gone first, you know. But you learned to survive, you know. So it, it worked out okay. I didn't have no problems with that, but, but anyway, so the meantime, while I was in the Army, I had leased my license out to some cab operators, you know. And they paid me so much every week while I was in the Army. I, I made good money while I was in the Army. Matter of fact, I even took my own car to the Army with me. I drove from Birmingham [Alabama] back to Chicago [Illinois] and back and forth. I was almost running a taxicab down there in, in the Army cause I was a buck private and I was taking them lieutenants and stuff around 'cause I was the only one had a car down there. And you, and you had to have stamps to get gas. And I knew, from coming out of Chicago, I had, I knew how to get gas stamps and everything. So I was, didn't have no problem getting some stamps, you know. See, a lot of stuff was black market. So black market didn't bother me, you know, you want something, you have to pay for it. Story_ID: 12323 Speaker 1: See, I've seen people deny themselves of certain things because of dollars. If you want something, the dollar price shouldn't come in. I've seen people go in a meat market and ask the price of meat. And sometime they buy a cheaper meat in, instead of buying a good grade. And that's something they gonna put in, inside of they own body. And sometimes, it's not the matter of money, they don't have it, but they just still being cheap, see. I've seen a lot of people, matter of fact, the way I got those first two cab license, here I am a young kid, seventeen or eighteen, they didn't even want to talk to me about them license. I just overheard the conversation. And all them, all them people was, "Oh, man, you think that, you think I'm crazy. I'm gonna pay you $10,000", I'm gonna do this for that, you know. But I went for it 'cause I didn't have nothing but time. Here I am, seventeen, eighteen years old. What I got? I don't have nothing but time. So I'm gonna have these cab license forever. What do money mean to me, I got something forever? And that's what people really got to think about now. If you--when you sell a piece of land or sell something, they got it forever. So, you know, and people say God ain't creating no more land. Matter of fact I was with a dumb young lady, and said, "How come?" (laughs) I left her alone (laughs). But anyway, but see, that's what I'm saying. I, I've been seeing a lot of-matter of fact, most deals that I've got involved in, it's been because it's been too much for somebody else. And I don't think it's nothing too much for me, if I can buy it. I'd buy the world if I could get, start a down payment on it. I'd own it, control it. You know what, the more I talk, you know what I tell most people, everything that I owned and everything I put together, I created it, put it together, you know. The first thing in the Bible, God created the earth and heavens, right. So who do you bow down to? To Almighty, right. So if you create something, and anytime you buy a business, you buy it because it's already operating. The first thing a guy want to do is look at your books, right? How much money are you making? Now, if you don't have no books or nothing running, no track record, you know, you ain't got too much to sell. You gonna talk about what I'm gonna do; gonna do, it ain't gonna buy too much. You don't pay too much for what I'm gonna do. So if you got a track record, you got, you got some basis to work from. So what I'm saying here that you, you got, you got to try to put, put situations together in order for you to make it. Most of my places that I bought and owned land and stuff like that, it was nothing but coal yards, junk yards, and different things like that, and clean the land up and build on them, build on them. A lot, a lot of people just, a lot of people just--I've noticed a lot of people buy take-over stuff. And that's why, sometimes that's why they pay. They pay inflation prices because they buying something, and basically just find out there's no figure this, you know, most of the white people are moving out and black people buying. And they buying at the white person's price. And when they get it, that price ain't the same as when the white person was operating it. So, if they were making $50,000 a year, when you buy it, your situation might fall down to $30,000 a year. Story_ID: 12324 Speaker 1: After World War II, I mean--well, in the [U.S.] Army, did you have any particular experiences you want to tell us about in the Army, anything happen that--because I know the Army was starting to inte--to think about integration around the time that you were in there. They were trying to make some moves towards it. Speaker 2: Well, it, it was. When I first went in the Army, it wasn't no black lieutenants or officers, not hardly at all. But before I left out, they, they were making a few black lieutenants and so on cause the Army I was in was, was all basic, all black sergeants, you know. It was, it was--and matter of fact, we were in a complete segregated system, you know what I mean, because our district--what do you call it, like in our base. We lived in a certain area. Matter of fact in our, our, we used to, like 8th Regiment, our regiment was all, all black, you know. And all the, all the non-commers [non-commissioned officers] and so forth were black. And so later on, that's when they started integrating the service because--just like I remember when, in the [U.S.] Navy and so forth, they wasn't even taking black in the Navy until right after Joe Louis had did that fight, and donated the money and so forth. And then they started letting black people in the Navy, 'cause they wasn't, there wasn't nobody even--it wasn't even blacks in the Navy. So, well, anyway, all that--but the biggest thing I--in the Army, I wasn't trying to, I wasn't trying to make no, no--I wasn't trying to get no brownie points in the, in the Army 'cause, first place, I had been out here in Chicago [Illinois] and, and making money; go in the Army, I think they was paying me about $21.00 a month for, for being in the Army. And I wanted to get out. And then right--especially, after I was in there, the war [World War II] was just about over anyway. And I wasn't doing--just as far as I was concerned was killing time. So I wanted to get out of the Army. Matter of fact, I did get out. I didn't stay in the Army but a year and a half. So I got, got discharged out of the Army and came back to my business and operation, you know. Speaker 1: How'd you get out so fast? Speaker 2: Well, like I said, the war [World War II] was over. And, and then I put in for, I put in for a discharge for dependency kind of discharge 'cause I had a wife and a kid, see. And that's one of the ways I, I got out, you know. And they let me out, in other words, fathers and stuff like that, they would start letting them out, cause same thing if you had kids and so forth when you went in, you didn't have to go in right away. You know, and if you worked in the defense plant or something like that, they wouldn't, they wasn't pulling you in right away. Story_ID: 12325 Speaker 1: Earlier you were talking about business ethics basically, and the importance of doing a good job and being dependable and doing what you say you're gonna do. Are those values that you got from your parents or, or values you got from others? Speaker 2: No, I don't-- Speaker 1: Why did they stick with you? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I mean, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. You know, I'll tell you, you know I, you know, I think about that a lot. But, you know, just like you can see if some person is born to sing, some people can--born to play a piano. Some people are gifted in certain ways, and I'm not saying I'm gifted to, to a certain degree, but it must have been something about me different because, like I say, when I come to Chicago [Illinois], I didn't nobody, didn't--and since I been in Chicago as an individual, and I'm saying this open to the public, and anybody you can meet will know--and I've never tried to be a big person, you know, or throw my weight around. In other words, I want to stay low key as much as I can. And, but I've did more in Chicago as, as one individual than anybody else just about in Chicago, not having a big corporation or so forth, you understand? So, in other words, it had to be something about me that made me come up with those standards basically on my own because I've seen a lot of people in business will tell you anything and do nothing. And some people get a good little job at the post office and, and change they habit, won't even speak to you, you know. And, you know, you heard this old saying that as soon as they get such and such, you can't touch them with ten-foot pole (laughs). So that, that happens. So this is something that I never did want to fit into that type of category, you know. Like I got people right now, people all my life, I don't care if the person's big or rich or poor or a little bum, I'm gonna try to treat him nice because sometime the little guy has a lot of respect for you if you treat him nice. I find a lot of people, little wine heads, winos, even if he a dope fiend or whatever he is, I may give him a dollar, give him something. So, and, and I may not figure out that he's taking advantage of me, but it's my feeling. How do I feel when I help somebody? That's what, that's, that's where I get my benefit from. If I didn't get no benefit from what I'm doing, I wouldn't enjoy it. You can't enjoy the, you can't enjoy things by yourself in life. So when you doing--I come and I put a good show together or put a good motel up together, and I see people there and enjoying themselves and having a real nice time, that makes me feel good cause I pass by there and look. Look at all those cars. Look at everybody having a good time. Just think about it. I created that. Speaker 1: So it has to do with your own internal feeling? Speaker 2: That's right, and your own internal feeling. And a lot of times, it's not about the money, you know. I've had--a lot of times when I was in business, people--bankers and so forth tell me, "Take it easy, take it easy. You, you got four or five motels, what you gonna build another for?" See, but it wasn't that. It was just the opportunity to--I got the right spot. I, I want to move on it. And I might say myself, well, (laughs) I should, I should whup my own self for doing it some time, moving on out, you know, 'cause ain't do, but adding on some more work. Story_ID: 12326 Speaker 1: I found out, you know, truthfully, in a way, if you got a big operation, some time--and if you can control it and operate it, sometime your--sometime your work, but if you can dedicate authorities and, and, and put people in certain locations, your job can be much easier than if you, if you don't have that situation. If I wind up with one cab, I'd have to go out there and fix the drat gum flat tire if it goes bad. But if I have forty cabs, I'm sending, sending the tow truck out there to fix it. I ain't go to do nothing but pick up a phone, call them and tell them, go, go get a cab, it broke down; may not even have to do that 'cause the guy working for me gonna take care of it. So I ain't got to do nothing. I had a woman worked for me for thirty-four years, and ain't nobody called me up at all talking about who gonna work this shift. That shift never did come up to me. It came up to the person that was managing. And they do a good job, I ain't got to be bothered with it. Speaker 2: Okay, that-- Speaker 1: So control and, and management and supervision means everything. You don't think Walgreens [Corporation] around here stocking the shelves and things, do you? (Laughs). So that's where, what's happening. It's just, same thing with, with Wal-Mart [Stores, Inc.], same thing with all that stuff, inventory. You got to help--and that's, that's the thing in business, is, is putting people in charge and making sure they doing what they, they supposed to do. Speaker 2: Yeah, the bigger you get, the easier it gets. Speaker 1: Well, that's what I'm saying. The bigger you get, the easier it gets, easy, 'cause you can, you can pay. I had five or six, seven or eight, nine managers. Then I had managers checking on them managers (laughs). And then again, sometime, you, you got to kind of watch that because you can, you can kind of get-- Speaker 2: You can get ripped off. Speaker 1: Ripped off to somebody. Yeah, people on the payroll, ghost payrolls and all that stuff you got to watch. But I'm gonna tell you something else, at all my operations, I never had a job. Now, you may want to understand what I mean by that, never had a job in all my operations. Speaker 2: Well, what do you mean by that? Speaker 1: What I do mean? All right, okay, in other words, I never tried to be the bookkeeper. I never tried to be the cook, never tried to be the bartender, never tried to be the switchboard operator. I never tried to be the manager. In other words, I, I kept myself free so I could be over everything. In other words, I could supervise whatever, wherever, wherever I thought I had a, a problem, I would be able to be there. I could keep, I could set back and see the whole picture. When I was running the shows and so forth, I never would be down in the first seat, down in front. I'd be in the back of the house where I could see the whole house. When I walk in my office, and I got ten bookkeepers and secretaries and everything, I never was in the back room with my head in the books (laughter). I never was in the kitchen washing dishes. I never was on the cash register ringing up the money. See, the guy in the back door in, in the kitchen is taking all the food out the back door, going to the garbage can. So he don't know I'm walking around, I might be at the back door one day. Even today, I don't know how to work a computer. I ain't never turned one on. I don't want to, I don't want to get involved with that computer. I don't want to be down in that computer. That's the main, that's the--that's my bookkeeper's or somebody's job to deal with that computer. Now, I may understand when he pull out that stuff out and he explain to me, this and that, but that's--but I don't, I don't want to get started. I never sat on no switchboard working no switchboard, never been on no cash register, never set up no rooms, never made no beds. Story_ID: 12327 Speaker 1: Let's go back to when you come back to the-- Speaker 2: From the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, I come back from the Army, like I said, I had leased my license, cabs out, and I had a little money. I had quite a bit of little money saved up cause they was saving my money, the company that was taking care of my books and stuff, saving my money. So I came back, the first thing I did, started buying more cab license and cab license was going up. I was paying, you know, $4,000 to $5,000 for a cab license. And see, the city had only, a limit of so many taxicabs in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. The only way you get a license was buy somebody out. You couldn't go down there and fill out a application and get one, 'cause if everybody get a license, then it ain't worth nothing. See, too much of anything ain't worth too much. You got to think about all that too, when you going in business, you know. Just a guy talking about a feasibility study and all that stuff, you know. When I went in business, I didn't know nothing about all that stuff, feasibility studies, and, you know, different things in business, but you learn it all, that--projections and all that stuff and everything. But all that help you in business. But anyway, so I--let me say this about the cab business. You can have a taxicab and be off, be off the street four or five days or a week or a year, and the same day you put it back on, you got as much business as you did the day you went off cause you didn't have no business in the first place (quick whistle sound). A person that's hacking a cab, just like that, that's his same bill, you see what I mean. It's not like losing your business. When your cab get on the streets, you got it, the same amount of business. So, but I went back, started buying more cab licenses. And I bought some big companies out. You know, when I say big companies, people with five and ten and fifteen, that, that's not big companies, but most of the little--back in them days, guys had one or two little cab license or so. Guys that had fifteen or twenty cabs was kind of known as a big company, you know. So I bought two or three companies out and one company was, had twenty-some cabs in there. And I said them over a hundred, close to a hundred thousand dollars for that company and all that, even though I didn't have the money, but I worked it out where I could do it. And just like I say, the leverage, you know. So like I told you, I'd buy the world if a guy would give me, get a little down payment on it cause it's gonna pay for itself anyway. Everything is gonna pay. And I tell people, you don't need no partner if your business gonna pay. A partner ain't nothing but a headache. So you don't have, if you don't have no--only reason you need a partner is 'cause you need some money. And if you can get the money from the bank, you get rid of the partner. Then you don't have that headache. You don't have to wait to make up those, make up your mind or decisions cause sometimes with decision, you want to be moving and move fast, if you, you know, know where you think you want to go. Everything you do, it don't have to be right. Every move I made wasn't right, but you know what, some wrong moves made me make some right moves. You know, like I say, some hard times make good times better. You can appreciate it, you know. So anyway, I, I went and built the, built the cab situation up. And one of the reasons I built the cab situation up because I converted the jitneys from jitneys to taxicabs. I was the first to put, like two-way radios in my cabs; first one to put, put my cabs--stopped buying them big ole jitneys, the big ole seven passenger and started buying small cars and assigning them downtown working. And I started hiring white drivers to work for me. So when the cab go downtown, and they look and see a white driver setting in front of the cab, they got in. A black guy in front of the car, he--they wouldn't get in. So I started hiring white drivers to work for me, and assigning the cars to them on, on a percentage. And then when Yellow [Cab Company of Chicago] and Checker [Taxi] saw me hiring them white drivers, I won't say that's one of the big reasons, but that's part of the reason, then they started hiring black drivers. They start putting, 'cause they, 'cause I was using white drivers in my cabs, just riding right along with they cabs. So then they started hiring black drivers. So when they did that, that made my company, on the equal playing field. So I didn't more--I didn't have no more problem. Then my cabs could go anywhere. Then my license went up in, in price, equal--went up, went up. And that's a, that was--and, and the other companies and so forth wasn't following my trend. And that was the way, one of the reasons I was able to, to buy those cabs 'cause I was making the money and was able to pay. And after I had converted those cabs in, I was able to--the other, other companies and everything started following my, you know, my operation. And so that was the way I was able to, to wind up with those cab license. And then the value went up. The value went on up to ten to fifteen thousand. Cab license now, I think medallions now are going for about forty to fifty thousand. Some people even say it's $70,000 they paying now for a cab license. But, but just like I said, I used the leverage in my cab company, if you want to know how I moved from one thing to the other. I moved that cause I was also operating in the night club business and so forth. And I used the cab license and so forth to get involved in the motel business. Story_ID: 12328 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about the night club business. How did you get involved? Speaker 2: Well, I was in the--well, running the cabs and everything and the people going downtown and going different places, the entertainment. It wasn't too much on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in the night club type of situation. And I wasn't planning on really having a night club. I was just planning on having a big lounge and a little dance hall. And matter of fact, the first place I had a, had a--matter of fact, I had a place where I was running my cabs. And I was, had, had--the place was too small for my cab company, and I had moved out. So I took that building and converted it into a little lounge, you know, and put a little dance floor there, and put a, put a little small band in and so forth. And got a group of girls or so--back then, it used to be a lot of social clubs and so forth. So I was a sponsor for the club, social club. We called ourselves the 'Roberettes'. They was girls and stuff I had picked and relatives and friends and stuff like that. And I sponsored them and so we opened this club up, a little place there. And we--matter of fact, me being from Oklahoma, we had a barn dance, the first affair. The railroad yard's not too far from here. We got a lot of ole hay bale--bales of hay and lanterns and all that stuff and made some old wooden bars. And, ah, it was really nice. Matter of fact, I remember well, talking about important people, Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson] was there that night. He was my--our guests, come out, and we had some real nice people, you know, there. And we a caller and all that stuff, dance and everything. So we had that party and we did real good. Everybody made a little money, and I give the girls all some money. And everybody had a nice time-- Speaker 1: This is like country music and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah, yeah, barn dance, you know, westerns with cowboy shoes and boots and stuff. Speaker 1: Now, a lot of black people today in 2002, don't understand that, that association with country music and so forth. I know, I've heard of black people here in the '50s [1950s] having square dancing in the public parks and that sort of thing-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: --square dance classes. So that was pretty big in the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's right. Speaker 1: And people did have a heritage in doing that kind of thing in certain parts of the country. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, you see, and let me you this, see, most people come to Chicago come from the South and different place and, you know. Like we used to have like stomp dances down there in Oklahoma, suppers and all that stuff, be all that stuff out in the woods. We never did have nothing with no roof over it, you know. We didn't have no buildings and stuff so everything was there. And even your churches and stuff--you heard of church and stuff with dinner on the ground and all that stuff. People would come out and they set up some tables and stuff and everybody cook and bring food out. Everybody eat and big, big dinner on the ground, you know. But anyway, so anyway, we had that big affair, so after that I--'cause I didn't spend no money to do that. That was just, just a barn dance when it looked like a barn. So after that I figured, I said, "Well, let's be--fix the place up a little bit, put a, put a little dance floor in here and cover the walls with some paneling and put some lights up around the wall; put us a real bar in here, you know, and get some license." That day, we didn't even have no license. But you--like I say, back in those days, you could do a lot of things 'cause the police and everything--it was a lot of good will back then, you know. So anyway, so we fixed the place up and everything, and got licensed and all that. And we opened it up and we started having a little band playing. People just started coming in, just coming in, real nice, real nice people, first-class, first-class black people, real nice. I mean first class. I mean we didn't have no (laughs), you know, no, no riff raff like that. Everybody was nice, and everybody knew everybody, top, top class people would come in. So that went along for a year with--so we first, we started playing, just a little band playing and singing and dancing, hired a little girl to sing. Then we had--hired a girl to dance, kind of kept, kept on until we just added to it, building up a little show. That's when I hired, like Dick Gregory. He'd come in and work it. We wasn't paying the people no lot of money back in them days, $25.00 a night or something for working; maybe $150. The band might not make no more than maybe two or $300 a week, cause musician union and stuff like that, they probably was--the scale probably was, if they made $25.00 a night, they was doing good. So we built that going on. And that, we worked that for about a year, year and a half or so. And then I thought about name entertainment. I just figured, well, you can't make no money if you ain't got the volume. You have to have volume. You need seating. So I thought about that. I built a addition to the place, added another fifty feet, made the place, it was 100 by 150, you know, where I could seat about 750 people; put in a, put in a hydraulic stage in there. A stage, you mash a button, it comes up out of the ground, goes back down. The bandstand would, where the band play, it would roll back, roll forward. So when the, when the show over, the stage go down and the band roll back out the way, it give you more dance floor. So I designed all that and put that in. So, we played some of everybody. All the top names, from Dinah Washington, Sarah Vaughan, Louis Jordan, Roy Hamilton, Sam Cooke, Billy Eckstine, played all the, all the stars at that time. We had enough room in there, known as Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 12329 Speaker 1: Did you have any consultants that you dealt with in terms of the entertainment industry or did you know how to reach these people already? Speaker 2: No, let me tell you about that. First place, you get in, they had booking agencies. So you'd get, like Joe Glazer, who was back in that time. I don't know, you had Associated Booking Agency, Gale Booking Agency, Shaw Booking Agency, William Morris, you hear of William Morris [Agency] booking agency, all them people. And you, I'd call up and get, get them, and they'd give me the sheets, what acts they carry. First place, they looking for outlets for the acts anyway. I bought some acts that I never knew them. I'm, I bought a act like Dakota Staton and, and O. C. Smith. Now when I--the reason I mentioned them 'cause I went and bought them two together from Shaw Agency. I was in New York City, and I bought them. I didn't even know who they were, never heard of them before. I remember Dakota Staton 'cause of North Dakota, and, and Joe--I bought them as a supporting act to go with a show. The guy said, "I got somebody gonna be good." When I bought Dakota Staton, I didn't pay her but $350 a week for, for--that's working five days a week, three shows a night, $350 a week. Now, when, when I--when she come, got to come to work for me, her show had come out, 'The Late, Late Show' whew, man, I was pushing money in the safe with my foot, 'cause she was hot. So I'm just saying how you, you buy and you--so, but anyway, the people that, with all these things, they'll get on the phone and call you. "Hey, Roberts, I got so and so. He's open next week. Can you, can you put him, put a spot in?" Now, for an agent working with you, you kind of work along with the agent, if he ain't giving you no all garbage. If he give you some garbage, if you--first place, if--say, "You singing. I don't know you. What you gonna draw?" "Well, I--well, the best I can do." I say, "Okay," talking to, I'm talking to an agent, I say, "Okay, all right. I'll take the guy. Can he, what? He's gonna sing, dance or what? I'll put him in a spot if he's any good." So if he's pretty good, I'll go ahead and use him 'cause after all, I'm looking for him to still give me a star pretty soon, 'cause after I don't want him--I don't want to take all, take all his top stuff and don't never give him a play on some of his stuff he's trying to make, right, 'cause every, everybody gets started. I bought like Della Reese. A lot of these people, they wasn't no big stars when I bought them. Redd Foxx, all of them, then some had some names and stuff, but they still didn't have no outlets. A lot of people they, they need, they need club places to go work. Just, right, right now on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] now, you haven't got no place on the South Side for too many people playing, working. Matter of fact, today you got to pay too much money for entertainment so you definitely ain't got no spot for them. Anybody you buy now, it's gonna be forty or $50,000. I'm talking about almost a night. Entertainment done gone crazy. Whitney Houston can make a hundred thousand dollars any night she work, any night she want to work, she can make a hundred thousand. Speaker 1: Well, she needs a huge venue. Speaker 2: Well, that's right. And then, then another thing, she ain't gonna work but so many nights, 'cause what she gonna work for? She gonna have tax problems (laughs). See, so, it's--whew, yeah, so but anyway, so, my, my acts wasn't costing me all that much money. So back in them days, I played Dinah Washington, band and all and everything, Redd Foxx, all of them, at three or $4,000 a week for the whole show. Speaker 1: And how much would you bring in? Speaker 2: Well, you, you'd make enough some time to pay them and when you add up, a little bit of money left, you know. You did, you, you never did get, you never did get--you didn't get all that rich. Story_ID: 12330 Speaker 1: Everything is like to me, is like a car with a governor on it (laughs). You only can run-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Car with a governor? Speaker 1: You know what a governor is, don't you? Speaker 2: It's like a cruise control? Speaker 1: Yeah, like, yeah, well, in other words, you only can drive it so fast. Other words, if you got a car and put a governor on it, and it may not be able to do but 60 miles an hour. I don't care how much you push on the gas. It won't go but that far. So that's the way I look--seem like that's the way with business is; all of it just give you a, give a little margin. Speaker 2: No matter how big or small? Speaker 1: Well, that's right, give you a margin. Well, you know good and well, let's face it. How many people in business? How many--if a person made too much money, they would all quit wouldn't he? (Laughs) Some people been in business all their--been in business thirty or forty years, and they steady--just making it. Every restaurant in town is steady just making it. A lot of them be in business a long time and go out of business because what is that? Montgomery Ward's and all that stuff, and different ones. Doesn't--look, Montgomery Ward's was in before a lot of these big companies even come in business, and there they going out. Home Depot and different ones has come in and knocked them out the box. It's--they ain't never heard of Wal-Mart before. A person scared to see Wal-Mart coming now. Wal-Mart is an enemy to most people in business, if they in business. Wal-Mart gonna clean them out. McDonald's cleaned out a lot of people, all the little mom and pop stores, making hamburgers, hot dogs. They, McDonald's got in air conditioned place, nice, fast food, fast service. What did I tell you about first, way back a long time ago, good management. Clean washrooms. Ain't no mom and pop--didn't get there today and didn't get there tomorrow, 'cause they big enough. They got enough help. Just like me when I was running the motels, if one person didn't show up, it didn't matter 'cause I had so many more people coming. I could shift one person to that person. The person could work the switchboard, be a maid or be this or be a desk clerk or--you just wanted, you had them where you could switch them around. Story_ID: 12331 Speaker 1: Well, you know, I told you about the show lounge [Roberts Show Club] when it came, when I started with the girls [the Roberettes] and so forth and opened up this show lounge with the square dancing and so forth-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Okay, right, we've been through that. Speaker 1: Well, we talked about all that, been through that. Now we need to--'cause I told you about booking the shows and all that stuff and how I got with the booking agencies and everything. And I told you the booking agencies was looking for places to put--outlet to put the people in there. So they called me, and I did--and I handled all my own booking and stuff. Let me say about that. Now, you talking about a job I kept myself, but that ain't something you got to sit down. All you got to do is open your--and, and hear. And then once you do that, then somebody handle the paper and so forth. Now, but I would, I'd get on the phone and talk and write out who's, who's good and who's coming and how much they want and all that stuff. And once I make the bill, then I'll turn it over to the people that's gonna handle it. So, if any kind of deal making, cause say you get somebody just booking your shows, (laughs) you got to watch them. You, you want your leverage. If I'm dealing with a guy, I know I, I think I can make the best deal myself. I'm dealing--at least, at least let me make my own mistake. I'm buying so and so and so. I want to know what I'm paying. Now, I got somebody else buying it, I don't know nothing. I don't even know what's going on in my business. So, just like publicity. I'm dealing with the newspapers and all that stuff. I'm giving out the ad to the ['Chicago] Defender', to ['Chicago] Sun-Times', to the ['Chicago] Tribune'. I, I know what kind of, size of ad I'm going with. I know who I'm calling, who's going. When the guy come from the press, I want to meet him. I want to shake his hand. I want to buy him a drink. If he--any kind of favor, I'm gonna get the favor from him. He's gonna get me a write up. I might talk to him about getting me a little free spread or something in the paper, 'cause he can give you a write-up, you know, if he likes you, right? So that's, that's where you come in, see. So, all this I did, you know, like I was telling you about the few little jobs that I did do, being free. So now, getting involved from the, booking all these top names and so forth, back at that time was--you couldn't stay at a lot of these hotels. You couldn't stay at any of them on the Lake [Michigan], 50th on The Lake [Motel, Chicago, Illinois], and Stony Island [Avenue] and all that stuff 'cause a lot of black people didn't live that far in the first. So they was restricted for, for room service and so forth, and a lot of the--. Speaker 2: Did they actually tell you, you couldn't stay there or they wouldn't-- Speaker 1: Well, just a, just a, they--yeah they would just--you just didn't stay there is what (unclear). I never went up there and asked them and they said "No, we aint' gonna rent to you". But I knew that was the case in the first place, so you didn't go. So anyway, so, the entertainment that I had that most of these hotels and stuff that were in the community were, you know, hand me down stuff. And it wasn't up to standards, you know, not for like Sammy Davis [Jr.] and Smokey Robinson and some of the people coming in town and all that stuff and everything. So people, you know, used to go--just like, when I left and went down in Louisville, Kentucky for the [Kentucky] Derby--now, that was in 1952 or '53 [1953] or something, when I went to the Derby. I had--we all had fine places at people's houses to stay. Now, that's just '52 [1952] or '53 [1953]. Well, you know good and well in '64 [1964] before, before you was half way able to go anywhere. So, now, '52 [1952] or '53 [1953] was way ahead of time. And that ain't, that ain't less, that's, that's right now less than fifty years ago, you know, I'm just going to show you. I keep jumping around because the first time I, the reason I bought a motel in Oklahoma 'cause I went down there, and I couldn't find no place to stay in the hotel. So I wind up buying a hotel down there. But anyway, getting back to the places here. So I had top name stuff coming in, like with Sammy Davis, after he come here, I didn't have no place to stay him. I had to go rent a friend of mine's apartment. Matter of fact, he let me use it. He really didn't charge me. So we had the downstairs, and nice fixed-up basement, fixed up with a little bar and stuff. And then, his first floor with a nice big ole king-sized bed. And the place was real nice. He let us use his house and everything cause he was single at the time. And so, cause we--but now, he could stay downtown, you know. But all, all the people who was coming to see him and all that stuff, you know, didn't have no place. But, well anyway, it give me an idea. I had some vacant land across the street at the time. And that's what give me the idea of building a small motel, just to take care of maybe--I was thinking about then about ten, you know, ten to--you know, ten or twelve, fifteen rooms just to handle my entertainment. So once you get involved, like I said, one thing leads into another. You get involved, you talking about building a motel, the guy said, "Well, listen, you got to have a desk clerk, switchboard operator. You got to have this. You might as well build it big enough. If you don't have the volume, it, it don't pay. You might as well at least try to build a fifty, sixty-room motel." Okay, let's see if we can get some mo' land. Let's push it together and make it something. So that's what happened. We wind up doing a fifty-five room motel and putting the switchboard in there and desk clerks and all that stuff in there; first black-owned motel in Chicago [Roberts Motel No. 1, Chicago, Illinois]; went over (whistles) like hotcakes. People coming and plus all of the entertainment staying there. We had all, all the top names staying there. That's how I got chance to know so many of these people real, real personal and all that stuff. And from churches, from the preachers, ministers and just everybody, you know. So that went along. So you figure on--you seeing your track record and your receipts and your--as I was talking about, a feasibility study, didn't need one behind that (laughs). So you thought about building another motel. Motel is not like a drugstore. It's a lot of difference. That's why I tell you, people got to be thinking. Drugstore, you can put a lot of pills on the shelf (laughs). In a motel, you can't put a lot of pills in the, in that same room. In other words, you got so many rooms, you rent it, you're out of business, you understand, you know. So that's so, you mean, you got fifty-five rooms or so forth. When you rent that, you out of business. You ain't got no more rooms. So the next thing, you need some more rooms somewhere so you can build another motel. You send the people on to the next place. So you build that. Then if that going good, you build another 'cause after all, the market was wide open. It wasn't no motels, wasn't nothing new in Chicago, absolutely nothing new. I, I can't name you one new hotel been built on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], period. Not no hotel. Back in them days, it, it was all hotels. So it ain't nobody building--hasn't been nobody build a hotel yet. So everything they build has been motels, see. So back then this was all new, new stuff. And so I had the freedom and on the ground floor. So that's why I started building the motels and everything. And I was gonna build a lot of motels and, and franchise them out. That was my intention, building a lot of motels, franchise out; spend a lot of money and it's a lot of time looking for money 'cause you got to finance them. You got to get, you know, plans and drawings and surveys and a lot of stuff and contractors and everything, you know, your bids all in. It's a lot of work to it. It's a lot of work. But if you understand it and you like it, you enjoy it. You can't wait to get up the next day to do it. That's what I was telling you, you got to be--have that drive in you, 'cause who gonna touch you early in the morning and say, get up, you know, 4:30 or 5:00 o'clock, and you know what you got going on, you can't hardly wait for that time to come. Now, if you don't have it in you, something gonna fall down. So anyway, that's how I got involved in the motel business, and that--when I built a big motel on 63rd Street [Roberts Motel No. 6], that's what I wanted. And I still didn't get exactly what I wanted because even after I build a room with two or three hundred rooms, I still needed a big banquet hall. I had a, one room, but it only seated about five hundred people [the 500 Room]. But I wanted something then that, that--like I told you, working with volume. I was looking for something that would handle at to a thousand to fifteen hundred people, you know, for big, big church affairs, big things, you know. So, I never--I didn't have the land, didn't have the land. So, so, but anyway that was one of my largest motels operation. It cost me over $3 million to build that motel down there. Story_ID: 12332 Speaker 1: That's the one with 500 Room [at Roberts Motel No. 6, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, 500 Room at, where I did the shows, what you call, indoor-outdoor shows and did the boxing matches and played all the closed circuit TVs when [Muhammad] Ali was fighting and the George Foreman and [Joe] Frazier and all that stuff, you know. Back in them days, see everything, everything knocks out somebody. Now, paid, pay-per-view, pay-per-view TV done knocked all that out cause you can set at your house now and order it on your TV and you can get ten or fifteen people come around and watch the TV. Back then, they didn't have that. So you had to go buy a ticket to go some place to see it, like McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] or some big theater where they got a count on every head. Now, I was kind of fortunate because I bought it to go in, like the 500 Room, and when I turned it on in the 500 Room, I come to find out it was on in every room (laughs). I bought more than I thought I was buying. In other words, every room that--I had the fight on. Speaker 1: So when you bought the closed circuit, it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, to go for the 500, yeah, it, it showed up in every room (laughs). And I'm gonna tell, I ain't gonna tell you how happy I was, yeah. So that was an added bonus. So I was putting six, seven people to, to a room, you know, at least eight people to a room, you know, for that, for that special with that Ali and, was it Ali and Frazier, no, Ali and Foreman, that's right. Ali and Foreman was at, in Manila [Phillippines] or some place, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, 'Thriller in Manila' was, 'Thriller in Manila' was later but the 'Rumble in the Jungle' was the one with Ali and Foreman [Kinshasa, Zaire]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's right. But both of them was with Foreman almost, 'cause I remember when, when we went in there, the place just, the whole building just, was--when the fight was over it just was shaking man. It was like New Year's Eve, New Year's Eve, man. It was here. That was a good time. But anyway, so that's how the motel business got started, you know, based on need for my entertainers and so forth. And then after that, I forgot about the entertainers. I just went on with the general public and taking in business for people that needed accommodations, was coming in from out of town. Matter of fact, you come to Chicago and I could come to Chicago and just say, "Take me to Roberts", and they say, "Which one?" Didn't, you know, just, that's all I had to say. I could write a letter to myself and it would come, come to me, it'd be in one of them, one of them motel's mail boxes. It would come in, I didn't even have to put no address on it, just Herman Roberts there in Chicago. So that was pretty good. Plus, I had the cabs going. I had the night club [Roberts Show Club] going. Story_ID: 12333 Speaker 1: I had the motels [Roberts Motel] going, all the, all the black people could say that he was running 'the Syndicate'; he was working for the, for 'the Syndicate', and I ain't never met 'the Syndicate' (laughs). But see that just, that goes to show you too, I had 'Daddy-O' Daylie, Sid McCoy, Herb Kent, Marty Faye and all of them--one, one white guy, disc jockey, and the TV personality was Marty Faye. And he wind up owning everything I had. That's, 'cause he was white. That's what they said. Now, they never did say Daddy-O or Sid McCoy owned it. Now, me, me and you and another white guy could be standing right here. This the white guy, that's me and that's you. They say go over there and talk, tell Mr. Roberts about such and such thing. They go right here and talk to him. Speaker 2: Talk to white man. Speaker 1: (Laughter) yeah, cause they didn't think we had it in us at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, so they thought--just to make it clear, that people thought that Marty Faye, the white guy who was one of the disc jockeys here in the city [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right one of the DJs [disc jockey]-- Speaker 2: --that he actually was, you were fronting for him? Speaker 1: --for him. And I, I tell you where I met him. I was in Oklahoma and he come to the night club, came to the Show Club [Roberts Show Club, Chicago, Illinois]. And he was running 'Marty's Morgue', in other words, he was known to bury you, in other words, talk about you like a dog, 'cause he didn't care, 'cause listen, he talked about Elvis Presley or Johnnie Ray and all the people already making money. It wasn't hurting him no way, but every boost that, every knock is a boost, right, in a way of speaking if people--I heard people say, as long as they spell your name right. Okay, so now, he was talking about everybody. So I was in Oklahoma. So Marty Faye came out to the Show Club that night to see the show or something. So everybody called me down in Oklahoma and say, "Man, Marty Faye is out here, whew, he gonna, probably gonna talk about us like a dog or something tomorrow. We're waiting to see." So he went back the next day on TV, he had a TV show and he got on the show and talked about it, say, "I went to a club named Roberts Show Club and everything was really nice. I really enjoyed myself". It was real nice and all that. In other words, he giving me good compliment, good, good--so when I came back to Chicago, I went down to see him and told him, I said, "Listen, I heard you was out to the club and everything and you give us a nice send off and all that." I said, "I really appreciate it and all that." I said, "I tell you what," he said--I said, "You running a TV show down here." And I said, "Now, I get a lot of acts every, every week I'm bringing in some kind stars." I said, "Let's, let's work something out." I said, "If you can help advertise for me, I'll give you, I'll furnish you--every time I get a star in town, I'll let you, let them come down here and you can interview them and talk to--tell them where you, where they gonna be playing." And then he said, "Well, okay." And he said, "I'll do better than that. I'll come out and see the show and set out there, and I'll bring my wife and some people." And now on the TV show. I say, "Ain't nobody eating me up out there. In other words, just 'cause you're white, you know what I mean? (laughs). So okay, we got a deal." In the meantime, I'm feeding him a little stuff on the side, which back in them days, call it payola, you heard of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, payola. Speaker 1: Yeah, payola, yeah. So we set up a deal and worked that out. And he'd come out south. And so he started doing that, and we started working and, and then I--meantime, I hired a white boy to work on the bar for me. He, he worked for--'cause I had them cabs, and I was buying automobiles. So this was a salesman, white salesman at, at one of them automobile places. So I knew him real well. He was a salesman over there. So I hired him, but black people don't know where he come from. They just say, "He a mafia man" (laughter). Marty Faye would be walking around the place, shaking some hands and stuff like and everybody--and he inviting guests too, coming, right. He getting some more of his friends. His, his people coming out and all that. So pretty soon, Marty Faye, Marty Faye, man, you know Marty Faye own that place. Marty Faye own that. Then I had, I had too much going for them. I had the cabs and motels (laughs), you know, the entertainment and all that stuff going, you know, which was a lot of operation, but it didn't mean that much to me cause I put it together. So, but anyway, that's, that's how that situation wind up working. And so that's how I was working with the motels, the cab operation. Story_ID: 12334 Speaker 1: So, Mr. Roberts did you ever have any trouble with underworld? Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm gonna tell you about that now-- Speaker 1: With-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I mean, I know, I know, yeah, but Mafia and stuff-- Speaker 1: --with, motels draw-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Motels draw different kinds of folks. Some people just want to stay and see the show, but then you have like those, pimps are drawn to motels-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah, well, we had, we had--well, now, later on down through the years, we had people-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Gambling. Speaker 2: --that was, the biggest we had, it wasn't too much gambling and stuff. We didn't have to worry about gambling, because somebody might be gambling in a room or something like that and we don't know it or something like that, but that ain't, that's minor. But not no big set up deal 'cause if we had something like that, the police go and bust them up and they'd know that. But the biggest thing we had was probably with narcotics people that's peddling this or what's come in. But we, we had a policy though, like we know those kind of people might would come. We wouldn't allow them to stay no more than one or two days. They know they wasn't out of town. Now, you know good and well, just like right now, say, say motel rent is running around sixty and $70.00, say out here on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], $60.00 for a room. Now, a normal guy staying out here every day, he ain't gonna pay no $60.00 a day. You got to be doing something. Now, if you vacationing and coming from out of town or somewhere, he can afford to spend three or four days. He from Alabama, Georgia or something, he done saved money, right. Just like, I go to Las Vegas [Nevada] or something, I may pay two or $300 a day for a room. But I ain't gonna be there but three or four days. Now, if I'm out there every day paying three or $400, where is that money coming from? So it, it's just simple, you know. So that's the way. So we had where people come in that, that supposed to be permanent guests, we, we wouldn't keep them no more than two or three days, let them move on. So that's the way--so we had, we had some problems. The things didn't, things don't work as easy as I say because you have problems. Sometimes, you know, you still had to get the police some time come in for that. But, you know, what you say, "Birds of the feathers kind of flock together" so if you don't hire--all your help ain't, ain't involved in that. And your, and your, majority of clientele is not, it--let me tell you something. The biggest prostitute in the city can come in and check in your motel and bring somebody. If she acts like a lady, ain't nobody gonna know it. Who cares? She ain't got no sign on her back say I'm prostituting, right? So she in and out, right. She gone. Now, she stand out there and rent the room and bring that prostitute there, and then prostitute--I mean the guy leave, and she stays there and try to get another one and out in front of your place of business or out soliciting, then you got something to know what she's doing. Then she got to move, right. She done let her to--so, everybody might (laughs)--in, in my day, I've seen guys come in there with, with, with a queer and thought it was a woman. Maybe he found out, he wouldn't come back with her. See, so we all get caught in some kind of situation. I had a guy, I had a guy work for me for five or six or seven, maybe eight, ten years. And I think I'm pretty sharp. All the time the guy worked for me, he was a woman, and I didn't know it. All my desk clerks and everybody, we didn't, we didn't know it. The only way we found out, the guy got put in jail. And we was trying to get him out and calling up for him. And we finally called his house and talked to his mother and said, we trying to get so and so out. And his mother say, "Y'all ain't gonna find him," say, "'Cause he's not he. He's a she." Lord, whew. So I'm just going to show you. I've seen everybody, don't know everything. I don't care how much you think you know, you don't know it all. I've seen people at the race track, talking everyday, watch them horses every day. And some, some of them go out every day, and they broke. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I've seen down in the oil field business, guys that fool around with them oil drills, and they fool around, knowing where the oil might be, knowing where the oil might be, it's just like guys looking for gold. The gold, well, you know, you heard of miners, you know, looking for gold and all that stuff, they--some of them stay broke all they life, right? (Laughs) Look at the other day, just a few days, they--this guy--matter of fact, he just died the night before last, one of them Arab guys, you know, that thought his horse was gonna win. And the long shot came in. The favorite didn't even come in. So that just goes to show you, so I don't care what you know, nobody don't know it all. Speaker 1: But you never really had any big trouble with-- Speaker 2: No, well, you started on that, no, I never--cause let say this, when I was in the night club business, that's where you might come in, more involved with such a thing. I met a lot of people in the, in the, in that kind of business and so forth. But I was always a nice guy. I always bought different kind of beers, somebody from the outfit and so forth--might be from the outfit. What I care about the outfit? First place, I don't want to know nothing about no outfit. So if you selling some beer or something, send me twenty cases, send me ten cases. If it sell, I'm gonna push it, man. I'm gonna push it for you. I want to make money. You want to make it. If we do it, we gonna buy some more. I'm a nice guy. So that's all that adds up to. I never told a guy "Man, this--that stuff ain't selling; I don't want it, keep it out of here." I never had that type of attitude, you know. I met a lot of, lot of people. I've had people come out here and enjoy they self, shake hands and give me they blessings and all that stuff and everything and didn't, never had no problems. Story_ID: 12335 Speaker 1: Now, while, your businesses really started to thrive, I guess in the early '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: '70s [1970s], that's right. Speaker 1: About 1972, '73 [1973], you had the biggest operation-- Speaker 2: Operation going, yeah. Going, right. And you had like motels in Gary [Indiana] or-- Speaker 1: Gary, and, yeah, stuff like that, Gary and one in Oklahoma and stuff. I had bought some land in St. Louis [Missouri]. I was gonna build there and so forth. Speaker 2: And things were really going big and what's your highlight? I mean what's the highlight of this period of time for you? Speaker 1: Well, really, what I was really thinking about, I wanted, like I say, I really wanted to go into a franchise type of deal. I wanted to build motels all over and set them up in different cities. Matter of fact, that was my idea. I was gonna work with, with, not GE [General Electric Company], but like Whirlpool [Corporation], with RCA [formerly Radio Corporation of America] and--'cause I was gonna try to tie in with them, kind of like the Holiday Inn did with, with Gulf Oil Company, you know. In other words, what I was gonna do is try to establish some kind of line of credit, where I wouldn't have to look for money. In other words, have me about a $40 million open line. So when you get ready--see, that's takes you a lot of time. When you're going--in other words, I hit towns like St. Louis, Detroit [Michigan], New York City, you can't name me, you can't name me one--right now, you move around, you can't name me one black-owned motel or so forth in New York City right now; can't hardly name me one in Detroit. I don't know of any. I ain't heard of nobody. And I ain't heard of no black person owning no, no, no big motel that--now, you know, just recently, was--they just built that great big place where they're showing all the awards and stuff in, in Los Angeles [California], was it Sony or--? Speaker 2: Kodak [Kodak Theatre, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Kodak, that's right, yeah, that's right, that's right. It's Kodak, just built that, see. Now, anything built, just like now, you talking about Motown [Records]. Motown, they had a manage right now. I'm not gonna, I'm not knocking anybody who made money, and I don't know they complete situation. But Motown, they had just about all, top deal of the entertainment. But you know what, they didn't have no place for them to work. They didn't have no place. They didn't have no place for them to work. You need a field for a person to go work in (laughs). Speaker 2: Well, you're saying-- Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You got a lot of slaves and nobody for them to work, what are you gonna do with them? Speaker 2: They could have had it all had they continued. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) They could have had it all. Look, you know, what Hugh Hefner did? First thing Hugh Hefner did, Hugh Hefner come out here and sat out here and saw Dick Gregory work here, he had a place to send Dick Gregory to go work, down here at this Playboy Club [Chicago, Illinois]. He opened up Play--clubs everywhere. He, he had a circle for his people to work. He never did pay, he never did pay no big name, no big money for no entertainers hardly. He stayed low key and had, had a good club going. You went to Playboy Club 'cause it was a nice place and some good entertainment. Now, when he added Lake Geneva [Ilinois] and some of the other places, he might have brought in some special stars, but he never had no big stars working for him. He made stars. He made stars, created--what did I tell you? You see, now Motown, to me, you know, what is money to you--made for? Money is made for, to use to do something with. Like I told you, I've seen a lot of people walk away from deals because of some money. And once they walk away from it and somebody else make the deal, you out forever. Now, listen, Motown should have had a building in Detroit, where the top of the building spinning around like a record. I wanted something I could say, you know--legacy. Look here, this--I, I put, we put this together. I don't even know where Motown at right now. Speaker 2: There's a little house they converted to a studio. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that, and now, as much Motown owned, had all the top acts, right? They could have built a big club in every city almost and just control. The more they control, the more they could get. People run to you. It's, it's a, it's a guy right now in, in, in New York City, I see him on TV, a white guy, a old white guy [Clive Davis]. He just, he just--what is this girl's name [Alicia Keys]? She's the, she just got all kind of awards in the last year or something, and he--that's his act. What's her name? She about twenty-two or twenty-one years old. Speaker 2: Black girl? Speaker 1: Yeah, black, yeah, yeah. She real light-skinned. Speaker 2: There's so many new ones now. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, well, nah, she is (unclear), man. She the biggest thing. She done got all the top awards. She get every top--she done got all the awards, oh, I trying to--I almost called her name. But anyway, but I'm just going to show you. Now, I think he had Whitney Houston and he had--yeah, he had, that's right. He was the manager of Whitney Houston and all of them. And everything good, he, he grabs a hold of it, you see. But anyway, I'm just saying, you, you got to be able to have, have some outlets for these people, outlets, you know. Now, just like right now, the guy was talking last night on TV, on, on that channel, seventy-five, which is the black channel-- Speaker 2: BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Speaker 1: BET, said, that Bob Johnson [Robert Johnson], something, they sold it, sold the channel, you know, what I mean, sold the station. Now, I don't know. It's still being a black channel, but I'm just saying, I don't know whether--I'm not gonna get into that that much cause I don't know that much about it. But as far as I'm concerned, they, they sold it out from black to, to white. But I'm just going to show you that in order to, to have--to get back where I started off from, I wanted to build motels in all these places. And the thing about it was, was my deal was gonna do, just like I told you, there's not too many to create stuff. So I was gonna create these motels and set them up with furniture, put everything in them. All I got to get a guy to do is come with so much money down, and pay for the franchise and operate; give him the guidance and super--you know, and some supervision just like McDonald's and so forth and they doing in different places. See because, let me tell you what's going on right now. A lot of this stuff, most of these people now that's getting in business, all they going and doing now is the sharecropping again. Story_ID: 12336 Speaker 1: You were talking about franchises, people that purchase these franchises, they're like sharecroppers. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Sharecroppers. Well, that's all it is, is a sharecropper. You can put it any way you want to put it. It's still giving a piece of the action, you know. It, it's all dressed up. It's still a mule and a wagon and forty acres. It's a building and with some equipment in it, and you pay for the franchise. That franchise is the same as somebody owning the land. Speaker 1: Now, tell me, now you had--this dream was to create these Roberts [Motel] franchises all over the country-- Speaker 2: Franchises--that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: What happened, why didn't that-- Speaker 2: Well, okay, I'm gonna tell you exactly what happened and this is a sad thing to say in a way of speaking. At that time, I had a, had all the clientele and so forth, the people there because the, the black people wasn't in a position to go everywhere. When the, when, when they opened the doors up for--blacks could go anywhere and stay, Regency Hyatt House downtown [Hyatt Regency Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], anywhere they want to, the same thing that happened to me when I was at, operating the cabs, where my cabs could go anywhere, where the black people could go anywhere, we lost the business. Now, you know good and well my situation and I, and I'll admit this. All my motels wasn't no Regency Hyatt House. First place, it's hard for us to, to catch up even at this late date right now because it--and it's not only happening to black people. I'm not gonna say that somebody's sitting on us and holding us down, but it's money. Money. What do you think is the difference between Wal-Mart or Microsoft or all them people, it's money. Money is what sets these places up. When you walk in, here's mama and papa got a hardware store, you know good and well they ain't got in that hardware store when you go, as much as they got when you walk into Wal-Mart. So the, the volume, and the volume and stuff, that's what's drawing the business. What you--the same thing like I told you, they knocked out Montgomery Ward and so forth. Home--it wasn't Home Depot, Builders Square got knocked out the box. Big companies are eating up companies. Big companies are eating up companies. Speaker 1: So it's hard for small businesses to-- Speaker 2: Hard for small business to compete. Speaker 1: --to compete. Speaker 2: First place, just like right now, with mom and pop, long time ago, I'd drive from here to Oklahoma. I'm on a super highway. I got to pay a toll to get on the highway. Ain't no way in the world mom can open up a hamburger stand on that highway. You know, who's got that? Burger King or a McDonald's, one of them big companies, one of them big franchises got, got the right to be up there to sell. So you don't even have no right to see--you can't even get up there to sell nothing. And you ain't--ain't nobody can get up there and stop up there. If you build something on the side of the road, you gonna be so far off the road, and everybody passing you up. It's just that simple. So now, you either got into, get into the big swing of a situation or either you out of the box. And you don't have that kind of money to, to bluff or to bring. In the olden days, a guy open up a little ole, a little ole place on the side of the road and sell some pop or hamburgers or so forth. The, the--right now, they done fixed it so the highway done bypassed almost, some of the little cities and so forth. That's even what helped killed some of them little small towns. I told you about a little town I called Beggs [Oklahoma], the city road now, highway used to come right through there and turn two, two or three times coming through that little town. Come to a little red light, stop here and turn and go down this way and go to the Post Office and turn and go out that way, and go out of town (laughs). Now, the highway is about, I'd say about seven or eight miles from the town. The highway go past there. You wouldn't even know it's Beggs unless you go, you just going direct there. Ain't no reason in the world for you to stop to go to Beggs. So Beggs off the map, and it not only happened to Beggs. It's so many other little small towns like that, ghost towns, ghost towns. And, and listen, the same thing I told you earlier, downtown Okmulgee [Oklahoma] that's another little town about ten or twelve miles from my little town, they used, used couldn't even find a parking spot downtown in Okmulgee. Wal-Mart build out on the suburbs of the town, and now (laughs), they done pulled up every meter in, in Okmulgee. In other words, ain't nobody stopping there. Everybody going to Wal-Mart. Wal-Mart got everything you want in there. They got restaurant, dining room, I mean food, all kind of supplies. Well, you know what Wal-Mart carry, everything. Great big, huge-- Speaker 1: It's bigger than some of the towns they're in. Speaker 2: Yeah, they--you can take all the, you can take all the people in that little town and put it in Wal-Mart. And Wal-Mart go there and people socialize and meet everybody and know where everybody gonna be, plus you can get what you want there. Now, why would you go to a store that you may not get what you gonna get when you go there in the first place? And then you got to leave there and go to Wal-Mart anyway, 'cause I walked in a lot of stores. And they didn't have what I wanted, and, and they did have one item I wanted, but it's no point in me buying that one item. I might as well just leave that and going on over there if I'm gonna buy it; might as well buy two or three items over there. It's no point in me going up to the cash register and wasting my time. So that's what I'm telling you about the motel business, the entertainment business. It's all, it's all, all based on, on the amount of money and, and the--and what we can build to--just like if I go out to Las Vegas [Nevada]. Ain't no way in the world a Herman Roberts go to Las Vegas and build a little small motel and expect--unless I'm just gonna count on the few friends and so forth I know. And that ain't, that ain't enough to go in business on. That's just giving me something to do. Roberts got a little motel over there. It got forty or fifty rooms. Let's go over there and stay. Now, if he go all the way to motel--to Las Vegas [Las Vegas], he ain't coming to my place no way. He want to go to Caesar's [Palace, Las Vegas] or to the top spots in Las Vegas. Story_ID: 12337 Speaker 1: There was a split in the black community. A lot of them were discussing, you know, supporting black businesses here in the community or going out to this larger community where all this other stuff is that you were discussing before-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And that's, I think that spelled the decline of Roberts Motels, right here in the city [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Well, well, that's all right. True enough, and just like I said, and when, when the, when the split come, when I told you, when the situation broke down where blacks could go wherever they wanted to, the, the people with the money and, and was making the money and these entertainers started making more money, to be able to afford places. Now, look, if I could tell you forty years ago that they'd open up all them places downtown, like when they was going to them lunch counters down there in Mississippi and Georgia, if they let them go to the lunch counter, they didn't have no money no way (laughs). So if they let them go down to the Regency Hyatt House [Hyatt Regency Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], and all that a long time ago, they didn't have the money no way 'cause they wasn't making that kind of money. So everything done changed. So now they can afford to go downtown. They can afford to spend that. So if they done put themselves in that kind of situation--just like even with me, I know about trying to help black people. But if I go to Las Vegas [Nevada], I'm not going on the east side of Las Vegas to stay over there where you in a black motel, to help some black guy out. That's all it would be, unless it was, unless it was really up, up to class and date and I had a reason for staying there. If a lot of entertainers or a lot of people was going there, and they had a call for it, then that would be a different situation--but I'd have to be in the mainstream over everything. Speaker 1: So business is business, pretty much-- Speaker 2: Well, that's what it all add up to. You know, it's like I said, you know, what, like what [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] did and what [Rev.] Jesse Jackson and all these people did. All that's good, but all that did, that just put them in a situation for them to leave you (laughs), help 'em, help 'em, help 'em to get out of town cause when Jesse Jackson first started off, people couldn't work at Walgreens. They couldn't work at some of these stores, couldn't work at no supermarket, couldn't do nothing. Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson] couldn't put his products on, on, on the paper stands or nothing, cause they'd pull the other papers off. So, just like when I got Sammy Davis [Jr.] to work for me, you talking about the mafia, I had to go get the blessing for him to, for him to come out here to work. He was working downtown at the Chez Paree [Chicago, Illinois]. Well, that's a standard procedure. Even just like me, if I booked you, and you had a name, and I booked you, I don't want you to go work someplace else, ten or fifteen days before you come work for me. I'm gonna put that in your contract. And if, if Sammy Davis working at the Chez Paree three times a year, he don't want to go somewhere else working in Chicago. So I had to go down there and get him to okay, for him to okay to come out South [South Side of Chicago] to work. And the only reason they let him come out work out here because he was coming to a black place and it wouldn't interfere with his, his clientele down there. Story_ID: 12338 Speaker 1: Did black entertainers really appreciate being able to come here and perform in the black community? Speaker 2: Well, Sammy [Davis, Jr.] did, Sammy did. And let me tell you something else, a lot of people got what you call ego, you know. A lot of them, a lot of them don't want to be put down. See, see, it's, it's a different way you may think. If you, if you think you helping somebody, you'll go out your way. Now, but some people don't want to come because that, they could lose some of they prestige. You see, so, it depends on his mentality, how he think, you follow me? And a lot of us just got out of the cotton field, don't wanna go back. A lot of people that's passing for white is more prejudiced than the person that's white. Speaker 1: 'Cause they don't want to go back? Speaker 2: They don't want to, they don't want get, they don't want that to rub off on them. They too close to it, so they get away from it. If I did something to you and stole something from you, I may stay away from you. I'm not gonna go up there, I'm not gonna kick no sleeping dog, right? So that's the same thing there. So, now, a guy go up there, and he, he--first thing, he's, he's looking at his, his itinerary and his, where, where he fits on the chart. And he done worked Caesar's [Palace, Las Vegas, Nevada] . He done worked out in Miami, Florida, and he done worked so and so and so and so. Now, if he come down here to Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois], is that pulling him down or helping him? Now, if he can go and say, well, man, I, I done made up here real big. I'm going back and help these people. He's proud of that. Now, if he thinking that way, he'll come. He'll come. Speaker 1: Tell me, who are some of your favorite entertainers-- Speaker 2: That have worked for me? Speaker 1: --and celebrities. Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I've had some real nice people, and I've had some that was, you know, you know, like B.B. King, he was a nice guy. He worked, which is nice, B.B. Sam Cooke was nice; Sammy Davis, he was a pleasure, you know. I, I kind of got along with mostly all of them, but they--some of them had, they, you know, entertainers, you got to kind of kiss them a little bit (laughs). Speaker 1: Who are the ones that were probably the most difficult? Speaker 2: Well, like Billy Eckstine and Dinah Washington and Dakota Staton and stuff. Now, Dakota Staton, she was, she just, her religion was things. She didn't want nobody shooting no pictures of her-- Speaker 1: What religion was she? Speaker 2: I guess she might have been, I don't know, Muslim or something. I don't know what, but she didn't want nobody shooting no pictures or no, naturally, no, no drinking around her, no this, that or something. She was just real touchy about certain things, you know. And 'cause she, right away, she laid down some rules and regulations when she come in. She didn't want this, didn't want that. And Dinah Washington, she had, she was, kind of had a--not an attitude, but she was, had some kind of complex, you know. If you'd be, you could be looking at her, giving her a compliment, you know, about, ooh, look at this nice dress you got and her hair--you know, 'cause back in them days, when wigs first come out and so forth, it was--women didn't wear too many wigs. So she was like the first come out with them. So somebody might be giving her a compliment about how she look and everything. And she might think negative about what you thinking, you know. She might come out a bag on you, you know, so forth like that. Or you could get up, being that she singing or something, you might get up going to a washroom or a woman get up and go to the washroom, she, she might come in and say, you know, "Don't get up here going in front of me going to no washroom. You should have did what you gonna do before I start singing", you know, or tell the waitress and stuff, don't be serving no drinks in front of her, you know, and stuff like that, see. Then if the mic or something ain't working right, boy, she whew, she might call me on the carpet, you know. You know, you have to be kind of broad in this kind of business cause they got the mic in they hand, and, and they can, you know, I've heard--a couple of times, they be up there, okay, "Herman Roberts, have my money ready when I come off stage", stuff like that. You know, just, you know, such and such a thing, you know, different things. They kid you a lot, you know, "Where is, where is that Herman Roberts. He watering the whiskey" (laughs), say you fool around here and wind up with a whiskey habit, stuff like that, you know, just different jokes, you know. But you could, you could, you know, they, they kind of like to use you as a prop a lot of times if they, let everybody know, you know. And, you know, like Nipsey Russell, he come in, he be telling them, me and Herman was out, and he told me he'd get me a girlfriend or something", say "Put her on the--put her on the phone." And I said, and say, I said, "Well, listen, she won't fit in the telephone booth", you know, (laughs). In other words, she's so big, you know. You know, they, they use all kind of stuff like that, they tell jokes on. One day I was at a big ole police affair downtown at the McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois]. So George Kirby was doing this affair, you know. So George Kirby said, when he come in town, he--the first guy he met was me, Herman Roberts. And he told them, he said, "Man," say, "Listen, I'm broke," and say, "Now, I've been walking" and say, "My shoes is, sole is coming off and it's flapping right here." And said, "Can you help me out, get me some, get me a--shoes fixed, get me a pair shoes?" Said, well Herman didn't say nothing. Say, "He reached in his pocket, man, pulled out a big roll of money, and took the rubber band off it," and said, "Put that rubber band around that shoe and keep on walking" (laughs). Man, they--them, them police, they just cracked up cause a lot of them know me, see, and they, you know, they holler about you and everybody would holler about you might be cheap or something, you know (laughs). So, but anyway, there was a lot of, you know, little jokes and stuff you get, you know. And they--like Dinah [Washington], she be singing and stuff like that, and, you know, you probably heard this before, but she said--people sitting at the table right in front of her. And so she said, "Miss," say, "Your husband done fell out the chair up under, and slide up under the table." She said, "Naw, my husband just walked in the door" (laughs). So, he got in and slides over there. So we get a, you know, a lot of the jokes and stuff. You know, a lot of times I hear so many jokes and stuff like that. They, you know, pop up like that, you know, and a lot of times I hear a lot of jokes, I be telling to, even to the preachers and stuff, you know, about a lot of jokes with, religious jokes and stuff, you know. So I, you know, I--like I say, I try to get along with mostly everybody. Story_ID: 12339 Speaker 1: Now, being in this business and the motel business here and having so many of them, and with the lounges and (unclear) and all that, it puts you in a position to know a lot about the business of a lot of important people. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, most, you know, like, you know, like you say, my place mostly at that time, if a person doing anything or wanted to be anyplace, they would come, you know, be, to be at one of my establishments cause matter of fact, right now, I can talk to--I can meet anybody of any age, you know, and I'm not talking about young kids. But anybody of any age during the '70s [1970s] or '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] or so forth, and even in the '80s [1980s] and they don't exactly, directly know me. They know of me. And when I mention who I am or so forth like that, I always get a smile on they face, you know, cause they, they always this, if you hadn't been for Roberts Motel or Roberts Show Club or Roberts something, in other words, a lot of people worked for me, you know. And I got all kind of letters from people where they worked for me and left and went on to try to do bigger things and get better jobs and stuff. They, a lot of times they write me back and tell me how much they thank me for, you know, what I helped them, you know, in they life. And a lot of times, they even mention too that I don't even know them, you know, 'cause I never even met them before. But just like I told about a lot of people I met that helped me, they may not even know it. They may not even know 'cause I watched somebody or somebody that was way, and I, I took action from, from they action. So they may not even know that I was, that, that I was observing them, you know. But I appreciated them, you know. I owe a lot of, lot of, from, from different people cause after all, I didn't go to school for everything I've done, you know. And you got to pick up these pieces and things, and, and I've had a lot of people of certain ages, with me being young at that time, 'cause mostly all of my stuff, I was in my twenties and thirties, thirty-five or so when I was pushing all this stuff. So, I had a lot of people to help me. Matter of fact, when, in the cab business, I had a guy to give me twenty brand new cars with no money down, twenty, twenty cars with no money down. I used to pay him so much every week. And the, and his company was dead against it. But he was one of the--he was the son of the people that owned the outfit. So he, you know, and so, all that stuff I'll never forget, you know. I met a guy at the bank one day, and he--the first day I met him, he give me $50,000, loans. And I borrowed money, I've been with him for thirty or forty years now and borrowed two or three, five, six $7 million from them, paid them back over time. Speaker 1: What bank is it, if you don't mind? Speaker 2: Oh, it was like Standard Bank and Trust [Company, Chicago, Illinois] out there with (unclear) Pullman Group--Pullman [Bank and Trust] Company [Chicago, Illinois], you know. I help set up Highland [Community] Bank [Chicago, Illinois]--over here, a black bank over here on, on Ashland Avenue, Highland Bank. I was one of the trustees and stockholders in there and helped organize the bank and so forth. Speaker 1: It's Highland Bank? Speaker 2: Yeah, Highland Bank. You know, so--but I, you know, have helped--I've did quite a bit, a lot of stuff. Story_ID: 12340 Speaker 1: Like I say, with my property and stuff in Oklahoma, I was fortunate enough to drill--which we left our little drill, lucky enough to strike oil down there, you know. Speaker 2: Now, the story of that was it was the property that you grew up on had to be sold at a certain point because of the [Great] Depression-- Speaker 1: Well, Depression [Great Depression], where people, they had sold it off and left out, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you came back and-- Speaker 1: I came back and bought it, bought it back in the '50s [1950s] and bought it back and, and built a house on it and built another house on it. And built some more stuff there, and I ran cattle on it for a while and ran horses on there. I had a big horse ranch. I had a forty--maybe, almost, maybe, maybe a hundred, maybe sixty or seventy head of horses running, breeding horses, running horses. Then I ran a tractor cattle business there for a while, and, you know, so I worked with cattle to horses, stuff that I kind of enjoyed doing, you know. And I made some money and lost some money, but it wasn't enough for me to stay in 'cause it's, it's stuff that's moving. You got to watch; you got to watch it. You got to, you know, just like I told you, you don't stay on top of something, it's not gonna work. You got to stay right on top of it. Speaker 2: But you were able to, you got lucky out there really and struck oil. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's right, and struck oil, yeah. And that was about, I had, I had owned the oil rights there, and struck oil. And I'm--I drilled my own wells and put my own operation together and still operating it. And that's unusual for, for black people cause black people just usually lease they land to, to oil companies, and they don't have nothing to do with it. They just get a certain percentage off of it after they pump it. But now I control--I pump mine and do the whole thing. Story_ID: 12341 Speaker 1: Just like I was saying, it's, it's having the, the ability, maybe saying, think you know what you doing (laughs). Matter of fact, if I knew what I was doing, I may not would have did it (laughs). But that's true enough, you know, sometimes you can tell a person, and sometimes people can, sometimes people know too much, and they don't do nothing. Now, you know that, you know. I've seen young ladies come in the night clubs, and they ain't never been in a night club before, and just coming from down South. They come in and get--and see all these bright lights and everything. And they get carried away. They don't know what to do. They don't who to go out with. The worst hustler, the worse guy in the world sometime might wind up with them cause they don't know, see. So it's, it's kind of, it's kind of hard to, to, to separate certain things. Oscar Brown, Jr. had a song, and I--a lot of times I'd go see him, he would sing it for me. 'World Full of Grey', 'World Full of Grey', "When I was a kid, life seemed so simple. Now, I'm a grown man and all these crossroads. The world just full of grey. Now, which road shall I take?" And, and it's so true. And I always say, a world full of grey. I think about that a lot because I don't care who can tell you, if I had to advise somebody about certain things in life, it be hard for me to tell. Some, some women never been out with another person. And I know some fellows maybe never went with another woman, never went out. And some people been out with everybody. And I don't know who's good (laughs). What, you know--now, the basic thing is to be true, right, you know. But it's based on what you think you may like in life, enjoy. I've had a nice life. I enjoyed my situation. I enjoyed all my work. And that's what you do, I, I tell most people, if you get a job, get one you like, try to get one you like and enjoy it. It's no point in you spending a third of your time--and if you, if you don't like it, you gonna spend more than a third of your time 'cause you gonna spend almost another third thinking about not trying to go. So try to get something you enjoy doing, and if you do, it's gonna make life that much pleasant. You know, that's, just the only way I can see things. Story_ID: 12342 Speaker 1: So, so you, eventually though, you basically have--have you moved back to Oklahoma? Speaker 2: Well, no, I got, I got my home and everything there, and furniture and clothes and all this stuff. All I do is just, if I drive there or fly there, I can go right on there, just living like I come right back here and go. See, so I could stay at either place. But so far I been kind of involved with this place here, and I'm working with a church now to take it over, and I'll kind of be, because it's like I say, the smaller you get, the more you got to watch, right (laughter)? So I sold the motels and all that stuff and everything. So if I can get this in the--and the reason I'm talking about a church cause you could take and turn it into another group of people, and you may have problems. You know, you got a lot of people out here with some money, and if you don't get the right kind of people in here, it ain't gonna last. Now, you know. Just 'cause a guy got a lot of money, it may be good today and it's bad tomorrow. Speaker 1: Right, so you're trying to look out for the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Look out for the neighborhood, look out for myself and look out for the place 'cause I'd like to see it--I've sold two or three places and I've felt real proud about going back and seeing them again, you know. People fix them up, did nice and everything. I sold a couple of places to some churches before. You walk in there. They, just really nice, just turned it all the way around, you know, so. You know, like anything you create, if it ain't no more than your kid or your son or whatever you do, you'd like to see it kept like you thought you was gonna, like you thought--like the idea you thought about when you was putting it together, you know. You take a horse and break him in real good, and fix him so you can ride him real good, a lot of times you don't want somebody to get on him that don't know what they doing or get on him and, and snatch him around, jerking him around. Matter of fact, that would make you real mad. So that's the way, you know, that's the way, you know, a lot of things that you can do, you know. Story_ID: 12343 Speaker 1: So, did your parents get a chance to see you become successful? Were they still living? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, my mother, yeah, my mother [Ella Todd Roberts] did and my, my father [James Roberts] did too because he died in '59 [1959]. And so he was here when I had the [Roberts] Show Club and all that stuff. He knew that. And my mother, she was, she, she died about '75 [1975] or so, I mean 1975, you know. And she was around eighty or something when she passed. So she knew. Yeah, they were, they were all, you know, there. My mother, she-- Speaker 1: Were they real proud of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, sure. Matter of fact, my mother, you know, she was kind of slow talking and everything. She might be saying to somebody, "You know my son?" (Laughs). And she'd mentioned who he is. "Oh, yeah, yeah, I know your son, yeah, yeah." Matter of fact, that's why I would, started following her to church, and that's--been with the same church ever since, been thirty or forty years with the same church. Speaker 1: What church is it? Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist Church at 49th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue] with the same minister. He been there preaching about, I think, it gonna be his 40th anniversary with, been at the church. And I was there before he started there, you know. Speaker 1: Who is it now? Speaker 2: [Rev] Gordon Humphrey. Humphrey, Gordon A. Humphrey. He's a, he's a good preach--he's a good minister. He's up in age. He's about, around my age now. And so he's good. He's, you know, like the guy always talking about retiring or something. But he, he uses a lot of extra preachers coming in once and a while. But just like everything else, you know, he want to stay busy. When you stop preaching, what you gonna do? Story_ID: 12344 Speaker 1: You know, just like in my situation now, that's why I got the place in Oklahoma. I can do that, and I can move around a little bit and I want to help--I, thinking about really setting up something for senior citizens cause I'm gonna tell you, it's, senior citizens, it's so much stuff like, I mean just small things cause you ain't looking for, trying to make nobody no big money. People want peace of mind now. So a person get a ticket or get some kind of real estate taxes on some property or doing something. And people work for the city or work for the government, it's, it seem like they don't bend over too much to help you in a way of speaking. They--you got to go see about this. And then they send you some place else, and they send you some place else, and they send you some place else. Matter of fact, you can get on the telephone, whew, and you get the voicemail, you wait thirty minutes, and then they switch it. I'm out from the desk; call me back. Man, I don't know whether I like modern stuff or not (laughs). It can kill you. Story_ID: 12345 Speaker 1: All right, I was telling about when I was operating the night club, I had Sammy [Davis, Jr.] work for me. And he had, had worked me, and I guess he had--a year or something had passed. And so he was doing a show with Frank Sinatra and Sammy and Dean Martin for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at the [Chicago] White Sox park [Comiskey Park, Chicago, Illinois]. And so when he--they were up there talking and kidding and going on. So Sammy got to the mic, and he said, "Yeah, I was here. The last time I was here I worked for Herman Roberts at Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois]," said, "I hope he bring me back over there; said, I had a good time," you know, and so forth. And he went on talking about Herman Roberts and so forth. And so after he, he got through talking about it, and the show was all over, some, a friend of mine came up to me and said, "Gee, whiz, man, say, how did you have to give Sammy to say all that stuff about you?" I said, "A twenty-five year friendship, twenty-five year friendship." I said, "That's what friends are all about." I said, you know, so I guess some people don't understand that, you know. So if you make good friends, you know, and it comes back to you, you know, some kind of way. Story_ID: 12346 Speaker 1: As a successful businessman whose like provided some sort of a model, what are your hopes for the black community business-wise or any other wise, I guess, in the year 2002 and going into the future, what do you see the future of black businessmen or black people as such, as a group of people? Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what, I been trying to figure that out in the last two or three years or so with black business, and I don't know if it's ever gonna be a neighborhood or, where people are gonna be like they once were; you know, the way people lived in certain district and did business. You just gonna have to blend into the whole situation, just, just people. You know, now, that may--I often think about my cab operation. See, when I was running the black cab company, I'd--dealing with just picking up black people and so forth. Then I went, I went all over. I blend in with the Yellow [Cab Company] cabs, Checker [Taxi] cabs and everything, my cabs was just everywhere. It wasn't no certain thing. So I'm, I'm thinking on that almost like a person open up a lounge or open up his own--and one thing that's in a person's favor, I go in and I see a lot of white-owned business. I, I'm pretty sure they're white, but they got black people back there working, desk clerks, switchboard operators. They got all--different nationalities behind the counter. So you, so I had a motel in Oklahoma, as I mentioned--as I told you. Now, I didn't name that motel Roberts Motel (laughs) 'cause I wasn't even interested in whether the white people down there and so forth, 'cause I know I didn't have enough black people to support it. So it was just the Bel-Air Motel. And I had some white people working for me and some black people working, but basic, at that time, basically, it was all white. But now, since then, up to now, I could have that same motel. I could mix it with white and black and nobody would say anything. So, now, what I'm saying that--I saw a young guy the other day on T.V. when I told you about watching that BET [Black Entertainment Television] or whatever was on this (unclear) show, black guy in the clothing business. Now, if he making his clothes and he sell them to everybody, white guys, black guys, everybody, just selling clothes, and they don't know whose, who--he ain't got his picture on his clothes. And, and the best thing to do is keep his picture off. You know, in other words, it's all about dollars and, and marketing. So if you, if you can get into business--if I, if I went to, went to Las Vegas [Nevada], if I build a motel, I need to build a motel on the Strip or build it where it just--all people going. Don't go into a isolated neighborhood and build a--in the black neighborhood and expect to get, compete with the, with the other hotels cause I'm not gonna be able to compete. So I need to build a motel on the Strip. I got to compete. It don't have to be big as some of the hotels, but it's gonna have to be close to it where I can mix my help and everything. It'll just be a hotel. And then, it don't have to be known as a black hotel. So the point I'm getting to, people gonna have to get into the mainstream of stuff, selling shoes, open up a supermarket or whatever it's gonna be. Now, we know it's still gonna be some black neighborhoods. So the best thing you can do is do the best you can in your neighborhood. If you're gonna--but if you're going in and trying to do big business, you're gonna have to get out and compete with the, with, with all the other type operations. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's the only way I can, I can see it, because if I was gonna open up a night club now, I'd open up a night club, I'd think about opening up a night club down there close to the 22nd Street or somewhere, where McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], where I'm gonna get all those people. I wouldn't be thinking about just opening up a night club for--and I'd have the clientele, my help in there so, so mixed up, one way or the other, you wouldn't know, you wouldn't know what--who's operating it. Story_ID: 12347 Speaker 1: Tell me, is there anything that you would do differently now, in retrospect, when you look back at your business career? Speaker 2: Well, the things I'd do maybe different now, like I'll tell you, I would be thinking about maybe different locations and stuff. In a way of speaking, now, you can still, it's still, it's still a big need for, for, for different hotels and stuff in, in a community. Now, you gonna go in there, and you, you could just still say, you don't even have to start to using--I was gonna tell you, what I'm gonna tell you, say something else. Now, you know, we've come in, people come in, black-owned, we--you know, I think we jumping on that a lot, black-owned, black-owned. Now, you heard that a lot right, black-owned, black-owned. Now, you know good and well if the white went in and build up something and said, white-owned, white-owned, well, we'd be ready to march on them, right? Speaker 1: Well, there's a difference though in the perspective and, you know, cause everything is already white-owned. Speaker 2: Well, but I mean, they ain't, they ain't-- Speaker 1: Predominantly white-owned-- Speaker 2: But right now, if a guy opened up a store and say it's white-owned, you'd be why, why you talk about white-owned here. Speaker 1: He wouldn't even have to say it. I think we'd assume it-- Speaker 2: Well, I agree, but if he did say it. If he put a sign up here, white, white-owned, you-- Speaker 1: He would insult black people. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well that's right. Now, you know that would be--if anybody built a place right now and put on there, white-owned, "What you putting that up for, man?" Now, I can build a place and say, black-owned. You follow what I'm saying. Now, we know what reason we saying that, but it's really the reason we saying it though in a way of speaking, you know, but, but I'm just going to show you how, you know, how things go. And just like we talking about that radio station. I was talking about the, you know, T.V. station, black-owned, this is black-owned that's on there. Now, if anytime, like if a person come there, you know, we very sensitive about somebody saying white owned or I'm not gonna let no black in here or so forth like that, even if you go into a golf course or something and it says, white only, now, you know we'd be ready to march on them, right? Okay, so, but, thinking about I'm getting back to the, to the black person, if he goes in there and if he, if he got anything like some shoes or dresses or clothes or swimsuits or so forth, if he can manufacture them and get them in the market, and don't have to put on their black owned or nothing, one way or the other, he, he should sail on through. It shouldn't be a situation where if some black people own this, I'm not gonna buy it. See, now, and that happened to Nat King Cole. Nat King Cole, when he put on, had his T.V. shows and stuff, he couldn't even get sponsors to sponsor it because he was a black, black show. Now, see, you don't remember that, but I remember that. You heard of it, you know about it, see. Now, now, today, whew, he'd be, ooh, he'd be a big thing. He'd be like Bill Cosby or more. He would, he would be--I think Nat 'King' Cole today would be the top--cause he was a prestige act person then. And if he'd be living today and, and doing it, he would be one of your top--I don't, I'm gonna tell you right now, I'm thinking real hard. I don't know nobody besides Bill Cosby would, would top him. And he would more, more in a way of speaking, prestige than Bill Cosby cause he, his personality and, and his behavior, cause Bill Cosby is more like comedy. He ain't never been on no dirty comedian type or nothing like that. He's been real classy, but yet and still Nat King Cole was a real class act. He was too, he was too classy. He was classy, classy, classy. You've seen him work and stuff like that on shows and stuff like that. Speaker 1: I'd seen the show-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Well, wasn't, wasn't he a class act? Speaker 1: And they replay the show-- Speaker 2: That's right, sure. See, so that's what I'm telling you, see. So that's why I'm telling you now. Now, if--just like [S. B.] Fuller--you heard of Fuller, you know, Mr. Fuller and stuff. I think he passed along, but Fuller was the first big millionaire guy and stuff like that, but just like he said, we had Fuller Products [Company] and all that stuff. He said, he'd a been better off if he hadn't put his name on his stuff. Joe Blow Low Do-Do (laughs), they'd a probably bought it, you know. So, you know, and so I don't know. Speaker 1: So far as the big business-- Speaker 2: Big business, big business, you need to just go in there and go national, just, just, you know, if you're gonna go in there. If I were in big business, and it's sad to say, but I'd have me a franchise. I mean I wouldn't even go with no Roberts Motel. A person might say, I own some stock in it. I'd, I'd, I'd be doing the front part. (Laughs) I'd convert back what people used to say--he don't own it (laughs) and be getting rich all the time. I mean it's a heck of a way to be thinking, but that's, that's--if you can't win one way, you got to try it another way. Story_ID: 12348 Speaker 1: Tell me, sir, what do you think your legacy will be or what do you think your legacy is? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. It's, it's kind of hard to say. You know, I think about it. The only reason I think about it some time, I think about it because, for young people, not for the old people. But, you know, like--because what I really think about a lot of times, you know, and this guy--you know, you know George O'Hare. A white guy. He go around speak--lecturing to different schools and stuff. And he's a good friend of Dick Gregory's and so forth. So I was talking to him the other day, and I was thinking about maybe hooking up with him cause I'm not a public speaker too much, you know, but I can, you know, like talk to you and stuff like this, but I get in front of a lot of people, I kind of freeze up a little bit. But I was thinking about getting a lot of these pictures, slides and stuff like this and go into different schools, you know, and, you know, lecturing to kids and stuff 'cause people need to see actual proof of what you can do, and not what somebody gonna talk about doing, you know. You know, and you, you can't get on a streetcar unless one is running. You can talk about I'm gonna put one on there, but that ain't gonna help you get no where. So when the, when your streetcar come down the street, and you see it, you get on. So the point I'm making here, all this stuff here is--I ain't got to--I don't have to tell you nothing. You can walk in this room, and you--I come in and see these people here, and sometimes (unclear). And matter of fact, the church people come in the other day, you know, talking about they gonna buy the place or lease it, and when them members come up here, and they all see, they all, they, some of them bowing down, "Mr. Roberts, I didn't know". I know of, I know, you know, and just all that kind of stuff. And because I don't have to tell them nothing. The proof is on the wall. Speaker 1: And this is actually--this room we're sitting in, and people can't see it watching this tape, but they'll see some of the pictures later, but it's like museum, with all these photos-- Speaker 2: That's right. But I got another room in there, just full of pictures. I got another room next door. I'll show you before we leave, just (unclear). Matter of fact, Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs, at the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago Illinois], she want me to--she want to give me a room to set this up in, see. So, I'm thinking about, you know, what, what I want to do about it. The first thing I want to do, I want to put it in a book, take all the pictures. But then this way, I will take them off of--I'm trying to figure out how to shoot them without pulling them all off the thing. But I can get a--I think I can get a camera to do that, one of them little digital things, that high powerful cameras. You can come and shoot them in here and put them on a computer and take them from a computer and, and have them printed, in other words, to go in the book. Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Roberts, how would you, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know truthfully. I don't know, I guess whenever my name come up or something like that, people that was here during my time in operation and everything, they will remember. The young people, it just might be water under the bridge 'cause I talk to a lot of young people about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], a lot of other stuff like that, and some--well, figured, he didn't do no more than what he should have did, or something, one way or the other. I mean, you know, different attitudes about different things, you know. You know, we all, we all, we all helped bridge, bridged it, some kind of way of making things better for us, you know. Everybody did some work in certain ways. See, just like Martin Luther King made us--and I'm gonna tell you another situation, here's a situation we bypassed altogether. Martin Luther King marched all the shoes off of us, walked us to death, right? Now, you know, to me, taking advantage of it, if I'd a made any kind of shoe, went anywhere and made me a shoe, everybody would have bought a shoe, just to say it was Martin Luther King's shoe. And you, I ain't, I ain't seen one shoe sold, right? Now, you out in the street, you around, right? Now, the worse white guy on earth would almost have a shoe (laughs), to say, I mean, I got a pair of Martin Luther King shoes. Speaker 1: Would you say that you're like the consummate entrepreneur? (Laughs) Speaker 2: Well, I would say so. Be like, be like, I'd be like Muhammad Ali, whatever that word means (laughs). Speaker 1: You're really a businessman and, to your bone. Speaker 2: Well, well, like I say, I--you know, it's like I told you about some people born certain ways, to play music or, you know, sing or do something. I think it's, you know, it's just like I say, it had to be something about me that somebody else could see in me that I didn't even see because I had a lot of people help me. I had, I've had an architect to help me with this motel. He was an old guy, and he sat down and me and him would work together, days and days. And we'd sketch and draw and stuff. And I, and I never went to school for art. But I knew exactly what I want to do, how I want this to look. I know how I want, I know I, I want the guy to walk out the kitchen. I know I want him to go out the door. When I did my ranch down--I know how I want to cut my cows in, cut them out, how I want to catch over here in the pen. See, you got to have some kind of--you got to have something in the back of your mind. If I tell you, come and lay, lay out my house, my house you liable to have me going in the house backwards (laughs). I want to tell you how I want it. I tell my lawyer what I think I want. It's up to him to put it on paper to fix it like it--make it legal. But do like I want you to do, you know. And I, and I'm not a person with a closed mind. I, I want to listen. That's how I learn. When I was building these motels, I had four or five salesmen selling me air conditioners. I went out with everyone of them people, ate lunch with them. They bought me lunch (laughs); go to dinner with them. Everyone of them was knocking they, knocking the other guy's product. But the meantime, I was getting knowledge. I know a lot about air conditioners. I know a lot about blankets. I know a lot about toilet paper. I know a lot about beds, what kind of coil springs it is, and mattresses. How about, my threads in carpet, what kind of backing on carpet, how many yards? How to figure a room and tell you how many yards of carpet to buy. Story_ID: 12349 Speaker 1: So, Mr. Roberts, is there any, is there something that we haven't asked you that you want people to know? Speaker 2: No, it might be something flash up later (laughs), but right, I don't know, we've covered quite a bit, you know. And that's why I can, like you say, out of all these years, I couldn't, you know, can't think of it, just a lot of things. But basic, things that we have talked about, just about cover everything, you know, just, you can see from my way of talking to you that my mind flashes on stuff immediately, you know, and, and like said, everything don't have to be right, but sometimes I, I do my best work at, at, late at night when everything is, is in the, in the black. In other words, I do, I, I can rehearse what I'm gonna do. If I'm working on something, at nighttime, I may wake up, and I can--in other words, I may do it three or four times in my sleep--not in my sleep, but while I'm laying in the bed. In other words, I can put it together, tear it down, put it together, tear it down, put it together, tear it down. So when I get up the next day, I already done figured out where I'm going. So, in other words, I tell a person to, the dark, the darkest of the day, of the night is when I can see best. Story_ID: 12350 Speaker 1: This was, picture was made in about 1956. That's one of my cabs there, H. Roberts Cab Company. That's one of the taxicabs that I had converted from jitneys into regular taxicabs. And that was the Nobles affair was going on. And I gave them free rides, and that's me leaning up side the taxicab. Speaker 2: It looks like a Shriner group, right-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Shriner, yes. Speaker 2: Noble Order of something [Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine]. Speaker 1: [Herman Roberts (standing) with one of his taxicabs, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1956. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12351 Speaker 1: Okay, this picture is a picture of my brother, Colvin Roberts and [Mayor Richard J.] Daley and myself. That was made at a function that was held at the motel, and he was running for office. And we were all just congratulating him and taking pictures. I don't know exactly what year that was. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (left) with his brother, Colvin Roberts (right), and Richard J. Daley, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12352 Speaker 1: That's a picture of Mr. Handsome Herman Roberts. The picture was made in about '65 [1965]. I guess I was about forty-two, forty-three. It's a picture we had to give. A lot of time we had to give pictures to the newspapers and so forth, and one of the black and white I'd give out for publicity. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts, ca. 1965. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12353 Speaker 1: That's a picture of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and myself. That was at a meeting. I forget exactly what year that was, but we were just discussing the current events of the occasion that he was there for. So we was just, just talking in general. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12354 Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was made, I think it was around '58, 1958 where Sugar Ray Robinson had just won his third championship from the stadium. And they left the fight and came direct to my club. This was, they up on stage. That's with Joe Louis, myself, and Sugar Ray Robinson, Bobby Prince and Eddy Plick. Eddie Plick was known as a promoter in the boxing fields. And it was a real honor and pleasure for them, for him to leave the stadium and come to my club. It was a prestige deal. We stopped the show and let them come on stage. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Joe Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson, Bobby Prince, and Eddy Plick, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1958. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12355 Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was made in, the picture actually was made in about '53 [1953]. And that's Joe Louis and, with the group of girls we called Roberettes. And he was at a small cocktail lounge I owned. And he come out to just give us a well wishing for our opening. And it was a lot of other guests there, but that's all the Roberettes and some of they friends on the picture. Speaker 2: [Joe Louis with the Roberettes, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1953. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12356 Speaker 1: That's a picture of Jesse Owens. And that was made in 1957, with Jesse Owens and myself. He was in the club that night. It was a political affair and which he was a Republican. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Jesse Owens, Chicago, Illinois, 1957. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12357 Speaker 1: That's a picture of Dinah Washington and guests with me standing beside her, Dinah Washington, right there with the white gown on. And that was, she was working at the club, and that was some of her guests coming in. We had 'em lined also inside and about a half block down the, down the way. They was just waiting to come in. She was a big drawing card. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Dinah Washington (far left) and others, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12358 Speaker 1: That picture was made--that's, as everybody know, Joe Louis and [Muhammad] Ali and myself. I was in my office that day, and Joe Louis and Ali just come by to visit me. And they come in and came past my secretaries and so forth and just bust in my office. And, and it wasn't nothing I could do (laughs). So you can see I looked like a little wimp. Speaker 2: What year was that approximately? Speaker 1: Let me see here. Okay, that was about, I'd say it had to be about '66 or '7 [1966 or 1967]. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Muhammad Ali and Joe Louis, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1966. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12359 Speaker 1: That was James Baldwin and, and myself, Herman Roberts. It was some kind of a book--was going on, and he was here as a guest. Speaker 2: A book party or signing? Speaker 1: Yeah, book signing. It was somebody else's book, not his. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: It's got to be '60s [1960s] by the way it--look at the Continental suits. Speaker 2: Yeah, the suits, yeah, that's right. It was like, it might have been around fifty--'59 [1959] or so to me. Speaker 1: [Herman Roberts with James Baldwin, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1959. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12360 Speaker 1: Willie Mays and myself. He come in to see the show, and he was kind of a regular, once and a while come in, was really a prestige to see him come in cause he was one of the top baseball players as everybody know. And he liked the shows that we were having here. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Willie Mays, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12361 Speaker 1: That's, this picture here is Leroy Winbush and Mr. [George] Jones. Mr. Jones was the President of Joe Louis Milk and also was Officer at the Seaway National Bank. And they were guests at the [Roberts] Show Club [Chicago, Illinois] with, with Herman Roberts, myself there. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Leroy Winbush (left) and George Jones, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12362 Speaker 1: Left to right, young lady on the picture and Herman Roberts, Reverend Sims, [Congressman] Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], Dr. T. K. Lawless, skin specialist. The other gentleman is a health inspector for the City of Chicago [Illinois], and the judge all the way to the right. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (left, standing) with Adam Clayton Powell (seated, center), T. K. Lawless (third from right), and others, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12363 Speaker 1: Bud Billiken's Parade. To the left, Pat, and I can't think of the other young lady's name, but that was a Bud Billiken Parade and that was a 1956 or '55 [1955] El Dorado Cadillac, which I owned at that time, which only cost about $5,000. Speaker 2: [Bud Billiken's Parade, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12364 Speaker 1: To my left, Dick Gregory, Herman Roberts and George Kirby, both good friends and comedians and all of them worked at the Roberts Show Club [Chicago, Illinois], all good acts. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (center) with Dick Gregory (left) and George Kirby, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12365 Speaker 1: All right, Sammy Davis, Jr., starting to the left. That's his manager to the left and his, I guess bodyguard and chauffeur standing up, Sammy Davis, Jr. and Herman Roberts at the right. That was made in 1959, Sammy Davis was working here at the Show Club [Roberts Show Club, Chicago, Illinois], around Thanksgiving of 1959. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (right) with Sammy Davis, Jr. (second from right) and others, Chicago, Illinois, November 1959. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12366 Speaker 1: Herman Roberts, Mayor [Richard] Hatcher of Gary, Indiana and Sonia Roberts. Speaker 2: Sonia is your wife? Speaker 1: That's right, and that was in, I was going to say maybe around '67 [1967] or '8 [1968], whenever Mayor Hatcher was the mayor in Gary [Indiana]. Speaker 2: Do you remember the occasion you were all together for? Speaker 1: Well, it was some benefit, most of these people come for benefits. I don't remember the occasion. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Mayor Richard Hatcher and his wife, Sonia, ca. 1967. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12367 Speaker 1: Clifford Kelly, used to be the City Alderman, now he's a talk show host and young lady, in the middle, I don't know her name, Murray, Bill Murray, used to be an MC [master of ceremonies] and a comedian. Another young lady and the big tall guy with the white suit on is Ernie Terrell, [boxing] champion of the world at that time. This picture was made about--. Speaker 2: T. C. Hooks. Speaker 1: And T. C. Hooks, worked, in the middle here, worked for the 'Chicago Defender' and some other newspapers, myself, Herman Roberts and three or four, four young ladies as hostesses. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Clifford Kelly, Bill Murray, Ernie Terrell, T. C. Hooks and others. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12368 Speaker 1: All right, let's go to the left, see Johnny Hartman, I can't think of the, the other guy on the, all the way on the end is Herman Roberts back in the back. Speaker 2: Coming up, I can't see, with the young lady, but I know it's-- Speaker 1: On the end to the right is Duke Ellington and Al Hibler, who's blind, Al Hibler, well-known singer, back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Johnny Hartman (front left), Duke Ellington (front right), Al Hibler (middle right), and others. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12369 Speaker 1: To the left, standing, Herman Roberts, Bill Murray, seated is a friend of Sam Cooke's, and this is Sam Cooke in the middle, and his wife [Barbara Cooke], they had just got married, and they was here, right after they had just got married. Speaker 2: Was that the one that married Bobby Womack? Speaker 1: Well, it might be, I don't know her that well. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Bill Murray (standing, right), Sam Cooke (seated, center), and Barbara Cooke, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12370 Speaker 1: To the left, Colvin Roberts and Ralph Metcalfe, Congressman, and also the track man, and Herman Roberts to the right. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (right) with his brother, Colvin Roberts (left), and Ralph Metalfe, ca. 1976. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12371 Speaker 1: Okay, left to right, Herman Roberts and [Irv] 'Kup' [Kupcinet] from the ['Chicago] Sun-Times' newspaper. He was out reviewing our shows, whichgive us a nice write up. Speaker 2: Was this at your club? Speaker 1: That was at my club [Roberts Show Club, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: What year was it? Speaker 1: That was year was about '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with Irv 'Kup' Kupcinet, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1957. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12372 Speaker 1: This a picture of my staff and some of the police officers escorted out to the airport, Midway [International] Airport [Chicago, Illinois], to greet [Muhammad] Ali after the fight. The fight I think was with Ali and [George Foreman], coming back Zaire. We all had a big welcome mat out. So many people on there, I can't tell who all was there. But it was all staff from Roberts Motel [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts and others prepare to greet Muhammad Ali, Chicago, Illinois, October 1974. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12373 Speaker 1: Herman Roberts, Harold Washington, the Mayor of the City of Chicago, and Marty Faye was all at a fundraiser for Harold Washington, was held at my motel [Roberts Motel No. 6] on 63rd [Street] and--it was called the 500 Room. We raised a nice, nice fundraiser. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (left) with Harold Washington (center) and Marty Faye, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12374 Speaker 1: Left to right is Wilson Frost, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, Herman Roberts, Mr. Chamberlain and, and Muhammad Ali. Speaker 2: Okay, year? Occasion? Speaker 1: I would say that's around sixty, '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts with (from left) Wilson Frost, Richard J. Daley, man identified as Mr. Chamberlain, and Muhammad Ali, ca. 1967. From the collection of Herman Roberts.] Story_ID: 12375 Speaker 1: Okay, left to right is the gentleman that owns Vee-Jay Records [Jimmy Bracken] and his sister, a young lady I don't recognize, [Holmes] 'Daddy-O' Daylie, another young lady, that's Sid McCoy, Courtney McKing, Herman Roberts, Henry Bellagama, Eddie Plick and McKee Fitzhugh, all the way to the right, McKee Fitzhugh. Speaker 2: Okay, year? Speaker 1: That was in 1956. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: [Herman Roberts with (from L to R): Jimmy Bracken, Jimmy Bracken's sister, unidentified woman, 'Daddy-O' Daylie, unidentified woman, Sid McCoy, Courtney McKing, Roberts, Henry Bellagama, Eddie Plick, McKee Fitzhugh, ca. 1956. From the collection of Herman Roberts]. Story_ID: 12376 Speaker 1: Drexel [National] Bank [Chicago, Illinois], right there at 47th [Street] and Drexel [Boulevard]. Got dog, I'm trying to call his name. And the other, that little ole short guy was a big--he was, he was the head, he's the head of, with the President of the Bank of--First National Bank downtown with [Rev.] Jesse Jackson and a group of bankers and the President of Drexel Bank and myself standing in the middle, Herman Roberts. Speaker 2: [Herman Roberts (fourth from right) with Jesse Jackson (second from left) and bank executives, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Herman Roberts.]..