 Story_ID: 637045 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is mother, Mildred Thomas [Robinson's mother, Mildred Wilson Thomas]. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sheila Cunningham Robinson, S-H-E-I-L-A, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 20th, 1961 in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a magazine publisher, I am the chief executive officer, as well as the founder. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One second. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: And that's for Career Network magazine and Diversity Woman? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: August 14, 2014 [sic. August 15, 2014]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Burlington, North Carolina, at the home of [HistoryMaker] Sheila Robinson. Story_ID: 637046 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: That will have to be fish, fried fish. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color? Speaker 2: No, wait a minute, let me change it, fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I'm a southern girl, fried chicken is my favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Right now, the ocean, anywhere there is ocean. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, and that favorite phrase is, what someone else says or does is a reflection of who they are; and what you say or do is a reflection of who you are. Story_ID: 637047 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Seth Cunningham, Jr.], but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, Mildred Diane Wilson Cunningham Thomas [Mildred Wilson Thomas]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot to spell now, so-- Speaker 2: M-I-L-D-R-E-D, D-I-A-N-E, W-I-L-S-O-N, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M, T-H-O-M-A-S. Speaker 1: All right, so Wilson was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It is February 22nd, 1933 in Kingstree, North Car- South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, Kingstree, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family in terms of how far back you can trace them and what do you know about what they were doing in Kingstree? Speaker 2: Well, I do know that many of her brothers and sisters, well, her mother's, her mother and her sister left that area and my aunt went to, my great aunt went--moved to New York [New York] and all of our cousins and that side of the family, is up north, and my mother's mother, migrated to Winston-Salem, North Carolina following her brothers and that's how we got there and I recall the wonderful stories of how my mother, at age of, young age of thirteen years old, because she was so ambitious and driven to get her education, that she would ride the bus to New York every summer and stay with her aunt, which was her mother's sister, and work every summer. And she would have odd jobs as babysitting and, and I think one of her favorite times there was she finally got a job in like the Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] five and ten cent store. Speaker 1: Okay, and you say she was saving towards an education? Speaker 2: Yes, she ended up going to Winston-Salem Teachers College [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and went on from there and received her master's [degree] at Appalachian [Appalachian State Teachers College; Appalachian State University, Boone, North Carolina] and so she was an educator for forty years and she's still, she can, she could still be seen out, and her students still run up to her today, and tell them how much she changed their lives. Speaker 1: Okay now, did your mother teach in the Winston-Salem public schools or-- Speaker 2: Well, interestingly, she had a difficult time getting a job right away in Winston-Salem and she had to start out teaching in Virginia, Danville, Virginia and she commuted for many, many years, almost twenty years she commuted back and forth before she was able to get a job in Winston-Salem. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, is there a story on your mother's side about why most of the family members left Kingstree, South Carolina? Speaker 2: Well, wanted to have a better life. Still in the South, in that area, most of the jobs there were house cleaning and they just always thought the further north they moved, the better opportunity there was. Speaker 1: And that proved to be true? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 637048 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Seth Solomon Bristol Cunningham, Jr. [Seth Cunningham, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June, June 26th, and 19- 1933. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where was he born? Speaker 2: Lancaster, South Carolina, or (pronunciation) Lancaster, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, now, again, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, when I think about my father's side of the family, I think about how many sisters and brothers he had, it was ten of them. It's a very big family and still to this day, we have a family reunion called, camp meeting, where every family--they, many of his brothers and sisters also migrated up north and they started out from Charlotte [North Carolina], he ended up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], that's where he met my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas], on up to Washington, D.C. and so many of our relatives, on his side of the family, as far north up as, I know of, are Washington, D.C. area, and we would all get together every year, every single year, even to this day, and meet at his mother's [Hester Cunningham] home place in South Carolina, just amazing, big sleeping tents and cars and, you know, just a family reunion, a true family reunion. Speaker 1: So about how many gathered together every year, at camp meeting? Speaker 2: Hundreds and, and what it was, a camp meeting in that area meant everyone at this particular church, all of their relatives would come and they would set up cabins around the church and tents where all the preachers would preach and, you know, and candy apples and booths and photo booths where all the kids would take pictures and it was a treat for us all to dress alike and one year we, it was maybe fifty of us in different colored ponchos and with Afros and we were called the Cunninghams. And so we were hysterical in that area because it was such a huge family. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now are there any, did your father, do you know what his parents did for a living? Speaker 2: Well, his mom never worked. She was a homemaker of kids and he, his father [Seth Cunningham, Sr.], were, they were farm- they were farmers and when he moved to Winston-Salem, he became, he worked at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company all of his life and R.J. Reynolds is very historical in, in the Winston-Salem area and as a result of him working there, if he had children that went to college, you can work there during the summers and I worked there and, you know, he just was familiar with farming, tobacco fields and that helped him have a very lucrative career in manufacturing with R.J. Reynolds throughout his life. Speaker 1: Now, was, was his father a farmer? Your, your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His father was a farmer-- Speaker 1: --and as far as you know-- Speaker 2: --but his mother was a homemaker. Speaker 1: Yeah, the farmers going all the way back, you know-- Speaker 2: As far, yeah, that was a big farming area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, did your father have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: Well he graduated from high school but he moved to Winston-Salem with one of his sisters and received a job at R.J. Reynolds. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And during his era, that was a company you either retired or died from. No one left R.J. Reynolds. As a matter of fact, there were, I know during my mother's generation, her friends would say, they were going to work at R.J. Reynolds, that was like, that was bigger than going to college but my mom was so passionate about education that she, you know, pursued her education. Speaker 1: Yeah, so R.J. Reynolds was in Winston-Salem like Ford [Ford Motor Company] or Oldsmobile [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --was in Michigan. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Once you got a job like that, you had a good job-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Like, did they have benefits, good benefits? Speaker 2: Oh yes. It carried--and it carried the city. That was what made Winston-Salem such a vibrant--you know, the economy was just bursting at that time. Story_ID: 637049 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes there is (laughter). From what I understand, my father [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] was very, very good friends with some, some of my great uncles and, you know, how the guys ride around and one of my great uncles told him about their nieces, which was my mother and her sister, and they said he asked to go over and meet the family and when he did, my Aunt Nellie [ph.] shows my father a picture of my mom and say, "This is Mildred [Mildred Wilson Thomas] who you should meet," and from my understanding, my mom was so upset about it that her and my aunt had a little tussle about it, a little, you know, fight, about her showing someone her picture but as it turns out, when they finally met, she met my father, you know, it was just a connection and they started dating. Speaker 1: So was this in South Carolina or-- Speaker 2: Winston-Salem. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't until Winston-Salem that they-- Speaker 2: Right, they both had moved to Winston-Salem. My, my mom's mom had moved here with her brothers and my father had moved here to live with one of his older sisters who had come here and married and gotten established and that was the trend in, in that era. The one family member would move or relocate, get established and the other family member would bring on someone else and it would continue to grow. That happened like that when my [maternal] aunt moved to New York [New York] or my great aunt. When she moved to New York, she didn't take her children at first. She moved there, she got established and she finally, eventually, you know, a few kids came at a time. And so it was not unlikely for those that were left in South Carolina would keep the children until those that moved away, up north, could get established and, and get place of home and income to take care of others, and that's what happened with my mother's mother, as well as my father, when he relocated to the Winston-Salem, North Carolina area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, their talents, their--how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I think I am an identical twin of my mother's but I also have my father's humor. He was, every time I--my father's no longer living--but every time I think of him, he was, there was a joke out of every sentence and nothing could get him down. He just was always up, never worried about anything, and so I have a little bit of both of them in me, but I think I am more like my mother. We- some people say we're just like twins. Story_ID: 637050 Speaker 1: Can you list your brothers and sisters for me, beginning with the oldest and put yourself in the line of where you fit in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and let us know a little bit about what each one is doing? Speaker 2: Okay, three girls, my oldest sister is Darlene Cunningham Crawford, she is married, a mother of two and she was always the, the brain, the smart one in the family. I can remember she actually got accepted to Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.]. This was at a time when my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] was teaching and my father [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] had passed and she was trying to raise three girls and so she needed her to go to a school closer by that was in state but that was, I'll never forget that her grades were good enough to get accepted in a school like that, at a time back then and my middle sister is Sharon Cunningham and she has been a flight attendant with American Airlines all of her life and she's a mother of an adult son. And then there is myself and I am divorced but the mother of a wonderful seventeen year old daughter [Leah Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay, so just the three of you-- Speaker 2: Yes, three girls. Speaker 1: --growing up, and when you grew up, in the household, would it just, would it have been your mother, father and your three sisters? I mean, you and your two sisters, rather? Speaker 2: Well, it was, because my mother had to commute and she would drive to work and drive home every day, I don't know how she did it, rain, sleet or snow, and my sisters are five and six years older than I am, and so I can always recall the two of them being the caretakers and the bosses in the household. I can remember telling everyone I had three moms. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're really, really were the baby in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, some, some would say. Speaker 1: --so six years' difference-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that makes a lot of difference when you're growing up? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: 'Cause when you're six, they're twelve. I mean, you know, the next one is twelve. Speaker 2: It made, yeah, I, I would, if you were to ask them, I was quite a handful (laughter). Speaker 1: So they had two of them (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 637051 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I would say my earliest childhood memory was the, the house that I grew up in. It was, to me, such a beautiful home. I, actually I have a picture of it. A big porch with the iron chairs on it and swing and I used to sit on that big porch and comb my dad's hair. He had beaut- his, his heritage is Indian [Native American]. He had beautiful, jet black, just rich hair and I, I can remember combing his hair. It was, he and I a lot, together, back then, watching television with my dad [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] in the kitchen with him. He was the cook. I guess my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] worked so much but my father loved to cook and I remember he made the best chicken and dumplings I had ever tasted in my life and I think that he, he did go into the, I think he was a cook for a while. Speaker 1: In the-- Speaker 2: I think he was in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the [U.S. military] service or-- Speaker 2: I think he-- Speaker 1: --or for R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --before? Speaker 2: It was before he started working at R.J. Reynolds. He was a cook somewhere but that's how he learned to cook and that is one of my early--childhood memory that I can never forget, but I grew up in a very happy household. I can remember Christmases, toys everywhere, and I think that my father working at R.J. Reynolds and my mother a teacher, that I was very fortunate to come up in a, in a time where if there was a need, I never, I never experienced it. I always thought that we had everything that one could possibly want. Story_ID: 637052 Speaker 1: Where did you live in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]? Was-- Speaker 2: On 1521 East 23rd Street, I can still remember that address and that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this considered the east side of Winston-Salem or, or-- Speaker 2: Yes it was. It was considered east Winston and predominantly African American community and just, I still remember many of our neighbors from that time, we still see each other and laugh and talk like old times. Speaker 1: Okay, now Winston-Salem is, is a town that's written--that used to be two towns, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Winston [North Carolina] and, Winston and, and Salem [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: And Salem, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and do most of the black people live in the Winston part or is that, or does it make any difference? Speaker 2: I don't think it made any difference or I, that part of the history of the city, I'm not sure, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Somebody was telling me that east Winston was predominantly black-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: East Winston was, and was predominantly black and the, the Stratford Road area, that was an area that was predominantly white but it's not particularly Salem. Salem is an area where it's downtown Winston-Salem, very historical Quaker area. Speaker 1: Okay. You know there's, there's a big coffee pot downtown-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(laughter) from what I remember. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, from the old town, right, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, from the old town of Salem. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know what the big coffee pot is about or who built it but there's a big coffee pot down there-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, about the size of a house or something. Speaker 2: Yes it's huge. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, and, okay, so in east Winston, was there a main commercial strip going through east Winston that, that had any predominantly black businesses, you know, a black business strip? Speaker 2: Oh yes. There was Liberty Street in east Winston and I remember that area. The Esso service station, that's what we called it and I remember going to college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and the language that we spoke from the area I'm in is so different and one of my roommates, I would say, "We need to go to the grocery store," and she was like, "What's that," you know. So that's what we called it and she-- Speaker 1: The grocery store? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well that doesn't sound very different to me. I mean, that-- Speaker 2: I know up north they call it the food mart or something but she was very-- Speaker 1: I mean, north-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was from the North and it was very southern and so we were like, go to the grocery store, to the Esso service station, Zesto Ice Cream [Zesto Ice Cream Company], that was the biggest thing to go to, the Zesto Ice Cream mart, all that on Liberty Street. Another childhood memory was, Merita bread was huge and you can, the smells on that street, to pass, to go within so many miles of that area, you could just smell the richness of that bread baking. Speaker 1: This is the Merita Bread company [Merita Bread Bakery]? Speaker 2: Maria Bread company. Speaker 1: (Pronunciation) Merita? Speaker 2: Yeah, Merita. Story_ID: 637053 Speaker 1: So you were born in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], so you started school, I guess, in '67 [1967], I guess? Speaker 2: Around-- Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: Yes, and I-- Speaker 1: Did you go to kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yes I did and I do recall, I recall, vaguely remember the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. I remember where the house they lived in on Patterson Avenue. I remember the big Afros and the black leather suits and, you know, so that was prominent in the Winston-Salem [North Carolina] area as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so Black Panthers were a big, big deal in Winston-Salem. I know they're founded in '66 [1966], so about the time you were, started school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but they were founded in Oakland [California] but they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Oakland. Speaker 1: --had different chapters around. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this would have been you're in, I guess, grade school? Speaker 2: Grade school. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I went to Diggs Elementary [Jefferson Davis Diggs Elementary School; Diggs-Latham Elementary Magnet School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that, too, was near the Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] area. At that time, we were so young that my grandmother lived in that area and because my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] and father [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] worked so much, we would go to school and go to our grandmother's home, and then our father would pick us up at night. Story_ID: 637054 Speaker 1: We always ask this question and it goes like this, like, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and that's a great question. So, I remember, and I was just asking my mom [Mildred Wilson Thomas] about this, how they would, in the neighborhood that I lived in, they would let out, the truck would come by with, that we'd call it the smoke trucks and what it was doing in that area was, that was how they got rid of mosquitoes and bugs but we were kids and we, we, it just used to cloud up everything and those chemicals could have been killing us but we would play in those smoke bombs. So I remember those-- Speaker 1: So the truck would come down the street admitting like a cloud of chemicals to kill the mosquitoes (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And letting it out, yes. Speaker 1: And would the kids like run behind the truck? Speaker 2: Yes, and playing. Speaker 1: I heard that story before, it's, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's mindboggling. Yes, and we would play in the smoke and, you know, and the smells that it had, a really, really odd smell to it. Certainly some smells we probably should not have been smelling but that is definitely a childhood sound and memory. Speaker 1: You think you would be different today if you had not run--? Speaker 2: Possibly, no. I don't remember, I think that, I think that really in, around the time, it was, it was only a few years I remember that, they eventually cut that out. So that's a sound and smell that I remember. The Merita Bread [Merita Bread Bakery] that, and who can, the R.J. Reynolds tobacco smell [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. I just cannot tell you how wonderful that smell is. It was, it was the sweetness of the tobacco, to drive downtown Winston-Salem [North Carolina], you know, you knew where you were. That was a part of who we were. Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is, you're about the third or fourth person that, that's made a comment about how good the R.J. Reynolds smell. Speaker 2: Yes, and I actually worked there as well during college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did most people in Winston-Salem smoke, I just wonder? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), yes, yes, every, that's another thing I remember. Everywhere you went, there was smoke. Buildings in the inside and restaurants, smoke everywhere, um-hm. I mean, that was our livelihood. Speaker 1: Yeah, now is it, is it, has it changed since those days? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. There is, you know, they've become more of a, they own a lot of foods. From what I understand, I no longer live in that area, but I think they purchased Nabisco [RJR Nabisco, Inc.] so, and many of their, they still have tobacco but their customer base is more international now and, you know, what we did years ago, you could go to Paris [France] now and still walk on an elevator and people were smoking. So many of that customer base now is, it's hugely internationally, as well as still in this country but the R.J. Reynolds as I knew it, growing up as a child, is drastically different and, you know, that's because of health reasons and many things have taken place since the early '60s [1960s] 'til now as far as tobacco, that has impacted that industry. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that, that the R.J. Reynolds has diversified in terms of the product they, they deal with here and they, they have a larger market overseas now than they do here in some respects? Speaker 2: That's what I've been told, yes. Story_ID: 637055 Speaker 1: We were talk- talking about sight, sounds and smells, I don't know if we exhausted that topic but, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an interesting time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well tell us about elementary school. We were, now you had like two older sisters [Darlene Cunningham Crawford and Sharon Cunningham] that played a significant role in raising you. Did they prepare you for school, for the school experience? Were you anxious to go to school? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] was an educator. She was a teacher and just in my household, it was a given and I enjoyed school. I think that it was the social aspect about it. I never recall not ever wanting to go to school, it was just something that was a part of what I did. I loved all of my teachers. I got along with my teachers. From what I understand, I was pretty talkative and (laughter), and I probably was a little bossy. I probably was a little driven with leadership skills at a very young age, let's say that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you start school around 1966, I guess, kindergarten-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and did you have any favorite teachers in that juncture, I mean, in grade school? Speaker 2: Not at elementary, unh-uh. I don't remember a favorite teacher. You know my fifth grade teacher, Ms. Hart [ph.], she was very nice. I remember her coming to my father's [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] funeral and I didn't, at that time, I didn't even think that she liked me because I was a little pistol at around ten years old and she said that, "You think I don't know it but I know that you call me Witchy Poo," and I (laughter)--was my name for her. I never knew she knew it but she told my mom that I was a bright student and that she really loved having me in her class and I'll never forget, when I got married, she cut my picture out of the paper and mailed a letter to my home address and wrote a very kind note and said that, there were few students that she followed and kept in touch of 'em, very few, she named them, and she said I was one of them. That touched me deeply and I did not realize then that, you know, this teacher saw something in me and I apparently saw something in her because she, she is someone that I have great memories of being in her classroom [at Mineral Springs Middle School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Now why, why did you call her, Witchy Poo? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was her hair, at that time, the way she wore her hair but she was a little strict. She was, and she was, there was unconditional love and it was tough love that she was exercising at that time that, of course, as a child, I did not realize but, so I think that was what I, the term that I use when she probably had popped my hands or put me in place somewhere, you know, Witchy Poo and cross my hands (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now she was, what grade? Speaker 2: Fifth grade. Speaker 1: Fifth grade, okay, all right, all right, fifth grade. So this is, looks like, 1970 or so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the next teacher-- Speaker 1: --I think '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the next teacher I remember liking, Ms. Phyllis--Mrs. Phillips [ph.], and she was the P.E. [physical education] teacher when I was in the seventh grade [at Griffith High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and I think I liked her because she was so cool, you know. She was, at that time, I guess I was coming into, you know, what it felt like to, to, how you carry yourself, and she was the P.E. teacher and she, to me, I thought she was a very attractive African American, female, I just thought that the way she handled her students, we admired her, respect her, she was very young. I thought it was unusual to see a teacher that young and, and she was, she became more like a friend and a mentor as well, and that was one of my te- great teachers. Story_ID: 637056 Speaker 1: My next best teacher I had was Mr. Hunt [ph.], who in the seventh and eighth grade [at Griffith High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], was my band and chorus teacher from eighth grade, all the way through twelfth grade and he actually went to Teachers Coll- went to Salem State Teachers College [sic. Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at that time with my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] and he knew my mother and he would say, well, I did well in grade school, but he would always say, "If you come late to my class again, I'm going to tell your mother," and at that time, that was not a good thing because my mother had been a teacher and an educator. If I were to get in trouble, the first thing she would say is, "What did you do?" And so I, I made sure I didn't get in trouble but I remember even up until eleventh and twelfth grade [at Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], I had Mr. Hunt and he would say, "Sheila Cunningham [HistoryMaker Sheila Robinson], if you skip my class again, I'm going to call your mom," (laughter). So at that time, it went from being late to class in seventh and eighth grade to skipping the class completely. "Oh, we're not going to band class today, Mr. Hunt." Story_ID: 637057 Speaker 1: Now, Diggs Elementary School [Jefferson Davis Diggs Elementary School; Diggs-Latham Elementary Magnet School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], so you start there around 1966. Was that an integrated school, or was it still segregated then? Speaker 2: It was segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the next school I went to was Mineral Springs [Mineral Springs Middle School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and, well that was in the fifth and sixth grade and at that time, it was integrated. Seventh and eighth grade, I went to Griffith High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Ninth and tenth, I went to Hill High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Eleventh and twelfth, I went to Parkland High School [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. And during that time, the ninth and tenth grade schools were separated, the high schools were separated from the eleventh, twelfth grade high schools. I really wish it was like that today because a fourteen year old has no business in school with an eighteen year old. They have no business on the same bus. They have no business in the same hallways. They have no business in the same classrooms and I think that, going to school, ninth and tenth grade, you know, some of the issues and challenges that kids face today, you know, just were not prominent in my area because everyone, we were educated with age appropriate, everyone was age appropriate during that time. Speaker 1: So you think that's just too, too diverse a group to have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's too wide of an age group. Speaker 1: --four years is too, too wide. Speaker 2: I think it's way too, it's too much. Speaker 1: So you had, I got Griffith High School, then after that was, which one? Speaker 2: Hill High School. Speaker 1: Hill High School. Now this is just for-- Speaker 2: Ninth and tenth. Speaker 1: Ninth and tenth, okay. Speaker 2: You know, you think about it. The schools got together, it's increased in teenage pregnancy, you know, violence; so many things have happened when they're putting all of these age groups together. Story_ID: 637058 Speaker 1: What was it, you think that, that made your fifth grade teacher [at Mineral Springs Middle School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] follow your activities? Was it your social activities or your, what was it about you that you think that intrigued her? Speaker 2: I think that I was driven at a very early age. I was, I always showed a, I've always been very independent, very fearless, willing to--very talkative. Speaker 1: Did you organize the other students? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). I was an organizer even then, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, did you organize them around social events and things like that or, or anything? Speaker 2: I, I imagine, I can't recall specific things but I imagine that I always kept order. If you were, if I had to be in place, you need to be in place, too. That's not the way it should be. We're supposed to be over here or sit down, Mrs. Hart [ph.] said, be quiet, you know. Speaker 1: So you acted almost like a deputy teacher? Speaker 2: Yeah, I pretty much was (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now was church-- Speaker 2: And I, I remember when my, my cousin, I'm sorry, in the second grade [at Jefferson Davis Diggs Elementary School; Diggs-Latham Elementary Magnet School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], it's a childhood story that my mom [Mildred Wilson Thomas] tells about all the time. My cousin had very curly, pretty hair and my second grade teacher, she was, she was a toughie and I think she was doing something to his hair and we were in the same class and, and I think I yelled out, my aunt, who's name was Beverly [ph.], "Doesn't want you messing with his hair. You better leave his hair alone." So I always had that, take charge, that's not how it's supposed to be. You better stop. Don't do that. I was such a protector of my cousin, as well, because I was the more outspoken, like I said, and fearless one, they ended up separating us. They wouldn't allow us to be in the same class from that point on, and that was just second grade. Speaker 1: Now, now was church an important factor in growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I remember going to church with my grandmother, she wore her white gloves and her hat every Sunday. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the family church? Speaker 2: St. Paul United Methodist Church [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. It is 146 years old and my grandmother, my, and her family, has been a member of that church. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any special roles in the church or--? Speaker 2: Not at that age, but as I've grown and matured, I've done many things, served in many ministries over the years (background noise). Story_ID: 637059 Speaker 1: Now in school, I know you eventually became the captain of cheerleaders? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is at Parkland [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so did, did they have cheerleading at Hill too? Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't think, did I make cheerleading at Hill High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]? I think I made it one year but I recall not making cheerleading, it was so competitive and at that time, it was integrated and only two or three blacks would make the cheerleading squad. Speaker 1: Out of a squad of how many? Speaker 2: About twelve to fifteen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because, but I never stopped trying and, and I can remember, even when I made high school cheerleading, for some reason, I tried thinking, well, if I don't make it, even if I make JV [junior varsity], I'll play in, because I played in the band at Hill. So I, I still would try out every year and if I didn't make it, I'd play in the band and that's what I had decided to do in the eleventh grade and I can remember after I've tried out, I was in the gym playing basketball with a boyfriend and they ran in there, everybody was literally in shock. Here she is, this is the third year she's tried out, again, and this time she made varsity. I thought, well, maybe I'll make, if I'm lucky, I'll make JV, and I made varsity and it just was beyond anything I could ever imagine but my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] always told me to continue to work hard and, you know, one day you will accomplish your dreams, if that's what you truly want to do. Speaker 1: Now what did you have to be able to do as a cheerleader? I know at some, some schools, you know, you have to do a lot of tumbling and, you know, it's more involved than in others. In others it's just dance moves, you know, or a combination of both. So, so what did you have to be able to do? Speaker 2: Well this school was, they mainly did chants. So, from what I understand, I received so many high scores because my voice was so loud (laughter). So, that, that chanting and school spirit and, you know, you, making sure that you, they can hear you at the assemblies and at the football games, they knew that if I cheered alone, they would hear me but you had to have the jumps and to be able to do dance moves and, but it was not a tumbling, that particular squad was not a tumbling squad. Speaker 1: Okay, no gymnastics. Speaker 2: No gymnastics. Speaker 1: You didn't have to make a pyramid or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, but I eventually changed that. I made history at the school by incorporating that my senior year when I, I was chosen as captain, making history ag- again. Story_ID: 637060 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a story of, I know it's a story that you highlight in your book ['Lead by Example: An Insiders Look at How to Successfully Lead in Corporate America and Entrepreneurship,' Sheila Robinson], where your, your adversary is a Mrs. Malcolm [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's the cheerleading coach or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what, tell us about what happened. What was she, she had a way of conducting the elections, right? Speaker 2: Yes, she did, she had a way of conducting the elections. She had her favorites and everyone knew that she knew in advance who she thought should be captain and co-captain and she would influence and, and, you know, carry about the voting process to make sure that her goal was accomplished and the particular year that I came, I don't know, I think that we were, we were a militant squad the year that I was there. It was my junior year, it may have been about six African Americans and the rest white but during that time, in the late '70s [1970s], you know, we all were so together, we were united. We, it was a time that my generation, we stood together and at that time, they felt like they wanted the person who they thought would be the best leader to be the captain and they tricked Ms. Malcolm, they tricked her in letting her believe that they were going to vote for her favorite person for captain. Speaker 1: Now what I understand, she would meet with each individual cheerleader-- Speaker 2: And ask them who they were going to vote for. Speaker 1: This is prior to the actual election? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then she could use that time to-- Speaker 2: Influence them on who she should, they should vote for and they told her one thing but when they actually voted, they all voted for me and I was the first African American cheer captain that my high school [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] had ever had. Speaker 1: Now this, this did not, she didn't participate in the celebration of this historical moment, did she? Speaker 2: No, she did not and it, you know, she, I don't recall her ever verbalizing anything. She may have but what I do recall is that her demeanor and her actions let me know that she was not pleased at the choice that had been made. Story_ID: 637061 Speaker 1: One story in particular. Every year the two rival schools would, the captain of the football team would be called down to take the newspaper picture and the captain of the cheerleading squad, and so, it would take up the entire, whole page. I mean, that alone to a sixteen year old high school student to, just to have that big of a picture in the paper is huge but to have the entire page, it would be the captain and the, of the football team and cheerleading, of the two rival schools facing each other. Speaker 2: In Winston-Salem [North Carolina]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is-- Speaker 1: The main-- Speaker 2: So this appeared in the Winston-Salem-- Speaker 1: Journal [Winston-Salem Journal], the main-- Speaker 2: This is the town newspaper? Speaker 1: The town newspaper, a big ado, but that year I was not called. They called the co-captain who was a white female and they called her-- Speaker 2: Who was in charge of this process of notifying the-- Speaker 1: Well I thought Ms. Malcolm [ph.] was in charge but they said that they were unable to locate my number and-- Speaker 2: That seems curious when the school [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] maintains records on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah. Speaker 2: --every student and has a file and, your family had a telephone, right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes, yes we did. Speaker 2: I mean you had an address, you'd been there for several years? Speaker 1: Yes, and, and actually, I, that was the first time I ever experienced then, to my knowledge, really discrimination and, you know, I was, I was pretty old, you know, to be sixteen year old, just, you know, and it was, it was very painful and my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas], my entire family was hurt. They were hurt by that and, but I chose to turn that into something positive and by making sure that what my team chose me to do was the only thing that was important to me at that time, which goes back to that saying, what somebody else does or says is a reflection of who they are but it's up to me, what I say or do, is a reflection of who I am, and even at a young age of sixteen, I, we went to camps, we did stunts, we did dance, we were recognized as one of the top squads. We could never beat West Forsyth [West Forsyth High School, Clemmons, North Carolina] with the major stunts they did but to, we gave them, when they played us, it was the battle on the court, was not the basketball team that year, it was the cheerleaders and we really raised the bar and we historically became one of the best squads that year that school had ever had. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now what did you play in the band? Speaker 1: Clarinet. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I played the clarinet. Speaker 2: So you played the clarinet for a long time? Speaker 1: For a long time and I sang in chorus and I, I'm not, I don't have a voice or I would have taken those energies and gone further artistic but I have a joy and a love for music and classical music. I loved, I loved band, I really did-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Concert, at that time, it was called concert band. Story_ID: 637062 Speaker 1: In terms of your schoolwork, what were your grades like? Speaker 2: Well they were mainly average. I, I was very social, so every activity I can get in, like the band, the cheerleading, the chorus, anything I can get into. I was not a straight A student but I was, I made who's who in high school [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. I did, made mainly A's and Bs. It came very easy to me if I would have applied myself more, I probably would have been a straight A student. Speaker 1: Now were you involved in, you know, what, well what sort of high school activities that you're involved in other than cheerleading? Speaker 2: Oh the African American society, the--very few clubs but mainly anything like the band, the chorus, the football games, every homecoming event, anything that was team spirit, build a school, I was there, I was there, and being a varsity cheerleader was, it was pretty demanding because we had practices all the time. So, I didn't do many more clubs beyond the, the who's who club, the student council, just being a member of student council and, and during that time, we had an African American, I think it was called, the African American society. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a society of the black students? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what did the African American society focus on? Speaker 2: Well, it was most- mainly equality within the school, however, it also was an effort for us to do community work, for us to take on projects to, that show that we were servant leaders, that while this was a, a society or a council that we could join as an African American community, we also did so much to give back to the community of our school. Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in high school, did you have a sense of the civil rights history in Winston-Salem, well in North Carolina, the sit-ins in Greensboro [North Carolina] and other, did they talk about that, too? Speaker 2: Yes, I was very familiar with the, the sit-ins, very touched by Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, very touched by the civil rights in the, in the '60s [1960s] and I think my generation at that time, we were focused and driven to be so grateful for the opportunities that we had been given, that our parents had not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were in that mindset that we were never going back and that we were going ahead and the sky was the limit for us and that was the mindset that we had. Story_ID: 637063 Speaker 1: What were you projecting as a career in high school [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]? What were your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't sure. I really wasn't sure, but I was leaning towards becoming an attorney based on what teachers and my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] were telling me my strengths were, you know, like I said, the argumentative type in grade school, challenging authority, stating a case, saying what's fair and not being afraid to voice, so I seem to have all the characteristics of a good attorney. Speaker 1: Okay, and at that time, and I guess I didn't ask, like, did you have any history of entrepreneurial activity as a youth? Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all. As a matter of fact, it's, it's the one thing I said I never wanted to do. I was, always said I wanted to get a great job, great education, job, get married and have a family, that was all I wanted. Speaker 1: Okay, and the kind of job you wanted was-- Speaker 2: One that would pay well. I wasn't, I wasn't ambitious and driven. I think I was more ambitious and driven about getting married and having a family. Speaker 1: Okay, so the idea of being a lawyer was something that was out there but, you know, if you had gotten some other good job, it wouldn't have made that much-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Even at that time, if I would, in all honesty, if I were to, at that time, to go to college and come back and get a job at R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] as a supervisor, that's like being the, at that time, becoming a CEO and, you know, because the money was great, it was just phenomenal and so that was my backup plan. I'm going to get my education, if I do not find a job in my major, then I am coming back home to get a job at R.J. Reynolds in management. Story_ID: 637064 Speaker 1: So you ended up going to North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Is there a reason why you went there instead of A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] or, I mean, Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] or, or some other school? Speaker 2: Yes there is. There's a funny story behind that. Well, as I said, my priority was getting married and having a family and I wanted to follow my high school sweetheart to Livingstone North Carolina, Livingstone University [sic. Livingstone College] in Salisbury, North Carolina and, and my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] was just livid and at that time when my older sister was dating someone that went to Winston-Salem State, who was from Durham, North Carolina and, of course, my mother always commissioned my sisters [Darlene Cunningham Crawford and Sharon Cunningham] to, to help her and they started pursuing other universities because she was adamant that I was not going to the one I had chosen and been accepted to and he told us of how great North Carolina Central was. We looked it up, took a tour, I ended up really liking that area and I applied that summer and got accepted. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, okay, North Carolina Central, so, now you, you went into pre-law and political science, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, well, you also became a member of the Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], I think, right? Speaker 2: Well that was graduate chapter. I actually was a cheerleader in college. I, you know, I went ahead and I tried out for cheerleading. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I cheered my first year and that was a great experience to cheer my freshman year at North Carolina Central. Speaker 1: Just your freshman year? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 637065 Speaker 1: So North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Now Carolina, North Carolina has more black colleges than any other state, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: They got Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], North Carolina Central, North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]-- Speaker 2: St. Augustine [St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Livingstone. Speaker 1: --that you were forbidden to go to. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: And so, these, all these schools are here and what was North Carolina Central like when you were there in 1982, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yes. It was, well it was '79 [1979]-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was '79 [1979]-- Speaker 2: --it was '79 [1979]. I graduated from high school [Parkland Senior High School; Parkland Magnet High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in '79 [1979], so I started-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the '79 [1979], '80 [1980] year. It was, it was very historical. The, the university is historical. It was a huge university at that time in, you know, in comparison to some of the other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. I actually stayed in Eagleson Hall on the ninth floor and to stay on a, little southern girl from little Winston-Salem, North Carolina, you know, college, high rise room, it was a pretty exciting time for me and to, the campus life, meeting so many people, having that independence, close enough to home if I needed to get there, but far away, far enough away where I didn't see my family members on a regular basis. So I loved it. Story_ID: 637066 Speaker 1: And what was the political science department like [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Well, I actually started out in public administration. That was right there at political science because I just felt I wanted to go into government. And so that public administration, the criminal justice, the political science, it was all there. It was all, you know, individuals that were civic minded, that wanted to make a difference in law and government. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember any professors or mentors in-- Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Tyrone Baines [Tyrone R. Baines] at that time was over the public administration. He was one of the most intelligent and brilliant African American men I have ever seen in my life and I was extremely intimidated by him but I remember Dr. Aicher [Joseph Aicher] was the football coach and I ended up babysitting for his kids. I got, he was the chair of the political science division and I had such a great rapport with him. I've always had respect for leadership, you know. I may, the Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Robinson] may try to shift and jive like with Ms. Hart [ph.] in fifth grade [at Mineral Springs Middle School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and what, Mr. Hunt [ph.], in coming to class [at Griffith High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], but I've always had the utmost respect for leadership and that means my teachers, my professors, my pastors, the politicians, if we have put them in that place of authority, then we should respect that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I got along well with all of my teachers and all of the administration. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now did you work when you, while you were in school? Speaker 2: I worked when I was in high school. Starting out in college that first year, I was a cheerleader, I did not work. I eventually as, over time, received summer jobs. I would go home and work during the summer at R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] because my father [Seth Cunningham, Jr.] worked there before he died and that was very good income for college students, to be able to work there during the summer. One summer I worked at a clothing store in the mall and R.J. Reynolds because I wanted to have my own car. And so, I, as long as I can remember, I've always worked a minimum of one job (laughter), a maximum of three. So, I've always been taught to work hard and to, to have the things that you want to have and I've always loved fashion and, you know, having my own transportation and paying to, you know, support my education. There was a period of time where my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] had two girls in college, my older sisters [Darlene Cunningham Crawford and Sharon Cunningham], and while I can never recall ever being without, there were times where I didn't have the luxuries, the extra luxuries, and so, that's when I went to work. Story_ID: 637067 Speaker 1: You were in college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] from '79 [1979] to eight- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To '79 [1979] to '83 [1983], and then I thought, you know, what? I don't need college, I, this working thing had started getting to me and I only needed a year to graduate but I stopped to work at Home Security Life Insurance [Home Security Life Insurance Company]. I'll never forget it. I thought I had arrived. I would throw on my nice little suits and dresses and hosiery and high heels and walk in to work and I was an excellent worker. I worked hard. I was very innovative and creative and how fast and how productive I was and it got me nowhere. It, nowhere and-- Speaker 1: What was the problem? Speaker 2: Well, I think for, I think, I'm not sure if education, the fact that I didn't have a college degree because I was working in a claims division that no one else, but I do recall that I did have a problem with color, that my, my race kept me, I was overlooked for opportunities that I think that I should have been recognized for, for advancement and it didn't take me less than two years to realize that, that was not the path for me and I paid my way back to school and ended up graduating probably the best grades I ever received and I graduated from college in, I was working at Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company [Liggett Group LLC] and my experience from R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], afforded me a role at Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company. So I started to like manufacturing. I liked the pay at manufacturing. I liked the, the casualness, you know, you can wear your safety shoes and your blue jeans and at that time, I was all about earning a living and hopefully, meeting someone to get married and have a family, that was basically what I was wanting to do. Speaker 1: So, so when you went back to school now, you graduated in '86 [1986], right? Speaker 2: Yes, I went back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '86 [1986], so-- Speaker 2: --in '85 [1985] and graduated in '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: All right. Now was anything, what was your plan for after graduation-- Speaker 2: To go back home with that degree and get a management job at R.J. Reynolds. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're, you had given up on becoming a law-- Speaker 2: I had given up on pre-law and, you know, many things had changed and if you think about it, in the early '80s [1980s] how the administrative--administration changed, public administrative, the government jobs were, you know, just slim to none, just was an awful time, it was not a good time to be in the field of government and I was not really interested in being an attorney. That, that career didn't fit my personality and I no longer wanted to explore that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, all right. So you saw yourself becoming, you know, some sort of a manager in the tobacco industry at-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --R.J. Reynolds-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --primarily? Speaker 2: That was my goal (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: So you started working at Liggett and Myers in Durham [North Carolina]? Speaker 1: Yes, during, during school, no. Actually I got the job during school and that's how I paid my way back to finish because, you know, at that time, I had lost the opportunity for my financial aid funding by leaving school the way I did and my mom [Mildred Wilson Thomas] was like, "Well, you can do it, you're on your own, you want to be grown," so I paid my way back. Of course, she always supported me when I needed it but for the most part, I financed my own education that last year. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, were you still single during this period of time? Speaker 1: Yes I was. Speaker 2: Okay, all right so you hadn't gotten married or anything, so-- Story_ID: 637068 Speaker 1: You're at Liggett--well you start at R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], you did get hired by R.J. Reynolds in 1987. Now I don't wanna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, because I got laid off at Liggett and Myers Tobacco Company [Liggett Group LLC] and then, now comes the time where you could start seeing, you know, how smoking is hazardous to your health and it started impacting the industry and you, it was the first time in, you know, ever in history that companies like that, you normally die or retire from, started laying off and so I was laid off but I went home, I got on at R.J. Reynolds, I was so excited that I got a job in that area. I didn't get in management but I did get in. Speaker 1: Now this is, just for the sake of history here, we grew up and part of your early life, on cigarette commercials on television-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --people smoked on all the TV shows-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and in the movies. I remember meetings, you know, work meetings, everybody would be, would have a cigarette (laughter). Speaker 2: That's right. Any movie you watched, you watch a movie, they're smoking a cigarette. Speaker 1: And the stands at games, people are smoking. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, it was everywhere. Speaker 2: Everywhere. Speaker 1: And then the surgeon general's warning, I think, was put on packages in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: That didn't really, it kind of slowed down a little bit but then finally laws are being passed where you had to have, in a restaurant, a non-smoking area. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And this was like the first, you know, infringement upon the freedom of smoking everywhere. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And eventually-- Speaker 2: It started trickling, that trickle down effect started impacting the industry as a whole. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And when the sales decreased, you know, they started laying off employ- employees so-- Story_ID: 637069 Speaker 1: I went to R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and got laid off from there and-- Speaker 2: So you were there from '87 [1987] to '89 [1989]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you were a marketing research assistant, right? Speaker 1: Yes, and so at that time, they started trying to attack or try to be, you know, counteractive to what was happening in the industry and I had the opportunity to work on a new smokeless cigarette and it was highly, you had to show your badge to get in, it was highly secured, big secured gates. We had a special place, no one even knew where we were. And so that was pretty impressive to be able to get a career, to get a job in that area and-- Speaker 2: Now was this an electronic cigarette or-- Speaker 1: It was-- Speaker 2: --or similar to today's electronic? Speaker 1: It was a smokeless cigarette. What they actually did were, they were experimenting. What they were taking tobacco and putting it in a, around a metal piece and a charcoal at the tip and you burn the charcoal and the charcoal was heating the metal piece that was heating the tobacco so it was supposedly designed where you were still getting the tobacco flavor and the feeling that you got from smoking a cigarette but it was smokeless so it was not being a health hazard. And so that was something they came up with and they test marketed it and it did not go well. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: So I was laid off again. Another company that you either retire or die from. Speaker 2: All right, so, were you laid off long? Speaker 1: Well, I was laid off in 1989. So I decided to take the experience that I had received in manufacturing and, because, I'm so sorry, I'm about to sneeze, 'cause I had mentioned that I really enjoyed the community of manufacturing. I loved the people and, and I've learned now today that I am fascinated about meeting people and so that social environment, walking through the, I love manufacturing. So I decided to take my experience and pursue a career with another company and it was DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company]. I remember when I was in college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], one of the college students, she was from up north, in Wilmington, Delaware, and she worked for DuPont during the summers and she talked about the benefits and how they had given her a scholarship and she just raved about this company and I thought, wow, if I could ever work somewhere like that. And so I applied for DuPont and I actually end up getting a job in Kinston, North Carolina at the DuPont plant that made Dacron fibers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was my introduction to textiles, to the textiles industry. So I've now migrated from a tobacco industry to the textiles industry. Story_ID: 637070 Speaker 1: Dacron is a, you know, artificial fiber right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A synthetic fiber. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was it used for in those days? Speaker 2: Oh they used Dacron in, in clothing apparel and some of everything. Car seats, furniture, just, it was used for anything, any rel- any type of textiles, what textiles were used for. Speaker 1: What did it seem to, what was it like in terms of natural fiber? Was it like more like cotton or silk (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like a yarn, yeah. Speaker 1: Like a yarn? Speaker 2: Yeah, or something, more like a yarn. Speaker 1: Okay, so thicker kind of a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --material. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and, but a thin, I remember I used to have to watch it under the microscope to make sure it had the right number of fibers in it for it to pass inspection and big barrels of yarn. I even have a photo of myself shaking hands with Ed Woolard [Edgar S. Woolard, Jr.], who then was the historical CEO of the, of DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], the DuPont days and the history of DuPont is fascinating how it started as a gunpowder company and safety became such a huge issue so it's one of the, I love that company and still to this day, had a great career with them. Speaker 1: Okay. I know I've visited the DuPont national forest in North Carolina [DuPont State Recreational Forest] and went to Bridal Falls [Bridal Veil Falls]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and saw the falls and all that. I, a donation from the DuPont family I suppose. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: Yes it is a, it's a fascinating history behind the makeup of that organization that still proves well throughout the organization now how safety is of crucial importance and taking care of employees, the benefits, the work environment and the opportunities for advancement. Story_ID: 637071 Speaker 1: So at some point in your career at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], you become, I guess, in 1999, you're involved with something called Invista. Is that the vision of DuPont (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, a couple of things happened. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: I started out in Kinston [North Carolina] and I had a gentleman who was my supervisor. He just looked up to me. He thought the world of me and, you know, and I talk about in my journey how I have met men and white men that have been very instrumental and really appreciated me and valued me for my contributions and he urged me to get out of manufacturing, to use my college degree [from North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], to do something greater, and his push and several other, an African American male who was his supervisor, had found a position in marketing, a marketing assistant role, an administrative role, in Greensboro, North Carolina and I applied for it, I eventually got that job. So I relocated to marketing assistant and I worked at DuPont for, over my career, fourteen years but we ended up, they, DuPont decided to sell off the textiles division [DuPont Textiles and Interiors; Invista] because, you know, it was not at the time that North American Free Trade Agreement [NAFTA], all of these free trade agreements opened up and their brands became commodities. And so, there again, another company impacted with textiles. I had a friend tell me once, "Do not come to my industry. Every industry you have touched, has been hit." So, you know, I-- Speaker 1: So what year did you go to, from research assistant to-- Speaker 2: That was in, probably in around 1992. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And then I worked, worked for a long time in an administrative role, which I loved. I loved the job, I loved the office but I always wanted to be more, do more, and in all fairness to that supervisor, he did tell me that there was no room for advancement but I thought that my hard work and when they saw how much I contributed, if an opportunity came open, that I would be prepared for it. So, my, my, and what I wrote in the book ['Lead by Example: An Insiders Look at How to Successfully Lead in Corporate America and Entrepreneurship,' Sheila Robinson], the things that took place is, I saw many, many opportunities to come open, even though I was told there's no room for advancement, I saw young ladies and young men, younger and with less experience and college degrees that may have been in engineering, mine was not in engineering but I still was just as capable. And so I was wondering why was I being looked over and now that I tend to see all of these opportunities, I would like to be considered for one and there was at that time I was told, the only thing that I would ever be in that organization was a secretary. And so, my, I don't think that my race and my gender was as big of an issue as transitioning from an administrative non-exempt role to an exempt role. I mean, it was proven with this particular supervisor to be just unimaginable and it was at that time that I said, well this is not the organization for me and I decided to go back to school and I started, started working on myself because my philosophy is to always see what can I do to, how can I handle the problem? I cannot look for someone to change a situation because the only person you can change is yourself. And so my goal and my plan was to go back to school to increase my education and get a greater job at a greater company because I was then, now ready to do something different. Speaker 1: Now correct me if I'm wrong, but at DuPont, now did you work as a marketing director at DuPont? Speaker 2: Eventually. Speaker 1: Eventually, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came, yes sir. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 637072 Speaker 1: So this decision to go back to school was in what year? Speaker 2: Oh that was probably around '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, '95 [1995], and I started taking courses, graduate courses at the University of North Carolina in Greensboro [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina] in textiles marketing, in around 1995, but around that time, the supervisor left and a new innovative, driven, forward thinking, young supervisor came in and took his place and I was excited about this new freshness around the organization [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] and it inspired me. It inspired me to want to help him and it inspired me to want to do more things because I still was focused on going somewhere else but he started to recognize that I could do more and he brought that to my attention. I would come into work early and I would leave late. That time I was still single and he eventually, you know, many things happened. Him and a couple of other white male supervisors, all of them, recognized my strengths and gifts to the organization and I eventually got promoted to marketing assistant. And so that was taking me out of the non-exempt over to the exempt role, an entry level position into marketing and need I say, I was ecstatic because I had made history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, I'm sorry. I just want to get the year on this one so we can follow the-- Speaker 2: That probably, it probably took about two years, two-- Speaker 1: So this is about '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at that time, in '96 [1996], and at that time, by then, I had gotten married and I decided to drop the college so I did not pursue the textile industry degree and also textiles was starting to get hit really bad and I was starting to question if I should be pursuing an M.B.A. as opposed to a textile degree. So, I stepped away from UNC Greensboro, and started enjoying the, the newfound career in the marketing department and the married life that I had always wanted and cherished, and eventually had my daughter [Leah Robinson] in 1997. Story_ID: 637073 Speaker 1: Now is this when you started the, was this new job as marketing assistant, is this when you started to travel or--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then travel, as that job grew, travel started. I remember one of the first things that my new boss told me to do was he gave me a corporate American Express card and told me to go to New York [New York] for a few days and purchase everything I can on Fifth Avenue, new hosiery design styles that we can come back and show our customers and it was like, you're giving me a credit card to go on Fifth Avenue, to go shopping, even though I was shopping for work, it was fascinating. It was my first experience at, you know, seeing New York in a way that I never had an opportunity to see it other than visiting my [maternal] relatives there during the summer in the areas of like Brooklyn [New York] and the Bronx [New York] but I never had an opportunity to stay in hotels in Manhattan [New York], in the city and shop like that and that was the beginning (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And shopping with a credit card? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and that was the beginning of a career that, that I think flourished. I, we had an office on Broadway and I began to get numerous different opportunities to work in so many different divisions. I attended the CFDA [Council of Fashion Designers of America] Awards, the biggest fashion event. I, I'd sit in on fashion shoots with major models for major magazines. I placed ads in Lucky and Glamour. The famous model, Zac Posen, I remember my boss told me, "Zac Posen wants to see our Lycra plant. I need you to go to New York, get him, take the train to the Wilmington, Delaware plant, take him on a tour and then bring him back." Famous designer, who's now on 'Project Runway,' had the opportunity, I had to rent a car, I remember his mom calling, Susan Posen calling us and saying, "Where are you guys now?" And this was young and, Zac was young in his career right there but still he was a famous designer that he was interested in Lycra and how we, you know, how the fiber, the spandex, well, they will kill us if they heard me calling it spandex, how Lycra was different from any other spandex and also Sara Blakely, who's a billionaire. My department, the, my engineering team worked with her on Spanx and so I was sort of on the behind the scenes with the marketing piece of it and they're the ones that introduced her to Acme-McCrary [Acme-McCrary Corporation] who actually manufactures her hosiery. And so, I had to appear in a segment on E! Entertainment television with her, talking about hosiery and legwear and so I remember going to church one summer, Sunday, and a girl, one of the young girl said, "I saw you on E! Entertainment." So it was a fascinating career for a young southern girl, like myself, and I knew that I always wanted to encourage anyone I met, regardless of where they were from, what their background was, to be the best that they wanted to be and that they can achieve any dream. It doesn't matter where they live, where their roots, where they came from, only thing that matters is where they wanted to go. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, well tell us about, Invista. Now, that's a, that was a-- Speaker 2: That was after DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] sold their textiles division [DuPont Textiles and Interiors] off, all they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's where they named it then. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they named it-- Speaker 1: But it was, it was the--had-- Speaker 2: It was a spinoff. Speaker 1: --previously been the division that you worked in? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a spinoff. Story_ID: 637074 Speaker 1: So, well, tell us how, how you, how-- Speaker 2: Well when DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] decided to sell off their textile divisions [DuPont Textiles and Interiors], which included the Lycra brands and the nylon and the division I was in, we were given a couple of years to work with agencies and top experts in rebranding yourself and repositioning yourself to the market and that's when these agencies came up with the name, Invista. I had an opportunity to work, to be in those meetings, being a member of the marketing team and just, a ton of experience that has helped me, even to what I'm doing today but there were many people that were not as excited about it. I mean, who wants to go from a global brand industry leader, company name like DuPont, to Invista. Well the challenge was coming up with a name that was globally accepted, that was new and fresh and innovative and that could, you know, reach, draw in consumers and had market appeal and that was the name that was chosen and, you know, eventually, after the spinoff, and after the company separated, it was purchased by new owners and then there were more layoffs and I would have never left the organization because I loved the work, I loved the marketing field, was passionate about the brand, Lycra, and all the work I did and although when I found out that my name was on the list to leave, I was, I was asked, would I relocate to Wilmington, Delaware if they decided to keep me. Would I relocate to Atlanta [Georgia] to be over the Stainmaster, to be with the Stainmaster division. At that time, I was married, with a daughter [Leah Robinson], and relocation was not an option at that time. So by exiting out as a no, then they had no choice but to give me the exit out of the company but I was still so excited. It was a new, it was time to take fourteen years of experience, phenomenal experience, and my education, and start pursuing other opportunities in this area, and which I did. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, you left, I guess, by then it was Invista, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in 2004? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 637075 Speaker 1: So when you look back on the era with DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], as a marketing assistant, what were some of the highlights? Speaker 2: Well, the highlights to me were, every time I got a promotion, marketing, communications represented to marketing manager over this and then becoming considered, it was an internal role that I was, kind of like a director over the public relations apparel division, being responsible for all the PR and marketing with the brands. So with each promotion came a pay increase so that was exciting. Other exciting things was, you know, doing a legwear. We did a hosiery contest that we included schools like the Fashion Institute of Technology [New York, New York], had a big launch in New York [New York] with Jamie--actress Jamie-Lynn Sigler and it was just so many major career opportunities, such as when the movie, 'Chicago' came out, and Queen Latifah, I did a promotion with the actress, Queen Latifah at the Bloomingdale's department store, promoting all the hosiery brands that was in the movie, 'Chicago.' So I had an opportunity to do all kinds of creative promotional events that I would have never dreamed of doing in a career at R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. Story_ID: 637076 Speaker 1: You mentioned mentors before, you know, certain of the white executives, white male executives there, you know, reached out and, and helped you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --along the way. Speaker 2: I had several mentors, yes. Speaker 1: Now who were some of these men and was it, was, how difficult was it for you as a woman and, and how did it, I mean, was it tougher to be an African American woman in that situation than a white woman? Speaker 2: Well during my time there, I, I only can recall the one challenge where I was told there was no room for advancement and I would never go beyond a secretary. Other than that, my experience was very positive that it was such an innovative forward thinking organization that they were always looking for someone that was driven in ambition and that was throwing out ideas and being creative because I worked on, in a division that made new products and they were looking for, I mean, even the African American division, I had an opportunity to go to Essence Communications [Essence Communications, Inc.] office in the board room and talk about the Essence hosiery brand and that was fascinating. So, I had an opportunity to do market research. I did a pilot with U.S. Airways flight attendants, giving them hosiery to wear on a new product we tested and then seeing, getting the results from the product. So I had an opportunity to do all types of projects like that as a result of the, the different managers, supervisors and team players but a couple of mentors that stand out, for me, is Don Clark. He was a mentor, he was someone that was young, he was fun, he was a musician and he was brilliant. He was a genius and one of the things that he told me, he encouraged me to take Toastmasters [Toastmasters International]. He even said, "Hey, I'll, I'm going to, just so you'll go, make sure you go, I'm going to pay for it." So he encouraged me to take Toastmasters-- Speaker 1: This is like public speaking training? Speaker 2: To get, get, to start being more comfortable with presenting my ideas when I got in front of the team and he allowed me to come to some of the team meetings and to sit back and observe and then he eventually had me to participate in the team meetings and that is someone, I would say, and another female that I was fascinated with, she graduated from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and her name was Rhea Stern [ph.], she was a global brand manager and she was young and from New York [New York] and just, she can, she would be in a room with all men and, and just demand their attention. I mean, they, you know, they looked at her because she was brilliant. And so I looked up to her and she eventually became a mentor. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] have a significant number of African American employees and did it increase while you were there? Speaker 2: Well, in my division, there, you know, we had a significant amount in the administrative division. There were not as many African American women in leadership. As a matter of fact, in my area, there were not any. There was only one male leader, African American leader, during that time. It has since, you know, I've watched the company grow, multicultural women are in leadership role. They now have a female CEO [Ellen J. Kullman]. So during my time, there was very little women and women of color in leadership roles but I understand that, that is one of the companies that is recognized as being a leader in their advancement of women and people of color. Story_ID: 637077 Speaker 1: Now in 2005, you founded Robinson and Associates Communications, LLC? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell us what that, what you intended to do? Speaker 2: Well, I, it, it came about, I had never thought I would ever try to have my own business. It came about after numerous rejections. I had an incredible load of experience from DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] and I went out to all of these organizations. I can remember the president of the division I was in, a $6.5 billion industry, was used, as a reference. I had the greatest references, I had fascinating interviews but I was not given an opportunity, particularly in the area that I was living in and the last time that I was told, "You have a boatload of experience and more marketing and brand marketing that we could ever need at this organization but I'm concerned you're not the right fit," you know. I knew then that I was no longer going to go job hunting, that I needed a break, I was going to do something different, I needed to explore. I don't know if I'm going to explore going back to school, explore relocating to another area, explore, you know, just, I had to just stop because the rejection was just more than, two years of rejection, it just seemed like it, I had been out there two years looking for a job because I had started looking in advance when they told us we would be laid off, and I had this vision when I was at DuPont to start a magazine to support women in business. It's sort of like an Essence and a Black Enterprise but for women and then I thought, well, you know, I want to help anyone with their careers because there was something I had always been known for, if someone asked me how to do their resume or practice for an interview and I've always had this love, love affair with magazines and I took my passion for magazine journalism to, and my passion for helping others advance in their careers. I brought it to one and I had designed the template and the idea before I left DuPont and one of my friends told me that I should explore that vision I had for the publication and I told her, you know, there was no way that I had any funding to do that and she said, "Well I didn't tell you to do it, I just told you to explore it," and I did. I, at that time, I thought it was a great shift going on in North Carolina, we were shifting from becoming a tobacco and a textile industry, the two industries I had just gotten laid off from, to a biochemistry, biotechnology and a logistics and I thought, why not come up with a North Carolina career publication and talk about all of these different industries and opportunities that are taking place in my state. And so that's what I was passionate about. I was, I wanted to bring awareness to how our industries had shifted in this area and put it into a magazine and help people that had been laid off, significant layoffs like I had been in the textile and tobacco industry, and help them get jobs in other industries and long story short, North Carolina Career Network was in the market in 2005 and it was just a little small regional publication that got a lot of attention, including being on the newsstands and Borders bookstores [Borders Group, Inc.] and Barnes and Noble bookstores [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so did you distribute any in the black churches or the, or any of the other, well, black colleges [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUS)] or-- Speaker 2: No, because it, at that time, it was not a, it was not just for African Americans. It was for anyone in the State of North Carolina, men and women, and so I distributed it at the chamber of commerce [North Carolina Chamber]. I started, I knew from having events at DuPont, how successful I could be if I had an event. So I had an event and I distributed it there because I knew how to create promotional events from my experience there and that was the way I got it out. Story_ID: 637078 Speaker 1: So this is a general market publication, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --at that time. Speaker 1: --and so this is in 2005. In-- Speaker 2: Around 2008. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to meet Dr. Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] when she was president and I had the opportunity to volunteer with her programs. Again, I was looking at opportunities, not only to meet people that would encourage and inspire me and support me in my aspirations, but there was another platform that I could give out my publication to and I met so many advertisers and sponsors and companies that were partnering with her in some of her initiatives that were different from what I was doing and they said to me that, "We love what you're doing, we love your work but if you truly are to grow and get organizations such as ours to invest, you have to be on a national platform," and I had taken that advice and went to, I joined every--when you become an entrepreneur, you have to join every format you can. I joined every trade organizations, chambers, anything that I could find to help me understand how to be successful in entrepreneurship and at that time, Women in Periodical Publishing [Exceptional Women in Publishing] was an organization that helped women, a non-profit that, and I became a member, I received a grant, a scholarship to go to Stanford University's [Stanford, California] publishing program to learn how to publish and in a year's time, I hired an agency to re-shift my brand, the exact same thing I saw DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] do with Invista and I did the same thing with North Carolina Career Network and we became Diversity Woman. We went out, in 2008, Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson], who was the former founder of BET [Black Entertainment Television] and who now is quite a successful entrepreneur, recognized as one of the first African American billionaires, was on the cover of our magazine and I had the opportunity to go out to Alexandria, Virginia, somewhere in that area, and visit her farm [Salamander Farm, Virginia] and do the photo shoot and that was the beginning of, in 2008, of Diversity Woman, a national publication that supports the leadership and executive development of women of all races, cultures and backgrounds and that is when we shifted to the brand that we currently are today. Story_ID: 637079 Speaker 1: Now do women of all races and backgrounds share kind of the same dilemma in a workplace? Speaker 2: Well I think so. So it's a gender diversity platform. If you look at research today, shows you that over 50 percent of women are in the marketplace. More women than ever have M.B.A.'s than men and we are still hidden barriers where we get managerial positions but we can only advance a certain level. There are still less than 10 percent of women in the C-Suite, and less, even less than that in women of color. So, from a gender diversity platform, this is a huge problem for all women but we have become such a diverse and multicultural society that this is why we're inclusive of all races, cultures and backgrounds. One of the major reasons that, I think, we could change the dynamics of and move these barriers that we face when we're trying to advance in the workplace, is by uniting our women. We have power. We influence our dinner tables. We are the reasons that our children go in the playgrounds and act a certain way. We influence how our spouses and our partners and our mates go back into their workplaces and all the, on the golf courses and, and the gyms and in the tennis courts. And so if we, as a unit, can come together, women then, we can impact not only our schools, workplaces, playgrounds, communities, our society, our nation and possibly our world. Story_ID: 637080 Speaker 1: How has the magazine [Diversity Woman] been received? Speaker 2: It has been received very well. We're trending number one in diversity in Twitter. We are recognized in the country as one of the number one platforms for the advancement of women in leadership. It is received very well. It's been a hard time getting there though. It was not until I understand who I was, and what I had to offer. It wasn't until then that I truly understood who I was as a brand and as an organization that we started soaring and because I listened to what everyone was telling me, print was dead, that, you know, you only can be on the Internet, that no one cares about diversity or, you know, so you hear the, the negative things coming into one ear but when you stand strong and firm and believe that you have, you want to partner, you want a partner in organizations' success. You want to show and share organizations that, individuals that have a passion for this area when you can deliver a return on their investment, everything else speaks for itself. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So it seems like, I mean, the community like has really responded to your magazine and your activities. Now you're, you went to Western Carolina University [Cullowhee, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yes, I went back, I went back to, you know, and then, you know after a while I thought, you know, entrepreneurship, this is working, this is working for me, this might just work. So, I'm always focusing on how can I change me, how can I be the best that I can and take responsibility of what I need to do for myself and I found a program, a master's of entrepreneurship and innovation at Western Carolina University. At that time, it was listed as one of the top ten schools in the world for entrepreneurship and innovation and I got accepted and I graduated with my master's [degree] in, I think, what 2011. Speaker 1: Eleven [2011], right, right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Story_ID: 637081 Speaker 1: Now in 2012, you founded I Am A Leader [Burlington, North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now was that informed by your graduate school experience [at Western Carolina University, Cullowhee, North Carolina] at all? Speaker 2: No, actually it was informed by the reception that I was starting to receive from not only the adults that my target, my, who was my target audience [of Diversity Woman] but from the students. I was starting to get speaking engagements at colleges. I was, you know, asked to do events for students, to mentor and, you know, I recognized, when I started going to the colleges, speaking to students in high school, some of the questions that they were asking me, I thought were questions that, you know, it would be great if they already knew these things. It would be great if we could provide them ideas, solutions and resources to help them become student leaders before, you know, to help them in their career aspiration as a student leader before they came to the workplace and prepared them to be a workplace leader. And so our programs are designed for that, such as helping students get internships, that are in college, making them aware of the type of organizations and the different careers that exist. For so long, you know, some kids think doctor, lawyer, nurse, which are all wonderful, amazing careers, accounting, but they're, how many kids know of the science, technology and engineering and math careers that are out there and those are some of the things that we do through our non-profit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We create awareness for career opportunities at an age early enough for kids to get the academic background they need and to start researching different universities and whatever trades they may need to be successful in obtaining those careers. Story_ID: 637082 Speaker 1: In 2012, you enter the chief learning officer doctorate program at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: Yes, and that's, that, that's on the heels of the success of Diversity Woman. I was featured on the cover of Publishing Executive magazine for the work that I've done in my industry, the passion that I have behind the work. I believe in practicing what you preach. And so, you know, my readers and my customers, they believe in the work that I'm bringing to the table. They know that I'm not publishing a magazine to get ad dollars, that I'm publishing a magazine and hosting events so that I can truly help women advance. And so, there again, practice what you preach. I found out about a program, a chief learning officer program, that focuses on talent learning, talent development and advancing leaders and becoming a great leader yourself. And so, that was what, one of the main reasons why I wanted to take this program that was designed by the school of education [Graduate School of Education] at University of Pennsylvania and the Wharton School of Business, came together to design a program, developed to help individuals that work in Corporate America and to bridge the two together to help organizations that invest all of their resources in research and development, marketing, you know, how much are they truly investing in their talent, in their human capital, and that's what this chief learning officer doctorate is all about. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Helping organizations see the value of investing in their human capital as a resource to support the success of their organization. Story_ID: 637083 Speaker 1: In 2014 you wrote your book, 'Lead by Example' ['Lead by Example: An Insiders Look at How to Successfully Lead in Corporate America and Entrepreneurship,' Sheila Robinson]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which we have a copy and tell us about some of the highlights of the book. Where did you get the idea to write, I mean, why, we can see where the idea to write the book is coming from, basically, but what did you hope that the book would do that your other activities were not accomplishing? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, first of all, I thought that it's still such a very, very competitive market out there in the space that I'm in and I thought it could bring more awareness to the work that I'm doing and also it could lend a voice to who I truly am and help educate the consumer on who Diversity Woman is, that we are a platform that are trying to help advance leaders and we're trying to do it in a positive way. Now over my lifetime, there have been some times that I didn't do everything in a positive spin. I've tried, you know, been the angry employee, it gets you nowhere. I tried being the angry spouse, it gets you nowhere or the angry friend or parent or, you know, I've had the same, you know, made mistakes in ways of communicating and handling adversities and problems but what I've known is, it didn't take me but a quick minute, very, very early on, I learned quickly, that the way you lead is how you choose to be led. You should treat people how you want to treat others and I have an abundance of success by leading, by example, and I wanted to share this, my philosophy with others and gather other women who were, who thought like I did, like minded women, so the book is a, is a combination of my experience and other women in Corporate America and other entrepreneurs' experience on how they have handled businesses, how they have actually turned adversities into opportunities and that's really what the book is about and the overall emotion behind the brand of leading by example is to truly lead as you truly would want to be led and that is with dignity and respect for, for all, everyone should be treated with dignity and respect. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now that you opened the book with a discussion about how adversity could be turned in your favor? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, and I've had experiences like that. You know, I mean, point and take, what we just discussed. My career layoff with DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], a company that I love and I, and when I got laid off, I went, where do you go from here, this fascinating career, but it created an opportunity for me to do what I'm doing today and the experience I've had over the last past, almost ten years, has been ten times greater than anything I could have ever imagined at DuPont. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So, a perfect example of turning adversity into opportunity. Story_ID: 637084 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your public speaking career. Speaker 2: Well my public speaking career took off unexpectedly. It actually started at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], a funny story where I was at a PR [public relations] event and the agency we were working with said, "Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Robinson]," and this was an event I was doing with Queen Latifah in front of Bloomingdale [Bloomingdale's] store and E! Entertainment was there and she said, "I have an opportunity to get you on camera," and normally they just want the celebrities and the stars but I know where she was like, "You got a chance to plug Lycra, you know. This is how you do it," and I was like, "Okay." So they put the mic to my phone, to my mouth and all I could see is Queen Latifah, lights, cameras, paparazzi and I freeze. I freeze, and the next day they, my boss, enrolls me in a course for public speaking, ten thousand dollars. They fly me to New York [New York], and I'll tell you how this fascinating career was I had at DuPont and I started doing public speaking, being a spokesperson for the company at DuPont. That's how I had the opportunity to do the on air interview with Sara Blakely of Spanx [Spanx, Inc.], and in, rolled over into entrepreneurship. Schools started asking me to come speak to the students and college students and then as my business grew, organizations have asked me to speak. And so one of the things I learned, when the publishing industry, anyone that is in publishing that, that, that's watching this now or even any consumer will know that this industry, the print industry, has hit a fall and one thing that I learned at Stanford University [Stanford, California] was, if you're going to stay in publishing, then you have to have multiple streams of revenue. So, it was an idea to create an additional arm to my business and at that time, I worked with a very small agency on creating a packet and sending it out and we sent it out to the NFL [National Football League] in New York and I got hired to speak at the Pro Bowl in Hawaii and it was just awesome. I was interviewed, I was hired by the vice president of the NFL, out of New York, and I was the keynote luncheon speaker for the wives doing the Pro Bowl and they had asked me to speak on entrepreneurship and how, at that time, women, entrepreneurship for women was very, very good and I think the league was really wanting to inspire and support any spouse or mate that had access to this disposable income and to put it and invest it in someone, where they could pay off in the future and it was great thinking on their part because so many times you hear about, you know, they blew their money and had, you know, millions of dollars gone down the drain but, you know, they had programs in place to help the players and their spouses invest for the future. So, speaking engagements such as that, as well as corporations that have diversity programs or women's conferences and I continue to do that today. Story_ID: 637085 Speaker 1: Now what's next? Speaker 2: What's next for Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila Robinson] is I am currently in research mode, and I'm a candidate for my doctorate [at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at the end of spring 2015 and I plan to take that research and develop training programs and actually have a program in place, not only a magazine and a conference with great speakers and thought leaders and great articles but to take real training and maybe simulating training to develop women to advance into executive and C level roles and that is one of my, my passions and, you know, if one of the things I always think about as far as my non-profit, if money was not an issue, if money was not an issue, what would you do? You know, I hear of some of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] closing down. You know, if money was no object, I would take the school, the HBCU school that just closed down in Virginia, and I would turn it into a boys boarding school for African American boys because-- Speaker 1: Which one just closed down in Virginia? Was that-- Speaker 2: I think it's St. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Augustine's [St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] or, no, no that's in, St.-- Speaker 2: No, it is, it's one of the-- Speaker 1: One of the Episcopal schools? Speaker 2: In Virginia. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was a HBCU. Speaker 1: One of the Episcopal schools, I can't think of-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear) in South Carolina. They've got St. Augustine's, Saint Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia] and it seems like there's another one but I can't, okay, well go ahead, go ahead. Speaker 2: Yes, but I will turn it into an all-male boarding school for African American boys from ninth grade to twelfth grade because while my focus is on girls through I Am A Leader [Burlington, North Carolina] and women through Diversity Woman, I would love an opportunity to impact and save our men and our boys and I think it goes back to my thought that we're losing them in the schools with the peer pressure, with the, the, you know, the time to get into negative things and if, I think boarding schools are very, very effective and could create success for a lot of our students that are not getting what they need and, and not because the teachers don't want to give it to them in the public schools, not because the administrations aren't providing it, it's just not the right setting, it's not the right fit. They need to be in structured environments and I would take these schools and turn them into boarding schools for our boy and girl students from ninth through twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Have you made any steps towards that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's one of my, that would be, that's a dream if money is no object, okay, but I have made steps and plans to develop these training programs for women in leadership. Story_ID: 637086 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something in your history? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. If I, the things that I've done, I would have done it much earlier and this is, the reason I do the work that I'm doing, because no knowledge of. If you don't know what's available to you, if we're not creating awareness of how people can achieve success and obtain their goals, then we may take as long as I did to find them and what I would have done, I would have went to school, I would have probably not dropped out of school [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I probably would have went to graduate school early. I would have become an entrepreneur earlier. I would have done many of the things that I'm doing now a lot earlier but one could say, all of the things that I did probably shaped and molded me into the person that I am. So, maybe I wouldn't have knocked every, you know, half the years off, but at least ten years of them off. Story_ID: 637087 Speaker 1: Once again, when you look back at your career over all this time, what today, even though it's--you're still young, yeah, would you con- what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I think that my professional legacy is to, to come up and launch a national magazine [Diversity Woman] and to actually, as an individual publisher, be recognized along big media publishing houses and I'm an independent publisher and I'm almost recognized in my industry and with my customer base, as many of the big players and I think that I was able to accomplish that goal because I'm very customer focused and I truly care about the work that we're trying to make a difference in, in helping women of all races, cultures and backgrounds, advance in their career. And so that, I am told, has been quite a significant accomplishment. I remember someone asked me, "How did you have the guts to start your own magazine in an era where that industry was almost at death?" No one ever asked me, "Where did you get the money," because it took a boatload of money but they asked me, where did I get the guts, and I look at them and I tell them, "Because I wasn't afraid of the word, no, and I wanted to get rid of the word, what if," and they said, "Well what do you mean by that?" And I said, "I would much rather have accomplished pursuing the goal than ten years today looking back saying, what if." So the guts came from getting rid of the, what if, and I sometimes tell students that I'm talking to, "Don't sit in, sit on the visions and the goals that God gives you, you know, get rid of the, what if," and that is what I would say is my claim to fame, getting rid of that, what if, by starting that national magazine. Speaker 1: Now I've been, I've heard the saying that people, investors invest in people, not necessarily in ideas. And so, would you say that you developed a capital with certain contacts over the years to enable you to get the funding to start your, your magazine and your work, you know, as an entrepreneur? I mean, was that the key, you know, your relationship with people? Speaker 2: Well, if I were to say the key to the success of my business, I would have thought it would have been money. It really wasn't money and I tell, and I encourage everyone, you know, you can earn money, you can work, you can make money. It wasn't until I knew who I truly was as a business and an organization that I started making money and the reason I say that is, I've learned, you can't be all things to all people. You can't be about what you have to offer. It wasn't until I understood what the need was, what the market need was, what my customers, what their need was and what I had to offer and how I was to bring that together and match it and create win-win opportunities and the money began to flow. The challenge, one of the greatest challenges of starting a business is money. Where do you get it from and I actually had, first of all, started off, I was, I was married so it didn't hurt to have a second income. And so I had a small family investment there but then once I got the, the business got to a certain point, then I started getting bank, bank, particular banks to invest in it. So the money will come. It is understanding that what you are and the market need and the return on the investment. Once you can prove those two, the oceans just open up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I still have challenges today because competition will always be there, you know. If you have something and it's making two cents, somebody next door is going to try to make three cents more. Story_ID: 637088 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, and we can start with Winston-Salem [North Carolina] then broaden it, but? Speaker 2: Well my hopes and concerns with the African American community are our children, our students. I'm devastated. I have a seventeen year old daughter [Leah Robinson], I get involved with the schools, I'm deeply concerned that our kids don't have enough activities in our communities. There are not, there are not enough jobs, there are not enough, the cultural events, there is nothing for them to get into but trouble and I'm concerned that we are losing our race because of this and this is why I think that programs, programming like different type of school business models, like boarding schools, could work in, even summer camps, developmental summer camps, but I'm desperately concerned about our youth. Story_ID: 637089 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your daughter [Leah Robinson]. She's in high school now, or? Speaker 2: She's in high school. I'm a very, very proud mother of a seventeen year old daughter who is a competitive cheerleader. She cheers on a world tumbling team. They travel all over the country. They've been, even been invited to cheer outside of the country but she is a rising senior and she is very, very smart and some people call us triplets. Her, between, I said early on, that some people think that my mother [Mildred Wilson Thomas] and I are teen--twins, where there's some people that think they're triplets because she reminds me a lot of my mother and, as well as myself, but she reminds me more of my mother than she does me. We do have our differences-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I'm told all mothers do at this age. Speaker 1: And your sisters [Darlene Cunningham Crawford and Sharon Cunningham], are they, they both here in the city, too? Speaker 2: They both have retired from their organizations and one lives in Charlotte, North Carolina, one lives in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. Story_ID: 637090 Speaker 1: The last question is very similar to legacy but it's a little bit different, a little bit more personal. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I would like to be remembered as a great mother and example for the students and the children. Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] told me something, sitting at her living room table when I had the opportunity to interview her for my magazine [Diversity Woman] and I'll never forget it. She autographed a book for my daughter and when I was sharing with her my experiences and, you know, the challenges of motherhood and that there were a lot of things I was great at and I had not achieved greatness in that area and she said to me that, "Children are not born with courage, that it is our job to encourage them," and she said, "You must encourage Leah [Leah Robinson]," and that changed me because for so long I had been parenting and guiding and directing our youth and the children behind us, as if they're adults and talking to them as if they should know better and that's not encouraging. We should be encouraging our children and our daughters and our sons to be the best that they can be and encourage and guide them for the people that God made them because she is her own person and because she came from me, I was blessed with the gift to bring her here and so my goal and what I would want to be remembered for, is a great mother to my daughter and a great mother to other sons and, and daughters that come behind me. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're very welcome...