 Story_ID: 56080 Speaker 1: Sir, we're going to start out by slating this. My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No, no middle name. My name is Cordell Reed. First name is C-O-R-D-E-L-L, and my last name is R-E-E-D. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth. Speaker 2: March 26, 1938. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July 2, 2002. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have our address that we are at, and your profession. Speaker 2: Okay. We're at 1334 South Plymouth Court in Chicago, Illinois. I am a retired Senior Vice President of Commonwealth Edison. Story_ID: 56081 Speaker 1: Okay. I ask five questions of everyone. They're People Magazin-ish, you know, very short answers. I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: Pizza. (Laughter). Speaker 1: We don't have many of those. That's cute, that's good. Speaker 2: I wish I could say some soul food, but my wife will die; she knows I like pizza. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Pizza, do you have a favorite type of pizza? Speaker 2: Just sausage and cheese. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she really knows my... I don't do drugs or anything, but I do skins and hot sauce, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. I was asking about address. If you can re-state your address and then your profession. Speaker 1: Okay. This is 1334 South Plymouth Court in Chicago, Illinois. And I'm a retired Senior Vice President at Commonwealth Edison Company. Speaker 2: I did ask that, okay. So, we were on pizza. Okay, let me just re-state, ask the question again. Your favorite, your favorite food? Speaker 1: My favorite food is pizza. Speaker 2: And your favorite color? Speaker 1: Well, I guess my favorite color is red. I have to think about that, yeah. Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: Oh, springtime. Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 1: Orlando, Florida. Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Wow, this is, this is thoughtful. Favorite statement or saying... I guess, "God is good." Story_ID: 56082 Speaker 1: Okay. We're going to get started. And I want to start out by asking you about your father. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I'd like you to give his name and what you know about his background as he was coming up. Speaker 2: Okay. My father is Clevon Reed, Sr. And he grew up in Arkansas. And his sister, which was two years older than him, came up to Chicago [Illinois]. And then two years later, sent for him. My father worked at the stockyards. I can remember smelling his clothes when he would come home from work. And then he, he went to Phillips High School in the evening when he was in his thirties to get his elementary school diploma. And he achieved that, and then became an automobile mechanic at Yellow Cab Company where he worked until he retired when he was about sixty-seven. And banging those fenders through the years has impeded his hearing. But he is ninety-four years old, and he lives with me here, and he's just upstairs waiting for the ballgame. Yes. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Did he ever talk about any--well, how old was he when he came, when he was brought by his sister here? Do you know? Speaker 2: I think he was in his early twenties. Speaker 1: Did he talk at all about growing up in Arkansas, you know, his time there or anything? Do you know anything about his parents? Speaker 2: Very little. I have a picture of them. And we went down to his hometown about four or five years ago and looked around. But he just typically worked on a small farm back during... where he grew up, in his teens. And of course, he dealt with all of the problems of the Deep South at that time. He don't know anything slavery, and his dad was not a slave. And my mother's father was not a slave. But it was just amazing to me... kind of the... I won't call it the Underground Railroad. But one would come up to Chicago, get a job, make enough to send for the others. And him and his brother and sister... and it was just amazing how that system worked. Speaker 1: It's really in many ways like the immigrant population we see coming into the United States in many ways. Speaker 2: That's a very, very good analogy. And when I think of that and think of all the advantages... even today, I'm sixty-four years old, and I still have the love of my father. My mother just died last year at age ninety-two. So he had it, he overcame, and he was certainly a role model. Story_ID: 56083 Speaker 1: Can you, what kind of person was your father [Clevon Reed, Wr.]? Speaker 2: I would say a quiet, gentle person. Working in the Yellow Cab garage, the cabdrivers are pretty tough people generally. And they called me "Junior," even though I wasn't a junior. But when I was in high school, I worked two years after school in the garage. And for that whole two years, people would just tell over and over again, "Junior, your father is a nice man." I don't recall him cursing at us. To this day, I would not curse in front of him. He never smoked. He would drink at parties. But certainly, you know, my life with a mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and father all of my life; and a loving caring man who didn't have much education, but absolutely knew the value of education. It was never a question of me going to college or not. He would do whatever it took to make sure I went to college. So that's... I've had that foundation, and I can't think of any better foundation. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about him coming to Chicago the first time and what a difference it was, or adjusting to it? He wasn't a talkative guy, I think? Speaker 2: No. But I can recall the fright he and his younger brother felt coming to Chicago. We, we lived in Englewood for a long time. And he came in at that 63rd Street station. And he had talked about them coming in, and if they had not seen their sister, they would be totally lost. They would have no way... there was no one else to call. And the fear that they had... and when they saw her, the relief. So, I can't even imagine having that much uncertainty in my life. And it just took strong people to do what he did. Story_ID: 56084 Speaker 1: Your mother, give her name and what you know about her background. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Carrie Bell Reed. She grew up in Jackson, Tennessee on a small farm, not in Jackson, outside of Jackson. And one of the things we would do would be to go down to where she grew up at. Her father was not a slave. His father was a slave. I can remember going down there, and they had mules. I had to understand what a mule was. And they had the outhouse, and you'd go down the hill to the spring for water. And they had chickens in the house where the meat would be stored at. And she did proudly finish elementary school. But on the farm, they had some cotton that they picked. A very strong tie to the church. I get the impression that my mother had a stronger tie to the church than my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.]. He went to church, but I can see the church in her background. Very strong tie to the family... her brothers and sisters. I think if there's one thing that distinguishes them versus today, was that strong tie to the family; it was their vehicle. They were not just five brothers and sisters. There was synergy. One added something that the other did not have. Story_ID: 56085 Speaker 1: --(unclear) So, she, again, never drank or smoked. I don't know why not; a gentle person. And they were perfect, especially as they got older together in their eighties and in their early nineties. They were just a perfect little couple. Speaker 2: So, how would you describe your mother? Speaker 1: I would describe her as, again, as a gentle person. I can remember when my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] wanted to be a body and fender man, an auto mechanic, that he went to a school--career body and fender. And because he didn't read very well at the time... he could read, but just not very--she would be reading his schoolbooks to him, on how you put the dolly under the fender and how you hit the hammer with the dolly. And again, they were stronger because they had teamwork; they worked together. Story_ID: 56086 Speaker 1: How did your parents meet, Sir? Speaker 2: As I recall the story, they were at a party. And of course, my auntie and my uncle--the brothers and sisters, they went to parties together. And then they met at the party. And as I recall the story--they were telling this story at their 60th anniversary--they actually got married several months after that party. It was not a long courtship. Speaker 1: So, it was love at first sight? Speaker 2: It was truly love at first sight, which lasted their lifetime. Speaker 1: And they were married how many years? Speaker 2: Well, okay. As of last year, I think it was sixty-five or sixty-six years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Can you imagine that? Story_ID: 56087 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up. Speaker 1: Well, I remember growing up in the projects. We moved into the Ida B. Wells housing projects [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illlionois] when I was three, and I lived there fifteen years. I was in my first year of college. And so, all of those memories revolve around the Ida B. Wells housing projects. Our projects were four stories high, and three buildings kind of formed a triangle. And I had about fifty, sixty kids my age to play baseball with and things. And it seems as I recall, everyone I think had a mother and a father. I can't even conceive of a vacant apartment. I pass there frequently now, and my old Apartment 10 is not vacant. But the ones above... I couldn't even conceive of that. Certainly there was drugs during those days. There was a high incident of illegitimate births. We had gangs, but the gangs would meet in the park and would fist-fight. They had something called zip guns, but they were--if you... There was very few incidences of shooting, okay. We were more talk than action. And when it came to the women, we were more talk than action. But little did I know that I was culturally deprived, because as a kid I had everything... I had friends. The housing projects in the forties and in the early fifties when I lived there, was a very proud place to live. We were one of the first families to move into the Ida B. Wells housing projects. Our Apartment 10, we were the tenth family. And it was a matter of pride. We lived in the projects... we had... We actually had a washing machine, where you just walk across the yard and down in the basement. And then they had these storage places where you let them dry. And Madden Park, which was just not even half a block away, you could play baseball. A block away in Madden Park, there was swimming. And we thought that was all there was. And it was enough. Story_ID: 56088 Speaker 1: Now, I'd like you to take yourself back there and I want you to describe what sights, smells, or sounds remind of you growing up. Speaker 2: Sights, smells, or sound. Well, sound, I think that the... There seems to me there was always the laughter of children. We had so many... there was age groups. And if you were twelve, maybe your age group was, maybe was eleven to fourteen, and we all hung around together. Those that were elven to six, they hung around. And if you were sixteen... we... it soon sorted itself out, and you just didn't violate those. But there was always some group either playing baseball or skipping rope. I don't recall a lot of profanity, "M.F. this or M.F. that." I don't recall that. But to a kid, it wasn't noise. It was laughter; it was, it was good. I had asthma as a child, and I had to stay in the house a lot. But I had friends... trading of funny books... coming over to play marbles and cards. My brother [Clevon Reed, Jr.] is a year older than I, and as I go back now and look at that little bitty apartment, it looked like a mansion then to us. So my childhood, I know it's different now, because our expectations were different. No one was really, that I knew, was living better than us. There were people in Park Manor, maybe. But it was satisfaction, because it's what I knew. I had a mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and a father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] and a brother, had good friends. It was good. Story_ID: 56089 Speaker 1: Any smells? Speaker 2: Well, the only smell--and my father worked at the stockyards in the early days. It's not a bad thing; it's kind of a funny thing. But he would bring his clothes... and once you work at the stockyards, I mean your clothes will always smell of stockyards. So, I remember he would come home and he would put them in the closet. It was a telephone closet, something really, really small. And I can remember that smell. Other than that, living in Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] there was no factories around. Well, I can remember a smell. I went to James R. Doolittle School [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School] at 35th and Cottage Grove. And during most of the time, I was in my homeroom which was at the end of the building. And there was a horse stable. And the horses would pull wagons for people--the rag man and then stuff like that... the ice man. But I can remember hearing these horses and smelling horses during the time that I was in school. Story_ID: 56090 Speaker 1: Now, what, can you describe other aspects of just family life? Any favorite memories you would like to share? You know, even playing with friends or times with family, or around... you know, anything, any instances that stand out. I'd like two or three. Speaker 2: Well, one thing good about the forties and fifties, we didn't know very much. And I can tell you one of the greatest trips was when me and my friends would get on the bus and go to Altgeld Gardens [Chicago, Illinois] out to 130th. I mean, it was like going to Orlando [Florida] or Las Vegas [Nevada]. It was a one day trip. The good thing with the family was driving down to Jackson, Tennessee. And in those days, you know, it was an endeavor of the car. There were no expressways. You really--it was truly a family trip, and you got to be together. And I don't think my brother and I were bad kids. I think we were more of a reflection of our parents. You didn't have to yell or scream to get attention. So, I don't think we yelled or screamed. Speaker 1: Do you remember the, you know, the trips, the first trip down? Because it was rural when you were used to doing this. Speaker 2: All--we went... subsequently I've learned what we did. It, I remember going through Harvey, Illinois and maybe it was Route 54. And all I know, (Laughter) you wouldn't go very fast, but you kept on going through town. You just would go through towns... you would go through towns; you would go through towns. And it was very interesting, especially for my brother and I--growing up in Chicago [Illinois], being born and raised in Chicago--that we actually found that people were really prejudiced. And you didn't have to get to Tennessee before you ran into that. You would get to southern Illinois. I can recall my brother [Clevon Reed, Jr.] saw a water fountain, "Colored only" and he didn't even know what they meant. (Laughter). He went up, he went over to the other water fountain just because it was closer. I mean, one said "White" and one said "Colored." And he just didn't know any better. And I think they realized (Laughter) he didn't know any better. But it soon became clear to me that as we drove down further south--and you didn't have to get too far south of Chicago before Dad [Clevon Reed, Sr.] and Mom [Carrie Bell Reed] would get very cautious... where we would eat. Of course we would carry the chicken sandwiches with us. But even to go to the washroom... that became a real issue. Do you go here to the washroom, or do you not? You know, how do you ask the person? And they tried to let us know that we were in different territory. And it was--it was, it was kind of an awakening. I mean we were under segregation so to say in Chicago, but it just wasn't in our brains that we were being treated differently. Story_ID: 56091 Speaker 1: Now, your brother is one year older you say than you? Speaker 2: Yes, he's one year older. Speaker 1: Can you give his name? Speaker 2: Clevon Reed, Jr. Speaker 1: So, he was the junior, and you were the second. No other, no other siblings? Speaker 2: No, and I'm the baby. I have a step-sister, Mattie Mae Austin. But as we grew up, we didn't grow up with Mattie. We became very close after we became adults. Speaker 1: So did your--were you and your brother not like twins... or sort of... Were you raised--I mean were the... Was he definitely the oldest one, and you were the baby? Was there much distinction made between-- Speaker 2: No. Well, without doubt, I was the baby. And because I was sickly, I got the most attention; I had asthma. And, but the baby always got his clothes. Everything was passed down, and I know I used to really resent getting his underwear. During those days, we were close. They would have to entice him to stay in the house and play with me when I was sick at times. And he was always better looking than me, but I had the advantage of being "Little Reed" through elementary school. He would go the first... he would go in there. And he was kind of a leader. You know, he was captain of the hall guards and stuff like that. So, I think I always had his coat-tails. Whenever you have an older brother, it always helps you. People are less likely to jump on you. So I just think I was really surrounded, really surrounded, by support. Story_ID: 56092 Speaker 1: And you said you went to, you said Doolittle? Speaker 2: Doolittle. Speaker 1: Doolittle Elementary School [James R. Doolittle Jr. Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. And were there any teachers there that you remember that had influence on you at Doolittle? And were the teachers--were they white, were they black? Speaker 2: Most of the teachers at Doolittle were black. And Mrs. Albritten, I can remember her, because when I did go to school with my asthma, I couldn't go out to play at recess. And she would kind of treat me special and let me stay in the room during recess. You know, you don't think... I can think of her support... just letting me stay, saying nice things to me. And after I got older and I moved out to Marynook, an area on the South Side of Chicago, she moved... she was there, too. Mrs. Hancock... I can think of some teachers. When I was in school, I did pretty well. And it's funny how the Lord does things. Because I had to stay and my brother [Clevon Reed, Jr.] had to bring my homework home--because I couldn't go out to play--that's all I could do was homework. So, I ended up when I was coming out of elementary school I was reading at ninth grade, and my math was tenth grade. And that burden which I thought was a very significant burden, that I couldn't play the way I wanted to, in retrospect I think that that burden--as the way the Lord does things--was a blessing. He was molding me. Story_ID: 56093 Speaker 1: You know, when did you first get an asthma attack? Do you know how old you were? Speaker 2: Well, as early as I can remember, I would think two or three years old. And the doctors just told me not to go out. I mean, I would have bad attacks. They would last for a couple weeks. I would get delirious. I couldn't lie down. My father would walk me, and my uncle would come over and walk me around. They tried everything. I remember a lady coming in. I won't say she was a voodoo lady, but she danced around me and slung something. There was something that if you take... drill a hole in the door and take some... your hair and put in there, that by the time you got an inch over that, the asthma would go away... you are what you eat. They just tried everything. But my doctor was Dr. Beasley, and he was two blocks away. And for the most part, they didn't make house calls then. But sometimes he would call on me. And it was just so funny that having asthma when you're really small is really better than when you get it as an adult. Because as I became fourteen, it kind of went away. And when I went to high school I did not have that as a problem. And the asthma didn't come back until I was twenty-six, when I was working in power plants with sulfur and the coal, and then I started to get it again. Story_ID: 56094 Speaker 1: When you, do you remember... so you don't remember your first attack as a child? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember my first attack. But I do remember, I do remember the asthma. Speaker 1: And how did it feel? Because I suffered from bronchitis. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I remember, you know, it being somewhat debilitating. And sometimes asthma attacks can be pretty frightening. Speaker 2: Right. It was wheezing, that's what Mom [Carrie Bell Reed] and Dad [Clevon Reed, Sr.] said. Okay, basically wheezing. It is coughing; it is getting your breath; it's the difficulty of not getting your breath. And after a while you just get, you get tired. I mean, these would last for days. And the, at times I would just get delirious with fever. I think the fever made me delirious. And I can tell you, my parents tried everything. I mean they didn't try Northwestern Hospital or University of Chicago, because we couldn't afford that. But they tried every remedy that anyone would ever tell them about. And I can't imagine how much of their time--my mother did not work while I was growing up. She got her first job my first year of college. And she couldn't work, because of the burden of me. And... oh, God, you're going to really get me going. School was two and a half blocks away. I can remember her walking up there when I'm eight, nine, ten... walking up in front of me to be a wind shield, to shield me from the wind, which would take my breath away. And so, she had to be home to take care of me. And yet and still, Dad... from the stockyards to being an automobile mechanic... I don't even know what wanting for something. We had food, we had clothes; we had toys. You know, our taste... we didn't have designer clothes, but we didn't know designer clothes. I just can't think of something we wanted that we didn't have. Speaker 1: Now, did you... you said you were out of school quite a bit. Do you have any sense of what "quite a bit" meant? Or you said, "When I was in school." Speaker 2: Yeah. I think it was fourth grade where in essence I had to stay home that entire winter, and I flunked fourth grade. There were so many days if you were off, that you flunked. The good news, I got a double in sixth grade. So, I graduated on time. But when I mean a lot, there would be like--I guess if I could characterize it, maybe every two months. Maybe I would have a major asthma attack four or five times a year. And then there would be a two week period generally where I could not go out. Speaker 1: You had pretty severe asthma. Speaker 2: I had severe asthma. And it is so funny that there was at least a concern whether I would make it or not. And now here I am one of the healthiest ones, (Laughter) after going through that. It's, life is really an amazing journey, and it is... it's truly a journey, you know. You know, if you judge it just for that period, you will reach one conclusion. But if you look at the whole thing, it's, I think it's just preparing you. Story_ID: 56095 Speaker 1: So, what were you doing when you were sick? Were you were sort of listless when you were sick, or were you actually... You said you were reading? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the little apartment... You would go look out the back window and you would watch the kids playing in the backyard. And you would look out the front window. And there was gravel in the backyard, but we actually had grass in the front yard. But I can remember being, being bored. It was especially tough during the school day when no one was out. But after school, the kids are running around in the backyard. And I would stand in the window, and they would kind of communicate with me in the window. My mother actually paid friends to come over and play with me. I have a good friend now, Adonias Samuels, and we're in a social club together. And I tell everyone, "This man took money from my mother, to come over and read my funny books and to play with me. And we're great friends now." Story_ID: 56096 Speaker 1: Now, what, were there any types of, you know, comics that you liked, or funny books that you liked? Or what were you... I mean, you know, as a person who was spending a fair amount of time by yourself--weren't you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm just wondering what was happening inside of your... you know, in your mind? Were you fantasizing? You know, what kind of child were you, I guess is what I'm trying to... I know you were well-behaved. Speaker 2: Quiet and well-behaved. And well, I don't know. I just, I just, just was, I had plenty of time to read and do my homework, but it did come to me. Speaker 1: The homework came easily? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And so not--did you have tutors? It just came easy? Speaker 2: Yeah. No, I did not have tutors. Speaker 1: But did you... were there other... were you an introspective person? Were you thinking thoughts in this process, or were you... Were you dreaming of things? Were you, you know, were there thoughts going through your head? Were you... did you have an imagination? I mean-- Speaker 2: I... that's an interesting... that's an interesting question. And from my kids, I can understand what you're talking about. I don't think so. You know, our world, our world was limited. We had the radio. We got a TV in 1950. And one of the reasons--we were one--not the first one in the projects, but one of the first ones. Because I was stuck at home so often, they got a TV... and Howdy Doody and all of that stuff. But I guess I learned to... to... I guess I learned just to be quiet and peaceful. I guess I learned to be still. I was not hyperactive. I would read funny books; I would play with toys; and I would do my school work. Story_ID: 56097 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite comic strip or funny... I mean character? Speaker 2: Oh, gee. We had Superman, we had Batman and Robin; we had the characteristic ones. And it's funny that Afrocentric was not, was not an issue. I loved Howdy Doody and you loved all of the... The Ed Sullivan Show... And we, we were, I think we were Negroes during most of the time. And the worst thing you could do was to call me black. That was the ultimate for my brother [Clevon Reed, Jr.]. He can call me the 'N' word, and that was loving. But when he says, "black 'n' word" that was nasty, because I was darker than him, yeah. (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, also with...(unclear). What subjects--did you find that you were good or had proficiency with reading or with writing or with math or science? And did you--were any of those things coming into being? Speaker 2: I think math. I think I was good in math, the multiplication tables. And I had a lot of time to practice that kind of thing. And reading, I'm trying to think of what kind of books I had. I don't remember any "book" books--funny books and stuff. I just think I had time to look at things. And when I did go to school, often in the wintertime, I couldn't go out to play. It seems to me that my asthma was less severe in the summertime, and I would go out, because I can remember going out playing. I never could go swimming. I was allergic to chickens. And in the early forties, they had live chicken stores. You would go to the chicken store on 35th just west of King Drive, South Parkway at that time. And you would pick out the chicken and they would kill the chicken and you'd take it home. And when I walked in the store, it would just be instant asthma. I did it twice. The doctor said I couldn't swim because of my asthma. You couldn't get wet and cool off. So, there were limitations. But I played baseball, and I played football, and hide and seek, and bean blowers, and all kind of stuff that a normal kid would do. Speaker 1: Did you... well, okay, let's go to... Was junior high the next... Did you go to elementary through eighth or-- Speaker 2: Through eighth grade. Story_ID: 56098 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, where did you end up going to high school? Speaker 1: Tilden Technical High School [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And that was an interesting story. Because the guys in my backyard, we didn't want to go to the high school that was two blocks from us, Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Because we would go up there to the little dances, and there was this red streetcar that ran down 47th Street; we wanted to get on the red streetcar. And so, we signed up to go to Tilden Tech; you could sign this sheet. It wasn't that you had to have good academics or anything. It was just kind of, in that day it was a kind of a magnet school without any standards. (Laughter). And it is incredible how dumb we were. First of all, we found that it was an all boys' school. Second, we found that it was a technical high school. What's a technical high school? I don't know. And they made you take chemistry and physics and algebra and geometry and trigonometry. Given a choice for those subjects, I probably wouldn't have taken any of them. But it was absolutely mandatorily required, and we just stumbled into this school. Now, dumb luck--I call it grace, you know. But it's amazing how unsophisticated we were. Story_ID: 56099 Speaker 1: And this is your friends and you? Speaker 2: Yes. Those that graduated from, with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of, who were some of their names? Speaker 2: Hollis Wilson, and I just went to his wife's 62nd birthday party; I've got some pictures of him. Billy Taylor... Who else went to Tilden [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] with us at the time? John Roberts... some of his... the guys... about four or five of us were going to just do something different. And it wasn't a big deal, really. Speaker 1: Were you close friends, all four of you? Speaker 2: Not especially. Speaker 1: All good students? Speaker 2: Not especially. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: There was no--I said close friends. I guess there was one or two really close friends. But when you that have many kids to play... You all kind of were close. We, you know, we all... My poor kids when they were growing up, we'd go out and then there would be no one to play with on this nice little block. I literally had forty, fifty, sixty kids my age. You hang with this group. One group is going over here, so you go there. One group is going over there, so you go with them. And you just, there was always something going on. Speaker 1: Now when you say Phillips, are you talking about Wendell Phillips? Speaker 2: Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, because... oh, you're shortcutting it. Because I was going to say there's DuSable, there's Wendell Phillips, and there's, what's the third one? Speaker 2: Dunbar. Story_ID: 56100 Speaker 1: The other question I have for you, though... I have, I thought that here in Chicago with the technical schools-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that those were harder to get into. But you said there were no standards at Tilden [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I thought that they, there weren't a lot of black students who typically went to the technical schools. Speaker 2: We got to Tilden, and it was about one-third black. And the rest, I forget how many Hispanics. And we grew up in Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois]; we thought that any black guy could whip four or five white guys. But these were the baddest white guys I'd ever seen in my life. And they had a school store, and we had a school store. There was no segregation, but you went in this store and they went in the store a half a block away. At lunchtime sometimes we'd start calling each other names and throwing rocks at each other. And then bell would ring; we would go into school. And I remember my drafting partner was Al Radivitz. And we would go there and we would just laugh. Boy, you know, we were friends. But when you left there you go to your store and their store, and we'd call each other names. But it was just friends. Speaker 1: Now, how did the class structure and the programs--how did it challenge you? You said all those courses were mandatory. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I think that given no choice, we took these courses. And amazingly, I mean, not that algebra was easy, but I think after taking algebra and trigonometry and geometry, we soon found we could do what other people could do. We didn't have any social life that evolved around the school like we would have had at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. That would have been great. But I think it was, it was my first inter-racial contact, going to Tilden Tech. And it was a bad relationship initially, because you still thought badly about them, and they thought badly about you. You talked that stuff, but again when you're personal friends, you know, you felt okay. It wasn't until I went to a church conference when I was about fifteen, and started to have some inter-racial contacts that were positive, that I began to really know that gee, they're no different than we are; there are good people and there are bad people. Speaker 1: Were the teachers encouraging? Did you have people there who were nurturing you along? Speaker 2: Yes, I would say, and most of them were white. We had a couple of black shop teachers. But they were encouraging--the chemistry teacher, the physics teacher. The blacks took Spanish, you had to take a language. And I just know if you were black, you took Spanish. You know, "habla Espanol" baby, you know. (Laughter). And I can remember Mrs. Gall, she was the Spanish teacher. And I just, I wondered what kind of people we were. We were not really nice little guys, you know; I was the little nice person. Story_ID: 56101 Speaker 1: But I don't, I don't recall there being tremendous discipline problems. About six or seven years ago, I went to Tilden [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] to give the commencement address. And I've given commencements at high schools and elementary schools--many, many schools. And the conduct of the students and the parents were the worst that I have ever entailed. The principal of the school was the sister of a guy I had gone to school with at Tilden. And it was African-American and Hispanics. Now, it's co-ed. And I remember pointing out one of the girls in the audience. She said she's literally homeless... she stays this relative, that relative. Sometimes she just stays out. And it's really a very poor area. And it's a generalized school, it's not a technical high school. So, suppose that resource wasn't there available to me. Suppose I had a choice on taking math or not taking math. Who knows? Speaker 2: Where you would have ended up. Speaker 1: Where I would have ended up. Story_ID: 56102 Speaker 1: Now church, was it an important part of your life? The only reason that I mention that is that--well, I had wanted to ask it earlier. But you also said that it was in a church school program, or a church camp, that you had your first inter-racial-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We went to a conference. Church [simultaneous]-- Speaker 1: Church conference? Speaker 2: Yeah. Church has always been a part of my life. I can remember we grew up going to a Baptist church, and was baptized in the Baptist church. And when I was about eight years old, my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] left that church. He was a deacon and there was some kind of disagreement; he left there. And I remember going up to Metropolitan Community Church at 41st and King Drive. We were at 37th, so it was four blocks. And we went, we started to the daily Vacation Bible School because they gave you chocolate milk and graham crackers. So, we would go up there. And they had stuff--you could color, you could do stuff. But then you got the chocolate milk and graham crackers. And we went that, we went two months that summer for just that purpose. Isn't it--what a hook. And then we got into the junior church there... kids our age. We got into a little choir there. Story_ID: 56103 Speaker 1: And through my eleven, twelve, thirteen, through high school, the first time I ever went anywhere was... We were fifteen, I think. We went to New York to the National Council of Community Churches. We met kids from Canada, and we would... it was almost like aliens. Kids from Boston [Massachusetts] would be talking about Oboot and the Bubbler, and we would be talking about, "Hey, man, what's happening?" And we would just sit and talk to each other and just die laughing. And we just enjoyed it. And then the next year, we went to Whittier, California. And we went on a train, and the train would take our church cars, and they'd let us--then another train would pick us up. But that nurturing... that was our first exposure to something other than Jackson, Tennessee. I was in church all through high school. And we, we, we, that's where we hung out. It was kind of like a little gang. I mean we dated together, our little junior church gang. Oh, we weren't perfect, but we wouldn't smoke in front of Reverend Wesby. We wouldn't curse in front of Reverend Wesby. We'd curse behind his back, but we were not hanging on the corners. As a matter of fact, they started--the tough guys started called us sissies, you know. But we had a little gang, this gang we grew up with in the church. And then when I went away to college, I first went to Navy Pier [University of Illinois-Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois]. But when I went down to Champaign [University of Illinois-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] for my last two years, the church helped to pay my tuition. And the room and board was four hundred dollars--oh, my God. I mean, that was so much money. And they paid my room and board. My father paid the rest of the stuff--my mother and my father. But then you would bring your grades back. And even being a college student--sophisticated, you know, and cool--at you know, eighteen, and nineteen and twenty years old--it just would make me feel so good when they looked at my grades, the trustees, and they would be talking about "My boy" this, and "Boy, look at that" and "That was great." And you think it didn't mean anything. But I see now that I really thrived on it. I would thrive on my mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] being happy with my grades. I mean that's what I would do; I would bring it so they would be happy. Story_ID: 56104 Speaker 1: But I graduated from college and then I was elected to the Trustee Board at church [Metropolitan Community Church] at age twenty-one... twenty-two. And I served on the Trustee Board for thirty-eight years at church, thirty-eight years. And I just retired from the Trustee Board in '99' [1999], and I joined the choir. I didn't want to die... everyone dies on the Trustee Board when they're ninety-five years old. And I didn't want to die... I wanted to... We have so many young, bright people coming, and they tend to put more weight on my opinion than it's worth. And I wanted to show that I could use my gifts for something else. So I joined the choir, and it's been magnificent. And I know so many kids that were, grew up in the church--little ushers--and now they're professionals. I got so many of them jobs at Com Ed. So many... two engineers where their mama brought them to me and said, "What is an engineer?" And they are engineers. So, the church has been the foundation. My best friends are with the church. Our pastor is forty-one, forty-two. He's our pastor, but he's our son, too. He's our really good friend. So many people at church who I am proud of. Story_ID: 56105 Speaker 1: And our church is not--and I love Trinity and I love Apostolic, because they have such wonderful ministries. But we are not a middle-class church. My, my, my position has been high. But I try--I would lose my rapport if somehow I was revered. And there's just a couple of people yet that still call me "Little Cordell." I've been there all my life. Speaker 2: Now, what church is this? Speaker 1: Metropolitan Community Church. Speaker 2: Okay. And you said, it's forty-- Speaker 1: Forty-First and King Drive, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Now, it's a Baptist church then, right? Now is it? Your (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's inter-denominational. There's about a hundred community churches around the country. It has to do more with the governance. There's no bishops or anything; the congregation hires and fires. But it's generally a Methodist order of service. But it's like most black churches today--whether they're Episcopalian, Methodist or what, they're evangelistic. We get happy. (Laughter). Okay. We don't dance, but we do get happy. Speaker 2: You're not Pentecostal (unclear)? Speaker 1: We're not Pentecostal. But I just find almost every church--every black church today is, that there's a lot more emotion in the church in what you do and what you sing. And I think my greatest satisfaction is being--I don't sing very well, but I'm a part of the ministry; I'm a part of that Sunday's ministry. Story_ID: 56106 Speaker 1: Now let's... just... I want to understand one other thing in high school [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. You're from parents who, you know, were not educated. You know, they got an elementary school education, but not past that, right? Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: And yet you said that they were encouraging of you going to school. And in the black community a lot of times there's a, you know, "Get a good job." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I mean not even necessarily go to college and get a good job, especially, you know, maybe at the time that you came along. So, I'm wondering where did college, where did the mindset about college first come? Speaker 2: I don't know if I ever thought of not going to college. I can remember doing okay at Tilden [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I graduated in the upper quarter of the class. And I know me and Hollis and Earl and Arthur, we were looking in the catalog for Navy Pier, which was the University of Illinois Chicago in '54' [1954], just before we graduated in '55' [1955]. And it had mechanical engineering. And you used math and science to convert materials to everyday useful activities. And we said that sounds cool. That's what we said in those days, "That was cool." So, about five black guys went down to Navy Pier. I don't even think we--well, I know we knew of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And you had to take a test to go to Howard. And only one, Arthur Wallace--there was only one guy that passed that test to go to Howard University and get a full scholarship. We knew about Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. My cousin played basketball. And the cost, if you weren't an athlete, the cost of going to a historically black college would-- Story_ID: 56107 Speaker 1: But you were talking about, you know, U of I [University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and going there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But my, I guess what I'm trying to... when did the... I know it was always a thought... you were talking about how your cousin went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, and there was this issue. And you five guys decided you were going to go to U of I-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --here in Chicago. So, how long were you in Chicago [Illinois] before you transferred down to--? Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: Three years. Speaker 2: And the trick to Navy Pier [University of Chicago-Navy Pier, currently University of Chicago-Illinois, Chicago, Illinois] was that it cost ninety dollars a semester. And you could get on the elevated and go down there. You didn't have to pay room and board. So, we went to Navy Pier. Just about all of the five guys who had gone to Tilden Tech [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], we went to Navy Pier. And there was an awakening there. Because although we were strong in math, they asked us when we came there to write a theme. And I remember we asked each other what was a theme? Because our math was strong, and our science was strong. But our rhetoric, we had never heard of the term rhetoric. So, again, how things happened. We could get in Rhetoric 100. If you didn't pass the test, you could take a year of Rhetoric without credit. So, we did. We didn't write the theme, because we didn't know what a theme was. My first year there I can recall my two best friends, Earl Collimore and Arthur Diggs. We were about mid-way through the first semester and they said, "Let's join the Marines," and that we could do this and that; we could go to California. We didn't know what California was hardly. And I can remember going home that weekend and telling my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] that me and Earl and Art are going to join the Marines. And he said, "The hell you are." Now, this man didn't curse, but he was emphatic. I don't know... that sense he had, he just knew it was wrong. He didn't know college, he just knew it was wrong. And he was just so emphatic about it. Not that he threatened to beat me up, but I've always wanted to have his love, you know, his approval. Well, Earl and Arthur went to the Marines. They went out to California and Tijuana. And Earl... I finished... You're supposed to... U of I Chicago was usually a two year school, but it took me three years to go through, because in engineering there were more subjects to take. And then I went down Champaign to [University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois]. It's just, I did okay; I did well there. I had a good background. Story_ID: 56108 Speaker 1: I had the love of living at home. After my first year, we moved out of Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] to Englewood, to Paradise. We actually had a washer and a dryer in our basement. We had our own house; it was Paradise. And again, I think I had the ethic of studying hard. My little thing has always been if I can work harder than the next person, I usually would do okay. And Lord knows, I don't want to interpret that as: "How did you succeed?" "Because I worked hard." I succeeded because of the grace of God. I mean I know that; I don't just say it. Because all of these things weren't serendipity. They... all things happened for a purpose. But if I work hard at something, even today, even in retirement, if I do something--if I work hard I can generally do as well as anyone. If I don't work hard, then I generally don't do very well. Did, now this work ethic, was it something that came through your family or the church environment? What, you know... was that talked about a lot--if you worked hard you could succeed? If you-- Speaker 2: It wasn't taught, but there was my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.]... My last two years of high school, from the time I was fifteen to the time I was seventeen, I worked at the Yellow Cab garage three hours a day from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. seven days a week... Christmas, holidays. I had more money then than I ever had. I mean I only got paid a dollar an hour, but I would gas the cars; I would figure out, add up the money for the cabdrivers. And I was Little... I was Junior. And when I reflect back, I say, you know, it's hard to think... I remember on Christmas going to work. I remember on Thanksgiving going to work. But I did it, my father was there. And they all treated me special, I was Junior. So, I don't know where... I guess it came from my father. He was--he didn't have to preach it, he did it... he did it. He had hard physical work, and he did it. Story_ID: 56109 Speaker 1: Now, sir, what about the engineering? How did you decide that, you know, why engineering and not math? And what were you thinking? And what kind of engineering were you thinking then? Speaker 2: It was truly just happenstance going to Tilden [Edward Tilden Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and taking all of those subjects, without any context for them. Because the entire time I was at Tilden, I never met an engineer, I never knew an engineer. My uncle and... no one was an engineer. Reading about mechanical engineering in the college catalog and through the three years at Navy Pier [University of Chicago-Navy Pier, currently University of Chicago-Illinois, Chicago, Illinois], I never had a job in engineering. I delivered mail, I was a busboy. Down at Navy Pier I met people who were engineers, professors. Champaign [University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] two years, never had a job in engineering at all. And I graduated in the upper quarter of the class out of the University of Illinois. I was the third black mechanical engineer to ever graduate. We've had civil engineers. Story_ID: 56110 Speaker 1: I was in the upper quarter of the class in 1960; interviewed with fifty-eight companies. The lady in the placement office said that was a record. And I received two offers. Companies said, "We think you might do okay with the professional staff, but we're worried about the union. How would they accept you?" Nineteen Sixty, [1960] it was booming. I can remember a buddy of mine, he's still a buddy... I won't call his name. (Laughter). He ended up being the head of an architectural engineering firm. He was in the lower quarter of the class, and got ten offers. He got offers from people he didn't even interview with. Some of the people would just look at my black face and just say, "Oh, my God, I just wasn't prepared to talk to you. And, let me go back and see what we think of it." But my two offers, one was from an architectural engineering firm, and one was from Commonwealth Edison. But I don't know why I said Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison]. The Lord kind of led me there, and I was the third black engineer that Com Ed had hired. Story_ID: 56111 Speaker 1: And they put me in training. The tough part of it was being almost like a freak. People wouldn't know what to say, you know. "Do you know Joe Louis?" you know. If I stepped on their foot, they would say, "Thank you," rather than "Get off my foot." And in the central office it was--I would look up, they'd be looking at me, and they'd look down. And that was tough because I remember telling--I wasn't married--telling my mother [Carrie Bell Reed], you know, I would just as soon go back to the post office, I was so uncomfortable. But then after the first year of training I was assigned to a generating station, one that's within five miles of here, our Fisk Coal-Fired generating station, and it was dirty. We were engineers and chemists, and you work in the hot with the boilers and the turbine generators. And it's almost like being in a foxhole--you meld together. All of a sudden you're not black, you're just another dirty smelly guy tackling technical problems. And I got to be really friends with people just about everywhere. Story_ID: 56112 Speaker 1: Just about everywhere I had been throughout my whole company career of 37 years, I was the only black person, and that's not good. I think I was able to succeed because I was such an unusual person, I was just different. Everyone knew I was there. It's not that way now. I think being so dark, and when I opened up my mouth I speak English, I would take people unexpectedly. They would I think magnify my thoughts, because there was this real dark guy who could actually talk. And I think my talking--I was learning how to mimic, because I've always lived in two worlds, and I'm so happy now that I've maintained the two worlds. I'd lived my whole life in a ten mile circle, around Provident Hospital I lived my entire life. I drove sixty miles one way each day for three and a half years. And I wouldn't move to Morris, Illinois with my children because of my church [Metropolitan Community Church] and because of my friends. And I would learn how to talk white, but if you hear my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] talk, you know, it's not shrimps it's swimps. It's not advertising it's admatising. And I've never, ever, ever had to ask my mother [Carrie Bell Reed] or father "What do you mean?" People at church, you know, I never have to ask them what they mean because I was very, very well-versed with the language. On the other hand, when I'm out on the other side, I talk like they talk. So it has, it has, I've had these two worlds, I've have fantastic friends who are white in the company, but I always maintained the black community and my church. And even my biggest dilemma today is I say, "Well, you know, I would like to live in Orlando [Florida] for four or five months, or Las Vegas [Nevada]." And we keep looking at these places, and it all gets back to I don't want to leave my church. We're going out Friday night with two mem- two couples from church. It's a good thing. If I had moved to Winnetka or Naperville, Glenview where it would have been logical--Downers Grove, during my career where it would have been logical and assimilated there, in retirement where the church and the friendships are even more important to me than when I worked, the simple people of character, people who don't brag about how great they are, people who don't--where money is not a big deal. I would have missed that. I would have missed seeing these kids grow into adults and becoming leaders of the church, and my greatest joy is from that. So, I'm so happy I lived in two worlds. Story_ID: 56113 Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting to me. You graduated in 1960, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was Chicago [Illinois] like in the 1960's? And why do you think... and I'm wondering, who were the engineers who preceded you at, you know, Commonwealth Edison? Who were the black engineers? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: And when did they come through? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I know them quite well. John Vierra... Well, he wasn't the first. First, Lester Dugas. Lester Dugas... boy, he was out of the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], an electrical engineer, long the spokesman for Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison]. He was in charge of the south side area. Good friend, in a social club together. And then John Vierra. And John is out of Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] or some good school like that, and John lives up north. And I think John Vierra I think was the first corporate vice president, black corporate vice president. And obviously we live in a small world, so we all know each other. But John Vierra and Lester Dugas. Now, I'm told... I know another friend who graduated, not from one of the Big Ten schools, but an engineering degree from a minor school. But an engineering degree, who never got past being a draftsman... never got past being a draftsman; they didn't recognize his degree. Story_ID: 56114 Speaker 1: 1960, probably only a Commonwealth Edison would have hired me. It was before '63' [1963] and the Civil Rights Movement. Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison] today I think is--they serve everyone. They are regulated by the city and the state. I was the chief diversity officer. But I think they had a tendency to be more liberal--historically had a tendency to be more liberal. Again, that was a gift, to go to... to go to a company where... I've sat on panels in the sixties [1960s] and the seventies [1970s] where I've been embarrassed. I hear my colleagues at other corporations talk about how they were programmed to fail, and how people withheld information from them, and how they treated them. And I would be embarrassed, because I wasn't programmed to fail. People... people related to me. People... my bosses generally helped me. I worked construction at a nuclear power plant in '68' [1968] during the George Wallace campaign. And I was called the 'n' word a lot, okay. But my fellow workers--my colleagues, my bosses--there were a few exceptions--maybe I worked for a jerk or two. From the time I worked in that first coal-fired station, to going down to Dresden Station in a nuclear power plant, to working my way up to the executive level, I had support. Speaker 2: Do you think it was because it's a technical area, or utility? I mean, this is-- Speaker 1: I think it was because--I keep saying this because I honestly believe it--because I was unusual. I think I was maybe the role model for that exception. You know, "the rest of them weren't like me," you know. But I was that exception. And again, I think I keep surprising people. I would give a great talk. I'm bragging. It's not that I'm bragging, it's why. When I first started giving talks, I would have to be careful of the tense, you know, "have" "has"... I would talk like my mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and father [Clevon Reed, Sr.] talked, you know, talked like the people at church talked. So, I would memorize the talk to get the tense correct, and to get the words correct. And so I would take extra time, extra time, extra time. And by the time I gave the talk, I wouldn't have to read it, I would have memorized it. And that came across as a good talk. Story_ID: 56115 Speaker 1: So, the other thing though is you are from... you still--even though you've been in school and everything and been exposed--your environment is not a corporate environment. And that's why I'm trying to understand. Maybe because of it being, you know, engineering. I'm just trying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Well, I think-- Speaker 1: But I'm just saying how... what... let me ask this question. What, what lessons were you learning? I mean, you know, it's one thing, you know, to go to school. But you know, to start sort of in a corporation and, you know, and its whole environment--were there certain important lessons that you learned, you know, early on that put you in good stead later? Speaker 2: Yeah. This issue that you're grappling with is a good one. And let me see if I can relate that to it. It had something to do with me working in a generating station, that acceptance. Because I think you're right on. If I had come out of school and stayed in the corporate office, that environment would not--I never would have gotten close to people. In a generating station, you're helping each other. You're sweating... you're, you're... you're... it's five of us on the tech staff and we're... a problem occurs and we have to rely on each other's skills--running and getting stuff, and helping each other. And in that generating station, we became close. I became the head. There's not the visibility in the generating station being the tech staff engineer as if I was downtown being the corporate. This was the sixties. Sixty-Three [1963] and Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the whole Civil Rights Movement, it became very popular for companies in the sixties and in the early seventies to be in favor of the overt racial discrimination. It just was so bad that people couldn't support that. And I think I benefitted from that also. Story_ID: 56116 Speaker 1: But to answer your question, for the first ten years of my corporate career I worked in generating stations--coal fired stations. And then, three and a half years at a nuclear power plant--the only person, only engineer in any of those environments that entire time. I think I got to be--I think I get along pretty well with people. I think I naturally relate to people. After that coal fired station and becoming the tech staff engineer over about five engineers and four instrument technicians, I think I learned some supervisory skills. In the nineties [1990s] and 2000, it pays not to be autocratic. It pays to be a softer, gentler "Jack Welsh-ish" type floor manager, who gets it done by teamwork and involvement and like that. And I generally find that women and African-Americans and Asians and Hispanics are humble people. They are a natural. They're usually not arrogant. I think that my natural inclination is to be humble, not to be arrogant. And those skills were always appreciated, even in the sixties and seventies and the eighties. I think that helped me. Going down to a nuclear power plant in 1967 was an extraordinary thing for anyone. But it was a super extraordinary thing for an African-American. I can't think of another African-American who would have been participating in the start-up testing of the world's largest nuclear reactor at that time. And they took four of us who were the tech staff engineers of a coal-fired station. And we knew thermodynamics; we knew chemistry; we knew plant and equipment. And we went down to train in nuclear physics and health physics and reactor operations. And what we were doing, no one had ever done on this size unit. We were the first four people in the United States that went through a commercial nuclear power plant simulator. You hear of airline pilots with simulators. We were the absolute first ones in the United States to go to our nuclear plant, I think in the world. And we were doing things first, first. So then I think my reputation started to build, not so much as being an African-American, but being one of the early nuclear guys. Story_ID: 56117 Speaker 1: And again, as I started to be in charge of people and during... during the period at Dresden from '67' [1967] to '71' [1971], I had to deal with a lot of construction workers. And construction workers are like truck drivers; they swear, they stand out at the car and drink beer at thirty degrees. And I was called some names from afar, but generally if a construction worker was working with me under my supervision, there was a rapport; there was kindness there. But I literally drove sixty miles one way each day to Dresden Station from the south side of Chicago [Illinois], within my ten mile circle. Because I had three little black boys, and we would have been the second black people in Morris, Illinois if I had moved there like they had offered. The other was just one guy, he didn't have a family; he worked down there. And although my boys were six, seven, very young--two, three... I still wanted them to go to my church [Metropolitan Community Church]. I wanted them to play with other black kids--black and white kids; we were in an integrated area. And the Lord took me down those sixty miles and I worked rotating shift work for a year and a half. I don't think I could do it now, but the car never broke down. My greatest fear was the car would break down, and I would have to go in someone's house and knock on one of those farmhouse doors and ask to use their phone. (Laughter). But after working at Dresden for three and a half years, and after working at a coal-fired station and becoming a tech staff engineer, I was a technical expert. I was... few people in the country that had my experience. And when I came downtown then into the corporate office, in the engineering office, I came down with status. I was something. I was one of the guys who had actually worked in the field and not just the central office. But again, I can tell you, my boss was great. He, he was great; supportive, helping me to get involved. His boss was great to me. And as the Lord would do it, shortly after being down there--my boss was the project engineer for a new nuclear power plant we were building, it was only a design (unclear). But after I was downtown about six months, he got promoted to go... to go someplace else. I became the project engineer. Story_ID: 56118 Speaker 1: And one of my first jobs when I came out of college to Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison] was to participate in the start-up testing, the full power testing of Dresden Unit 1. And although I knew nothing about nuclear, we were testing mechanical equipment, and I got the chance to meet the early pioneers in nuclear power at that time. Speaker 2: So, let's talk about the nuclear industry-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --at the point that you were, you know, what was happening in the country. There was a lot of excitement about this. Speaker 1: There was a lot of excitement. There was a lot of animosity toward nuclear power, and the fears of radiation and the fears of a plant's design and safety. And again, because of that, I think that I really achieved some notoriety. I became the nuclear expert. And when Three Mile Island happened in 1979 where there were severe nuclear field damage and radiation steam, and two thousand newsmen--I was the person going to the news and on the Kup Show [Irv Kupcinet Show]. And when Chernobyl happened in '86' [1986], I was the person, I was the person that would give talks to the analysts, security analysts. And if I had been in charge of the commercial area where there was no mystique, nothing unusual, probably I would not have had the opportunity to do what I did. Story_ID: 56119 Speaker 1: Now, but what was this thing? Explain what this thing was, nuclear power. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Why it was viewed with--why the utilities, you know, the utility line of Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison] was--why did they put so much energy in that arena? And resources? Speaker 2: The traditional ways of generating electricity is to burn coal or oil or gas in a furnace, and to boil water into steam, and the steam turns a turbine generator to make the electricity. And although Commonwealth Edison got into nuclear early, kind of as a novelty, when I worked at the coal-fired station in Illinois we burned Illinois coal, and it put out a lot of sulfur dioxide and smoke and stuff. And the city, in the sixties when clean air became kind of important, banned high sulfur coal. And we ended up buying coal from Wyoming and Montana, very expensive. Two-thirds of the cost was the transportation of the coal. So, Commonwealth and the city of Chicago [Illinois] had an incentive to try to explore other means of generating electricity. We couldn't use cheap coal anymore. And that's how we became a pioneer in the area of nuclear power. Story_ID: 56120 Speaker 1: Was there any other type of power generators... Was there any other type of thing that was competing but nuclear power won out at that time? You know when coal, when coal was waning, was there any other direction that the... you know, the utilities could have gone? Speaker 2: During the seventies there was a lot of talk about wind power and solar power. And the problem with those concepts is just they were not economically viable. Although people wanted the environment, they're not willing to pay a third more or half more for their electricity. And wind power... and Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison] just bought a wind generation field. But they're very large... solar is very inefficient, because a lot of the heat goes away to the water; it doesn't make steam. So, nuclear really was competing with coal, gas, and oil. And Com Ed had the vision that there's uranium... Well, how you get uranium is that you mine uranium out in areas like near Denver, Colorado. And that uranium is then sent to a fuel fabrication plant; it's changed into a gas and it's made into nuclear fuel. And this nuclear fuel is generally pretty cheap, and it's pretty abundant. And then, when you put the nuclear fuel in the reactor and you cause a fissoning process, it causes heat and makes that steam for the turbine generator. But the concern is that while it does that, it becomes highly radioactive. And if somehow you were to be exposed to this fuel, it would kill you immediately. If you put it on the highway, you couldn't drive past it fast enough. So, the whole effort has been that you have this potentially highly radioactive thing that could kill people. In the forty-plus years of commercial nuclear power in this country, no one has ever been killed by radiation. Story_ID: 56121 Speaker 1: That has--in the Soviet Union, Chernobyl, 1986, there was this core meltdown, and there were fires and people were killed by the fires there. But because of the concern about radiation, and the real fear of people, I think the nuclear industry really made some errors. Because in the sixties [1960s] when people asked about the safety of nuclear power plants, we said that it was a secret; we can't tell you. And in the seventies [1970s] when the environmentalists would make these extraordinary claims, these horrible claims... they would say anything. I think we, the industry lost its credibility. And we engineers, you know, would say, "Don't worry, public. Your chances of being killed by radiation is only ten to the minus seventh," which meant something to us, but to the public they were saying, "Oh my God, ten to the minus seventh. Oh, I'm afraid of that." But it took us a while before we learned how to speak English that people can understand, to understand the real fear of people about radiation, which it seemed ridiculous to us. But as most geeks, you know, things don't seem the same to us... that I think we started to gain some credibility. Story_ID: 56122 Speaker 1: People will be in favor of nuclear power again. First of all, nuclear is accepted today. In the seventies [1970s] and the eighties [1980s] there were a lot of protests about nuclear power plants. And they were evolved around these two things: One, potential that the radiation in that plant could get out or hurt someone or hurt employees; that was one issue. The other issues, what do you do with the nuclear fuel once you are finished with it? Once it becomes radioactive, it stays radioactive for tens of thousands of years. And today, as when I retired, we're storing this fuel in spent fuel pools at the plants. Having twenty or thirty feet of water above the fuel is enough to attenuate the radiation. You can walk around the fuel pool; you can work around the fuel pool. But the government was supposed to take this highly radioactive nuclear fuel and to take it to Yucca Mountain [Nevada]. They were to take the fuel, cut it up into small pieces, convert it to a vitrify it--convert it to a glass--and store it underground in deep caverns. And after about a thousand years the radiation, most of the tough one is gone away. And the government yet today is still debating Yucca Mountain. The House just approved Yucca Mountain and the Senate has yet to debate it. And in the meantime we store our spent fuel at Zion Station, and at the hundred nuclear sites around this country. Story_ID: 56123 Speaker 1: So, I don't mean to minimize at all the concerns about the safety of nuclear power. But in the early seventies [1970s] I was out talking to universities, to the public. I was on TV, I was debating people--mostly debating environmentalists--housewives who would make allegations. And I'm an environmentalist, and they can say anything. But what I said, I had to back up. And I said then that I couldn't get the brightest engineers--we were getting some of the brightest engineers to come and work in the nuclear program--if they felt it was dangerous, if they felt it was dangerous to the public. And now I can look back thirty years and say coal-fired plants have killed people. They were overcome by methane gas and from the coal. But no one has ever been killed by radiation at a nuclear plant. But the toughest accident was Three Mile Island. It was radioactive steam in the containment. If someone had stood at the site boundary for the eleven days after the accident, they would have gotten the amount of about two chest x-rays in terms of radiation. So now, I think people don't have that fear that a nuclear power plant is going to explode. They don't have the fear that radiation is killing people slowly, and especially when they understand the price of coal and what is really astronomically the price of gas and oil--that there's an acceptance of nuclear power. If ever there was a nuclear accident anywhere I think in this country, that--it would be a different story. Story_ID: 56124 Speaker 1: But the point is that nuclear power today supplies, I don't know, about twenty percent of this country's electrical supply. And the country don't have a lot of options. We desperately need nuclear, but we need coal, we need gas, we need oil also. And so it's not a matter of let's do away with nuclear someday. Today at Commonwealth Edison, nuclear is the most economical source of electrical generation; that is a fact. On your electrical bill when we're using nuclear, you get a fuel adjustment clause; your bill is lower. And when you're using gas and oil, your bill is higher. Story_ID: 56125 Speaker 1: So, I can tell you that being a part of the controversy and being on many news shows, being on many debates... I remember going up to the University of Wisconsin--I'm sorry, going to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to give a talk to, I thought, students. But when I got up, instead of me talking, they were interrupting me and challenging me--you know, some anti's. But being a part of that, I think I learned how to communicate. And I think I really benefitted in the company from becoming the nuclear expert and being a spokesman, and being honestly involved with the safety of the plants and being in involved with making it a safe source of generation. All of that I think helped me to become what I became, and that was a top executive over a top technology. Story_ID: 56126 Speaker 1: Just one other thing on the--on nuclear versus electrical engineering (unclear). But so, you have really significant on-the-job training as it relates to that. How are the two similar in terms of discipline nuclear engineering and electrical, and how do they differ? Speaker 2: During the thirteen years that I was chief nuclear officer, I had about... two thousand of my six thousand people were engineers or technical experts. And in a nuclear power plant, we need experts; we need nuclear engineers. We need nuclear engineers to analyze the core operations and predict what's going to happen. And you have to be a certified nuclear engineer. We need electrical engineers to do trouble-shooting on sophisticated electrical circuits. We need health physicists, people who are trained in radiation protection. And we need mechanical engineers. However, in the progression of management, an engineer who is a mechanical electrical who can learn other disciplines... "I'm a mechanical, but you give me a year and I can learn what the nukes and what the electrical and what the civils are doing." That has been the key to success. A plant manager is a person who has about eight or nine hundred people. He or she has a budget of over a hundred million dollars. They have to understand all of the disciplines. And for those who have that ability are the ones that succeed. I think that my success has been that I have been able to learn all of the disciplines. As a matter of fact, of the twenty-five hundred or so engineers, most of them were mechanical and electrical. We had a department, a nuclear fuel management department that reported up to me that had seventy people, and sixty of them either had PhD's or masters in nuclear engineering. They did a certain design. But the people who really progressed the fastest was the person that's in charge of the whole station, bargaining group people, mechanics, engineers, administrative people, accounting people. So in engineering, often in corporations, the person who grasps all of the technical disciplines and the key--who has the ability to deal with people--are usually those who succeeded. So, what makes the nuclear industry unusual is that it needs some nuclear engineers. But what makes it unusual, it needs a lot of other specialties, too. Story_ID: 56127 Speaker 1: Now what did you know that... was it in... When did you--was it between '77' [1977] and '79' [1979], or between... well, that you knew that you were being tapped for, or being mentored along? When did that become apparent to you? Speaker 2: I think that...when I came downtown after ten and a half years in the station, it wasn't apparent to me in the generation stations that I was upward mobile. Even getting this very unusual assignment at Dresden Station, it still wasn't clear to me whether or not that meant that I would be a good technical person. But when I came downtown to the engineering department and my boss got transferred and I became in charge of a nuclear, a new nuclear plant, my bosses were always supportive. And I started to be upward mobile. I became, in '71' [1971], I came to be the project engineer of LaSalle County. In '75' [1975], I had progressed that I was in charge of the entire station nuclear engineering department. And we had about a hundred engineers responsible for the engineering of our three operating plants--Quad Cities, Dresden and Zion. But moreover we had engineers responsible for the design of three large nuclear plants under construction. It was the largest nuclear commitment of anyone in the country. And then after having that job for two years--and at that time I could not have been a token--I was dealing with the company's most critical business. I became an assistant vice president and I was responsible for nuclear licensing. That sounds simple, but that job was going to Washington [D.C.] about once a week taking the 6:20 a.m. flight out and getting the 7 p.m. flight back into O'Hare about once a week, and going to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in Bethesda, Maryland to resolve issues concerning the construction of our plants and the operation of our plants. And I was the company spokesman. It wasn't just a good verbal, but I made the financial commitments that we would or we wouldn't, and that was good experience. And the Environmental Affairs Department reported to me too, which was an education. Story_ID: 56128 Speaker 1: Then in '79 [1979], I became the vice president and chief nuclear officer. And that meant that everyone who operated our plants and maintained our plants; the engineering departments, all of the technical support departments, the PhD's and nuclear fuel management, all reported to me. After Three Mile Island, they wanted one corporate officer in the company to have the overall responsibility for nuclear power in that company that they can bear--bring to bear operations or engineering. There was one person who was responsible, the chief executive officer of the company wasn't; the chief nuclear officer was. And that was the chief nuclear officer of a company with thirteen nuclear units. And no one in the United States had that breadth of commitment. And as I look back, it seems exciting, at the time, it was a normal progression. I attended all of the corporate board meetings, I reported directly to the chairman and chief executive officer of the company. My office was right next to his office. Although I had a third of the company's people reported in my area, six thousand people, I had a budget of $1.5 billion. And we were kind of draining--all of the money was going into nuclear, constructing these new nuclear plants. And it was the, it was the major effort and the major issue. And so, I no longer felt that I was a token, I felt that my performance dictated how the company would do. Speaker 2: So you, wait a minute, so you went from assistant vice--I mean station nuclear engineer, then you came downtown. Do you remember the whole decision when you got--did you apply for the position, or were you recruited, or were you tapped? I'm just-- Speaker 1: I was tapped. I remember being in the control room at Dresden, and I got a call from a guy named Nick Curshaw. And he says, "How would you like to come downtown and work in the engineering department?" After driving sixty miles each day (laughter), one way, I said, "You just tell me when." And I was tapped, that was a tap. I went down there and worked for him, before he retired he ended up working for me. Again, not a bad thing, that I was greater than him. It was just how life goes. And he was the same to me when I reported to him as when he reported to me, he never changed. I mean he didn't have me in awe when he reported to me, and he was a good guy. It became apparent to me, I think, that when I came downtown and after being there six months they put me in charge of this new nuclear power plant. And there was no way of saying it that was a major responsibility. And again, you know you can call it dumb luck or chance. But the people who move, someone died, how in just four years I was in charge of the entire nuclear engineering department, it just, it happened. I think, I think I was being guided. But I think at that time that the company had made up their mind that I wasn't the black engineer, I was, I was an up and comer. Story_ID: 56129 Speaker 1: The reason, Mr. Reed, this sounds so amazing is that, you know, a lot of people have been on these corporate tracks. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in most cases, I mean even if we--you know, as we sit in 2002, they have not... they've been...they may even get there at a time when the companies are going down-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or having trouble. And a lot, and then there's the other part of the equation that not many people got line item responsibility. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They got public relations-- Speaker 2: You had a-- Speaker 1: --public affairs, you know, those, that type of thing. So, I'm just... do you think it was your engineering background... I mean, you know, background that helped? And even if you were an engineer, that didn't mean that you got... because you got... that would you get line item responsibility. And I'm just even wondering, once you got line item responsibility, what were even some of the challenges you faced, or did you face, or--? Speaker 2: Without question in my mind that if I wasn't an engineer--if I was on the commercial side--I would not have had unique experience. And there was nowhere else in the company where there was larger responsibilities. By the time--I had the budget responsibility for the LaSalle County nuclear plant. The plant was a $4.4 billion plant, which is very cheap now in today's... And it was my job to approve things, and to come up with alternate designs. But the company was for real then. I am very, very aware of many people today--and for the last ten years or fifteen years--many people during that time who runs up against the glass ceiling. I mean you can progress to a point, but when it comes to the point where you are the person that's going to be in charge of a thousand people--three thousand people--where you are the person that has to respond to the analysts who rate your stock; when you are the person that has hire or fire responsibility for all sorts of people, no matter what their race or whatever--many of our people run into that glass ceiling, and it's not just the women. I have so many friends who are frustrated by going up halfway and then being stopped by something. They know when they're stopped; you start to do parallel things. So many people get frustrated by having the--being in charge of special markets when those special markets are us. Companies spend so much money recruiting people, training them, and people end up leaving the company. I won't cite the companies. Law firms, you're familiar with law. I know so many people, and you do too, who have left the major law firms. Story_ID: 56130 Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)-- Speaker 1: This issue... this issue you're talking about is so tough, because what I find is that many capable people are being dis-spirited. People who seem like they were at the top--I'm thinking of the guy from Xerox, Barry Rand; he left Xerox to form his own company. I see so many people who reach the almost top, and they go away and form their own companies. And today it's just totally different. I'm not sure at all that I would have been, I would have been that special. In order to perform, you have to be given the opportunity. And if you're never given the tough job, if you're never given... or given the budget responsibility, you never have the chance to prove you can do it. I had the chance to prove I could do it, and the people supported me as I proved I could do it. I think the feedback I get is that today's environment is the exception rather than the rule. The other thing I had going for me, it's that during the sixties [1960s] and the seventies [1970s] and the eighties [1980s] it was ever expanding jobs, ever expanding opportunities. It was always, it was always bigger. We made more units; we got bigger. And, and, there was mobility for maybe not people of color, but there was mobility. Story_ID: 56131 Speaker 1: Now, okay. Let me ask you--when you, you know, you say, you know, you were tapped when you were over at, you know, Dresden and got a call. But what I'm trying to understand are... were there were anything... any... this... I mean heading up a unit, and being a corporate... you know... executive is different than being in a plant, I think? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, and this was... you said there was growth, there was a lot of growth. Didn't we have a recession, though? But that didn't affect the, you know, the utilities? Speaker 2: No. You know, in the seventies-- Speaker 1: In the eighties. Speaker 2: --when we were building stations and bigger, you know, economy of scale (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But in the eighties, the eighties we had the recession--late seventies, early eighties. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it didn't affect Com Ed? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We still... electricity growth was growing. What you're thinking of is that the oil embargo in '74' [1974] resulted in a pause of growth of electricity. Electricity was growing at seven percent a year. In '74' [1974] and '75' [1975] it leveled off, and we did change some of our plans; we slowed down our plants. But yet and still, it was, it was a continual growth in this area. Story_ID: 56132 Speaker 1: But what lessons were you learning about how to be a corporate executive, is what I'm asking? Because there's a cultural part of that, too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I wonder-- Speaker 2: Engineers are taught two plus two is four. And we have a reputation often of not being imaginative, not being creative. I think we are creative, but for mechanical things. There's nothing in the engineering education that really gives you soft skills. We take eight hours--in my day, we took eight hours of non-technical electives. When my son graduated from the U of I [University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] in mechanical engineering in '89' [1989], he had twenty hours of non-technical electives. It used to be in the later part of the sixties [1960s], in the early seventies [1970s], we would select the best engineer to be the station manager, okay. When we got to the eighties [1980s] and the nineties [1990s] that was no longer our criteria. The plants were so big, they were so complicated, that we would select the best leader, one who could relate to people--a person who could say naturally, "Would you do this?" rather than "Do it." One who had overcome their autocratic management styles of the sixties [1960s] and the seventies [1970s]. I had the job of selecting the station managers for our six nuclear plants. And I just know how our criteria changed. And in the eighties [1980s] for our Braidwood plant, I remember I selected a guy who was a minister to head a nuclear power plant. He had been in the nuclear Navy and he knew nuclear power. He had gone to nuclear naval school. But for the last fifteen years, he had been a minister. And what I was looking at, at Braidwood was someone who could be a leader, who could bring groups together, who can teach his subordinates how to give control of groups. In my day, the autocratic manager, we controlled all of the information so that we knew what was going on. And when we got to the eighties [1980s] and the nineties [1990s], it became clearer to us that one person couldn't know it all. So, we want to empower groups; we want to teach consensus rather than just saying, "You do this." We wanted to, we started to hire weird organizational development people... the engineers did. And we started to do Myers-Briggs and learning our personality types. But what was so clear in the eighties [1980s] and the nineties [1990s], it was hard to predict by one's education and one's background whether or not they would then be the person who you felt would be a good leader. Leadership, it is... it is... part of it is humbleness. Some of it is giving up control, communications, dialoging with people rather than talking down with people. And all I can tell you is that you know it when you see it. You know how people react to other people. And then we started to make some very unusual choices in those who were heading up our various departments. So, I think that those kinds of leadership skills were natural to me. I was generally treating people... tried to treat them fairly. And I think they sensed that, and I think that was a real edge. It's nothing that I learned in college. I think my parents have something to do with that. That... there is--when you are arrogant, you can fake it for two weeks and then the real you comes out. When you get mad and you blow up and you talk down to people--about two weeks and the real you will come out. So, just the standards changed, that's all. Story_ID: 56133 Speaker 1: And did you find you had... continued to have mentors, or people who would sort of guide your way? I mean you almost are gaining--I mean aside from the early years which was sort of, you know comical, where you said people were looking at you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They'd step on your toe and say, you know, "Excuse me," or "Thank you." You're painting, you're sort of painting a place that appears to be somewhat color blind. Speaker 2: Oh, no. I think it's the other way. They were not color blind. I'm trying to tell you my color helped me. I think it helped me. No one ever walked up to me and said, "I'm your mentor," okay. But when I was first promoted to an officer, vice president, in 1979, the chairman of the company, Tom Ayers, knew exactly what he was doing. I mean, I think it was a plus. I think given Tom--and you have to know his commitment--his commitment in civic, his commitments in fair housing. He was a fair man. I think given a choice of five people, if one was black and could do the job, I think the black person would have an advantage. So, I'm telling you, the... I think being black was an advantage for me at Commonwealth Edison, a company that was serving a very diverse customer set--a company that had always prided itself in mobility for blacks. But there really wasn't much mobility, you know, up to the upper levels of the top three hundred positions in the company. I think that Tom Ayers and Jim O'Connor, our chairman, were very, very, very aware of me. I think even when I was further down in the chain, I was always visible. People probably would always ask about me. In the corporate meetings that they would have about diversity in those days, they would probably ask, you know, "What blacks are moving?" and like that. The problem we faced so often is that we find many reasons why that woman or that African-American is not good... they don't get along well with people. Usually, you know, they're saying it's the soft skills. Story_ID: 56134 Speaker 1: I was Chief Diversity Officer for three years, and I learned a lot about diversity. And we took our officers away--twenty-three officers for three days of diversity training. It was really tough that they would give up that time. And we concluded that the problem was is that most, the vast majority of the white males, felt they were color blind. That was not good. People like me, I was neurotic in terms of color. I told the story that when my wife and I watch a TV commercial and there's no black people in the commercial, we say, "Black people buy that. Why aren't there black people in the commercial?" And my white colleagues will... they say, "Are you that trivial?" I said, "Yes. The point is that all of the black people who work for you are just like that. When they walk in a place and they see eight people behind the counter and they're all white, they think immediately why aren't there blacks there? When you don't think about it as being unusual." And the epiphany, I think, of that whole session was they couldn't believe what we were telling them. So, they started to get groups of African-Americans and Hispanics and whites who always said things were okay in their area; they started to get them together. And they started giving them that feedback. They are aware of race. Every promotion... the color of your staff... they're all vividly aware of it. This was the mid-nineties that we were having these kind of sessions with the officers. But I just think that Com Ed had a tradition of at least doing things in the community for African-Americans--not the most fantastic upward mobility track record--but bringing people in and moving--having a lot of African-Americans in the mix. And all of that helped me through the sixties [1960s] when I was the only person. The Civil Rights Movement, no threat. Gaining that expertise... everyone would know who I am. And again, maybe surprising people with what I could do would be like most people could do, but maybe perceived to be Superman, or whatever you would call us... we're Supermen. Story_ID: 56135 Speaker 1: So you, were you getting involved civically at the same time? When did you get involved civically? Speaker 2: I have always-- Speaker 1: But I mean outside of your church [Metropolitan Community Church]. Speaker 2: --always been involved very heavily civically, and it really has helped me. I just retired from the Abraham Lincoln Centre board after thirty-three years. I have been on the Wabash Y [MCA]. I try to do things that relates to Bronzeville. I'm on twelve non-profit boards now. I'm trying to get it down to five. I'm on the Shedd [Aquarium] Board. I was on the executive committee for Chicago Community Trust. And I think I have been invited to some boards because I have always been associated with being in the community and knowing people in the community. I've only been--and since I've retired, I'm not... I don't want to be on any board for any glamour. I want to do boards where I'm going to do something that's going to help our community, and especially Bronzeville. Those boards I think has given me sometimes visibility in other corporate environments. And I've never intended them to do it, but I think that was the result of it. You get to meet people and see people. United Way, I got very heavily involved with United Way. And then from that I was able to make some corporate board contacts. Story_ID: 56136 Speaker 1: And were you, when you moved to the corporate boards, did that seem sort of the pinnacle of things, or did you find that... did that add to your experience base? Speaker 2: Very important. My first corporate board was Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago] in the early eighties [1980s]. We were the largest black bank with Al Boutte, George Johnson [HM], Cirilo McSween, Jim Compton [James W. Compton, HM]. And here I was an engineer and learning banking, and getting to meet these guys who have run businesses. And I learned about audit committees and corporate governance. Nurtured... if I had gone on to a large white board--here I was nurtured by people who I knew and I felt comfortable with. And then to speak of how things happened, Jim O'Connor who was the chairman of our company left the Talman Savings and Loan [Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan] to go to the First National Bank [First National Bank of Chicago] board. And again, Jim put in a good word for me and I was invited to join the Talman board. I couldn't have done it without Jim. It's who you know, you know. But Talman was the largest savings and loans in the Illinois area. That was a major board. And then in '91' [1991], Talman was bought by ABN AMRO [ABN AMRO Clearing], the people who own LaSalle Bank. So, now I find myself being on the board of the second largest bank in the Metropolitan area. I was on the Shedd [Aquarium] Board of Trustees, and through that connection with a guy there, I got invited to be on the Walgreen's board. My friend told me that he ran into Charles Walgreens, III and said he knew a black guy who could read and write. (Laughter). That's my buddy, Tim. And he says the rest is history. But I got invited to be on the Walgreen's board, which is an absolutely magnificent corporation, a Fortune 500 company. I've been able to get a leadership position on that board, and it is an absolute education to see how other people run their businesses, the challenges they face, how they deal with the people, how they deal with their visions, how they treat failure. You... that really helped me in my endeavors. And then I... It's who you know. I graduated with a guy from the University of Illinois, Tom Casino. I went to Com Ed and worked for thirty-eight years. He went to Underwriters' Laboratories to work for forty-four years. I just went to his retirement party last Thursday. And he invited me to the Underwriters' Laboratories Board of Directors, a $500 million company. He knew me. He hadn't seen me much from college, but he knew me. It's, it's... it's not a random thing. You... you... once you get contacts, then you'll get more. Then I just joined a board in May--Washington Group International, a $3.5 billion revenue engineering construction company. I was contacted by a search firm to be on the board, but the search firm was sent to me by a guy from the nuclear industry I've worked with in the seventies [1970s]. So, so, but the boards now are really terrific; it keeps me interested in business; I learn a great deal. They're profitable, but I can't think of any better thing to do in retirement. My wife [Bernice Reed] says I'm not in retirement. But you know when the meetings are going to occur, and it is very good. But everything that has happened to me has not been random, it's been because of help. It's been because of contacts, being known. And it's hard to replicate, because it's not that easy for people to get exposed to that today. Story_ID: 56137 Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, that leads me to several questions. One, the thing that impresses me about you is you never left your community. And you said... and I was wondering if you, you never felt pressure to move to North Shore to be accepted to be part of that whole thing? That didn't go into your mindset? You didn't struggle with that, about--? Speaker 2: I did. I think in the eighties [1980s] when I became a corporate officer--and you become a big shot, that you think of moving to some nice area. And I think in the eighties [1980s] and the nineties [1990s] suburbs were pictured as nice and we didn't have as many nice areas on the south side. But I have to tell you, I keep coming back to this. I think the thing that has kept me glued has been my church [Metropolitan Community Church]. And again, if I had moved there, I'm sure I would be okay and I would be happy, and I would be in a nice little area with some friends. But the older I get, the more important my background is to me; the more important it is for me to be working with people who are like me. And it just so happens that people who are more modest, are not upper middle class generally... not generally... in a lot of cases have really nice personalities to get along with. They don't sit and talk about their accomplishments. And because of our relationship, I don't have to sit around talking to them about my accomplishments. We relate on other kinds of things. And that becomes really important to me. We travel about every other month, and we've been all over. We have three weeks of timeshare in Orlando [Florida]. We've seen the most beautiful homes you ever want to see, with lanais and we could go out there. People quit calling me and I could sit on the back porch and on the lanai and sip mint juleps. I think, I think the Lord has a role for you, and you're to be a part of the struggle. My phone rings too much, and it bothers me that people bug me too much. But you can't be given all of this and not use it. And I think that I'm able to use it. I'm not trying to be so glorified, I just think that's what happens. I use it, but I'm getting... I'm getting so much from it, I'm gaining so much. The people who are leaders of the church now in many cases were teenagers. And I love for our choir director, Theresa... And I remember when Theresa was just a little... in the teenage choir, and now she's the director of our choir. And she'll tell me, you know, what to do and you know, "Hold it down," you know. And it just makes me feel so good. I mean I--she's our leader, and I just love that; I've seen the cycle. So, I am so--I don't say that it's not good to move to the suburbs. I'm just talking about me. My life has been an unusual life. I have not moved from town to town to town. This is my life. If you don't have that tie, then you may would have moved to the suburbs. And I'm sure that would be okay also. Story_ID: 56138 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. In the church, when you're in the church, how does that make you feel? What is that, that sense of community or sense of--you know, black churches are more spirited, and I'm just wondering if you can talk about-- Speaker 2: Our church [Metropolitan Community Church] serves a lot of different people--people from Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago Illinois], people from the high rise at 41st and Calumet [Calumet City, Illinois]. We have a prison ministry for the children and wives... for the children of people in prison, because often it's a mother in prison. We have senior programs that now I've become interested in. We tutor, we pay the scholarships. I can see what... it's the ministries, it's not so much Sunday morning. It's the ministries. I am the president of the corporation that owns our senior citizens' building. We put it in operation in '89' [1989], being the president. And we have seventy-six seniors there, and it's safe. A lady kissed me in the mouth; she was eighty. She was frightened to death where she was living. Now, she's not frightened anymore. I can see the people, I can see our interactions with the people... I can see the need. And I sure gain the benefits when I see people progress, improve their quality of life, have something to offer. And I sound like a Mr. Goody Two Shoes, but that's not it. But I truly... you would, too. But you have to be a part of them to understand what they're dealing with and to understand their accomplishments. Story_ID: 56139 Speaker 1: You like black people, don't you? Speaker 2: I do, I do. Speaker 1: And what do you consider special about us, Sir? Speaker 2: My whole life... I guess it comes back to my mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and father [Clevon Reed, Sr.], two dark people. I remember when I was divorced and I was kind of in play. And my dad, when I introduced him to my new wife [Bernice Reed], he said, "Whew. Wow, she's black." (Laughter). "She's really black." (Laughter). I have so many good white friends who I respect and everything, but my wife is from Mississippi, I'm from Chicago [Illinois]. When we are by ourselves, which is so often, so many things in our lives relate, track. I mean it's not just knowing the same music and doing the same kind of dances. It's, it's... she had an experience, but it was with black people. And I have good friends who are inter-racial married. And usually they have connections on an intellectual basis or something. But, but I can tell you that the benefit for me of being in the black community and being recognized in the black community just has been, it's been good for me. Story_ID: 56140 Speaker 1: Now, what are your hopes and/or concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well, I would have hoped that this generation would have gone past us, and be better than us. We were better educated--better jobs than our parents. And we actually see college enrollment declining since the mid-eighties [1980s]. We're going, we're going backwards in so many cases. But the good news is that I'll run across an engineer, or I'll run across a college dean who grew up in Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] and like that. But there's this whole thing that's going on with the third generation of mothers with only "baby daddies" and no family, and "MF" this and "MF" that... and the three year old in the grocery store. We are not progressing like I thought we would. It makes me feel good to see Frank Clark become the president of Commonwealth Edison. Mercedes Lang, I have so many friends that I'm proud of. Don't get me wrong. And I meet people who are graduating as accountants and engineers. But unfortunately, I think when we look at the overall picture, that we're going backwards. And if I look at the root cause, it's that they don't nearly have it as good as I did, okay. But on the other hand, I think it is the breakdown of the family, the breakdown of the family. And we pick on the poor black male, but you don't see them enrolled in college. Seventy percent of the students at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] that I love so well, they're women. Story_ID: 56141 Speaker 1: (Continued)--And if a child can't read at second grade, and if they don't get a certified or qualified math or science teacher at sixth grade, they will never be an engineer. And so many of our kids fit that profile, they can't read at grade level at second grade. And I've learned that I can't change the world. And there are people like Ken Smith who touched my life--you know, Reverend Wesby. And I can touch a few lives... But I get so discouraged because when I look at the entire picture, it seems like it's a total--it's a total loss. And when I get discouraged, I'll see some bright shining star coming through. But your point about our middle age kids with-- Speaker 2: Middle class. Speaker 1: Middle class, I'm sorry... with their pants hanging off their butts. Going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], I saw more designer jeans at Tuskegee and convertible cars than I did at U of I [University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois]. Story_ID: 56142 Speaker 1: Now, when you... you also spoke about corporate America and blacks coming through corporate America, and the time you were coming through. It sounds... you feel that that was a more productive period than you see currently. But I'm not sure if I misunderstood you. Speaker 2: You're correct. I think that, I think that I had the benefit, again, of being not a threat. Because there weren't enough of us to be a threat. And I, and I came through the whole Civil Rights Movement. I benefitted from that, from the early and late sixties [1960s] and seventies [1970s]. The industry has kind of turned sour on that now. I don't think someone coming through today is viewed as that exception. There's... everyone is fighting for their jobs. I just think it's tougher. And I get so many stories. People treat me nice now. And once you become a vice president, people treat you nice. But I hear so many stories about being treated less than nice, from people in not just one company, from a lot of companies. But I think it's more of a dog eat dog--the companies themselves are not looking for the loyalty. They don't think anyone's going to work for them for more than five or six years. I mean they... companies quit offering pensions; they offer 401-K's, so that they can be portable and carry it with them wherever they go. So, I just think the job--I have my boys, they're in the workforce. My baby is thirty-four; my oldest boy is forty-three. And I think it's tougher for them. Story_ID: 56143 Speaker 1: Do you, in terms of, you know, the utility industry or power industry, there's now competition coming on that's a whole different animal than when you were involved. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Well, whenever you ask an old guy (Laughter) how does he think today is compared to the olden days, is you, you know, you always get the answer, "Oh, I remember the good old days." Now, the one thing I've learned in life is that you cannot compare the sixties [1960s] and the seventies [1970s] and the eighties [1980s] with 2002. I think the public would not stand for anything other than de-regulated... not having monopolies. I remember when we had the best tele-communications system in the whole world. And then we broke up, you know, the telephone company. And the telephone company was thought to be a conspiracy. De-regulation of the electric utility industry has its notable failure in California. And I think for those designing it, they were very naive about the marketplace. When I was there in the sixties and seventies, when we made plans, we made plans for forty years. We would commit a power plant, and we would spend the money because we would advertise it over forty years. Today, someone from California owns half of the coal-fired plants in Illinois serving Commonwealth Edison. And someone from Virginia or someplace own the other half of them. Commonwealth Edison owns plants and generating plants in Texas and Massachusetts. And I don't know who owns the plant in southern Illinois now. And these are all business decisions. Most of them are short term decisions. So, it worries me that in this kind of atmosphere that we may not have the power we need going forward, because no one is willing to spend the money and get a forty year return on it. So, that's one thing. And no one is local. Everyone is managing it from someplace else. And that does not have the same loyalty to the employees. Again, you thought... every five or six years you go someplace. So, for a guy who is sixty-four, it scares me a little bit, this current environment. It scares me that who cares, who's responsible, who do you hold liable going forward? But I can just tell you, I'm old enough to understand now that there's a lot of things that changed that worried me. And once you look back, once you got through the tough period, it was a change for the good. So although I'm scared now, my natural reaction, I think that what is happening here today in de-regulation, when you look back ten years you're going to say, "That was exactly what we had to do." Story_ID: 56144 Speaker 1: I feel that I have to ask this question, then I'm going to ask just two more. But... well, one or two more. Corporate responsibility, what are your ideas about that? Speaker 2: I think that if you are a corporation in an area and you depend on that area for skilled labor--you depend upon that area to supply your engineers and your accountants and the like--I think you have a responsibility to invest in those sort of things. In the sixties [1960s] and the seventies [1970s] we had such a supply of people, and the skill levels weren't that great that we didn't have to get involved with elementary schools and high schools in terms of education. If you're going to be in the Chicago area and you're going to need those folks, I think you now need to become more involved with the universities, with the elementary schools, with money as well as people. Now, it's a hard proposition now because that's not happening. It's not happening because LaSalle Bank is owned by the Dutch; Harris Bank is owned by Montreal; Bank One is owned by Columbus, Ohio. The corporate, great corporate leaders like Tom Ayers and Jim O'Connor and Barry Sullivan aren't there anymore. The Illinois Bell... I mean my God. Amoco... and you don't even know who heads these companies. So, so, my fear is that I see corporations not being involved with the communities and the overall infrastructure when I think they need to. And corporations are interesting endeavors. When they find that they're not getting sufficient accountants and engineers and the like, when they find that--we keep seeing that workforce 2000, that it's going to be mostly African-Americans, but they still get a lot of whites that can take their jobs. But when things get tough enough, they'll come back. But right now the pendulum has swung that there's very little corporate responsibility--community, real community involvement. Story_ID: 56145 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want to be known for giving back some that was given to me; to be someone who has had some positive impact on the community--some impact on lives. And it's not one of those things where I want to be renowned. I just, I would love to do to someone's life what was done to my life. And I'd love... I really think it is my obligation. I think that's why the Lord has put me here in this spot right now, why he has done these things. My fear is that people look at me and pat me on the back like, "You've done something great." This is like at church [Metropolitan Community Church], we talk about tipping the Lord, you know. (Laughter). Instead of tithing, you know, you give him a little tip. So I have, I have so much, I've been given so much; I've been blessed with so much that I ought to just do--not worry about credit; I ought to do. I'm only proving it to one person. And if I can prove it to that person, then I feel I would have been okay. Story_ID: 56146 Speaker 1: Mr. Reed, you're, you know, you're on the younger side of people we're interviewing these days. Speaker 2: I am on the younger side? Well, praise His name, Hallelujah. Speaker 1: But I'm just saying... (Laughter). Why did you retire so early? And what does, what does Cordell Reed still want to do with his life? Speaker 2: That is interesting. I retired in '97' [1997] when I was fifty-nine years old. As usual for my life, a couple of things came. In '97' [1997], it became apparent to me that my mother [Carrie Bell Reed] and my father [Clevon Reed, Sr.]--my mother was alright. She had Alzheimer's, so she didn't know where she was. But my dad was going crazy, just couldn't... couldn't make it. I was going to lose him. So, they had to move in with us. And we bought this big house. I had been Chief Nuclear Officer for thirteen years. And then I was in charge of all of our nuclear and fossil plants. I had done it all. I enjoyed what I was doing--Chief Diversity Officer, Chief Ethics Officer. I was buying $800 million worth of fuel for the company--gas, oil and uranium. But I, I had really done it all. The chairman was fixing to re-organize. And I always thought I would retire at sixty-two or something. And I says, "Jim, why don't you let me go now? I don't want to sign up and get a position and... because I don't think I want to do that for the next five years." I had the benefit of being on these corporate boards, which would keep life interesting and profitable. I had a couple of instances where I had friends who were late fifties, early sixties, having strokes and heart attacks--people who were waiting to retire in five years or three years or whatever. And all of that kind of came together. Jim is going to re-organize. I say, "Jim, I think I want to get off now." And he said, "Okay." So, it was a number of things. And I can tell you, it was not the end. It has been the beginning of new things. Story_ID: 56147 Speaker 1: It's the most amazing thing to me, it's the beginning of new things. Again, the corporate... the boards, I can get on more boards. But my joy... I can stay up until one o'clock in the morning because I don't have to get up at five o'clock. I can get up at 8:30 in the morning. I love being here in the afternoon and falling asleep watching the news at four o'clock and waking up refreshed. I get more joy out of people, because I spend more time with people now. And believe me, my wife [Bernice Reed] and I, we go to board meetings and we're with CEO's and former CEO's. But you watch what we do this weekend. You know, this Friday night we'll be with one set of folks who out of the four, one maybe has a college degree. My best friend, who can do everything better than me--he can cook better than me, he can paint better than me. He's not... can't do nuclear engineering better than me. But he can do everything; he has no ego whatsoever. I would sit in any place... and we'd just sit on the porch and drink scotch and Seven-Up and talk. Those things of life are becoming so important to me. And in my life, I am so glad that I've lived the last five years. I would have hated to have ended it with the hustle and bustle of those thirty-eight years and thought that that was the only thing that was there. And as we go further in life, I don't know what's there. I think I have a mission. I don't worry about, I don't worry about dying; I really don't. My wife don't either. I want to be here for twenty years. But if I go tomorrow, it's okay. So it has been, it has been new life, wonderful new life. Yes. Speaker 2: Anything else you want to say? Speaker 1: I've said more than I ever thought. This has been the most interested--interesting interview I have ever had. Speaker 2: That's cute. Thank you. Okay. Speaker 1: And it's just, it has been a joy to my own soul to try to express some of these things. Story_ID: 56148 Speaker 1: Well, this is the young Cordell Reed, circa maybe the mid-forties. And I'm standing in front of Apartment 10 at the Ida B. Wells housing projects with one of those big hats and those plaid coats that was so popular at the time. Speaker 2: Now how old were you? Speaker 1: I think at that time I must have been ten or eleven, something like that. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is in 19-- Speaker 1: Maybe it's the late forties. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: [shows baby picture]. You can see I was fat even then. (Laughter). That hair, braid of hair; that was popular in those days. Speaker 2: Cute. Speaker 1: My mother, my father, and my brother standing up. And I'm the cute little baby in my father's lap. Speaker 2: Okay. I want you to go left to right with names. Speaker 1: Okay. From left to right is Clevon Reed, Jr. Speaker 2: Spell Clevon. Spell names... Speaker 1: Okay, C-L-E-V-O-N, R-E-E-D, Jr. Carrie Bell Reed, C-A-R-R-I-E, B-E-L-L, Reed. Speaker 2: That's your mother? Speaker 1: That's my mom. And then that's me, the little cute little boy, Cordell Reed, C-O-R-D-E-L-L. And then that's my father, Clevon Reed, Sr., C-L-E-V-O-N. Speaker 2: Do you know the year approximately? Speaker 1: It must have been about '41' [1941], because I look like I was about three year old or something like that. Speaker 2: And that's around the time you said you were moving into Ida B. Wells? Speaker 1: That's when we moved. I think that was just about the time we were moving into Ida B. Wells. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Cordell Reed, graduating from high school in 1955. Speaker 2: And you should name... Speaker 1: I'm graduating from Tilden Tech High School, and I'm contemplating going on to the University of Illinois at Chicago. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: The people in this picture are people who I grew up with in the Ida B. Wells housing projects. They are now in their early sixties. But-- Speaker 2: Is that the picture at the bottom? Speaker 1: The picture at the top. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They are the older, matured Ida B. Wells people. Speaker 2: When was this taken? Speaker 1: This was, we had gone to some kind of an outing, and they had just got together this group picture. Many of them are on their second or third wives. But here's the gang as it stands now. Speaker 2: Okay, the bottom one? Speaker 1: The bottom one is a group of people from the Ida B. Wells housing project that went to my church. And we had gone to California, to Whittier, California to a church conference. And I like these two pictures because they have to do with people from Ida B. Wells. We must have been 16, 17 years old at that time. Speaker 2: Okay, ready. Speaker 1: That's my mother, Carrie Bell Reed. This was taken two years ago. And that was before... later that year she had Alzheimer's. And I think she looks great in that picture, but she didn't know where she was. But she would always give a smile. She would smile at me, and she knew she knew me, but she couldn't place me exactly. But she would always smile, and she had a good, good, life; And that's my father. He loves to sit out, that's on our deck. He is now 94 now, and he's upstairs right now watching the baseball game. He's doing very well, very well. Speaker 2: How's his mind? Speaker 1: His mind is just great. Speaker 2: That's good. Speaker 1: It's his hearing. We keep getting the best technology for hearing... and his teeth. We have implants and stuff... for him to eat. But that's been my-- Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's an earlier picture of me and my wife. We were thinner then. And I don't know when that was. I suspect it was the early nineties; My bride. Speaker 2: And your wife's name? Speaker 1: My wife's name is Bernice, Bernice Reed. Speaker 2: Spell it for us? Speaker 1: B-E-R-N-I-C-E. Speaker 2: Okay. Next, this one. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is one of our best friends, Dr. Paulette Wilson. She lives a block from here. And she's my doctor, and she works out with my wife. She's a petite lady in her early forties, and she almost kills my wife doing Tae Bo. But she's our doctor, so don't worry. We love her, too. Speaker 2: Okay, ready. Speaker 1: This is the Walgreen's corporate board. I thought you ought to see what a corporate board looks like. There's one black and one woman. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And that's typical. Just about everyone in this picture is either a current or former chief executive officer. And what's interesting to me, you get to know them, and they're really nice people, really nice people. That's a typical board, you know. Speaker 2: Names. Can you go... will that be a challenge? Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe that would take a little while. But I guess I want to point out that this gentleman here is Charles Walgreen, III. His grandfather started the Walgreen's Company, and now it's the largest drugstore system in the country. Dan Jorndt is the current CEO of Walgreen's. Speaker 2: That's J-O-R-D-N-T? Speaker 1: Yes, you're really good. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: You're really good. Mary Lou Van Fresto was the managing partner of Ogilvy and Mathers. The person above her is Charles Hunter who was the chief financial officer of Walgreens. The person right next to him is Bill Springer, who was the chief financial officer of Ameritech before he retired. Bill Foote is next to him. He's the current chief executive officer of U.S. Gypsum. And then that's me, Cordell Reed. And then the... Jack Schwimm, who is the former chief executive officer of R.R. Donnelley. And below him is Jim Howard who is the former chief executive officer of Northern Power Company. I think this was '95' [1995]. No, no, no, no, no, no. No, this was like '98' [1998], like three years ago; The most recent picture of me and my wife. People say we look alike, others think she's my daughter. But the one thing about getting older together, you spend a lot of time together. And it really is very important when you have someone who is a true partner, someone that you can just... you don't need anything else, that you can spend your time with. And that's what I'm blessed to have. So, that's my wife, Bernice Reed. She, she is really a true partner, a true mate, a true lover; And there's a little picture of us in our Afrocentric garb. That's how we would look if we were African kings and queens. Speaker 2: That's cute. Speaker 1: We would look just like that, okay. (Laughter). Look at that smile. We've been together twelve years now; it's working, it's working...