 Story_ID: 12460 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Renault Robinson, R-E-N-A-U-L-T, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth? Speaker 2: September 8th, 1942. Speaker 1: And what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July the 3rd, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we? Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois at 1755 East 55th Street, Apartment 1103, my home. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a businessman. I own a staffing service. Story_ID: 12461 Speaker 1: Okay, before we get into depth, we always ask five "People Magazine"-ish type questions. And I'm compelled to ask them, and they just require a short answer. The first one is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: Now, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color--brown or green, yeah, brown or green. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite season of the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 12462 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, let's talk about your beginnings. And could you give us the names of your mother and father and spell those for us, and tell us, you know, when they were born and where? Speaker 2: My father was Robert Robinson. He was born in 1921 in Vicksburg, Mississippi. And my mother is Mabel, and her maiden name is Stevenson. She was born in 1925 in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: Now, did your parents have any stories about how they wound up in Vicksburg or in Denver or any family history that they shared with you? Speaker 2: Not really. My father moved to Chicago [Illinois] like many people did because of the oppressive conditions in the South. And my mother came to Chicago because her grandfather brought her here to live. And, and ultimately, my father and my mother met and married. Speaker 1: Excuse me one second. I'm just working out the final (unclear)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, we are rolling. Speaker 2: Okay, and neither one of your parents talked about, your father never talked about how his family got to Vicksburg or how long they'd been in Vicksburg or anything? Speaker 1: I'm sure I heard the stories about it, but I really don't remember them now. And the same with my mother. I mean it was a lot of years ago, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mississippi is a popular point of origin for people in Chicago, but Denver is not-- Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: And she didn't have a story about how she got to Denver, or--? Speaker 1: My great-grandfather, I guess, was partial Indian. And so that's probably why they were in Denver. But I, I really don't know. Speaker 2: Okay, did they have a story about how they met here in the city? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: What did your mother do for a living? Speaker 1: My mother was a housewife. She never worked. My father worked. Speaker 2: Okay, and what did your father do? Speaker 1: Well, he was self employed for a number of years. He had his own business. He had a printing business. He had an office supply business. He was a salesman, you know, basically. And that's, that's how we were supported. Speaker 2: Okay, did he talk about where he went to school or anything or how far he got? Speaker 1: My father went through high school, and my mother went through grade school. And, and I think one year of high school and that was it. Speaker 2: Did they both finish in Chicago, I mean-- Speaker 1: School? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No. It was my father in Vicksburg and my mother in Denver. Story_ID: 12463 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fall in there? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, and I've got five sisters and two brothers, eight children. Speaker 1: Okay, so can you remember any of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I lived on the South Side my entire life. And my family lived on the South Side then, you know. And so on the South Side was black and white and--as I grew up. And as time went on, of course, as the whites moved further West--most South Side whites went west, some went north, then we would occupy the area. As a child, our first home that we owned was at 63rd [Street] and Ellis [Avenue]. At the time, we were the second black family on the block. 63rd was absolutely gorgeous. There were restaurants and stores and it, you wouldn't believe it compared--it's nothing there now. But in those days, it was an absolutely gorgeous neighborhood. There were a lot of stores. And a lot of stores from downtown, they had branches out here. And it was really nice. This is pre- the gangs, pre- the problems that developed as time went on. Racism was alive and well, but we, we lived with it. Speaker 1: Okay, what were the things that you did as a youth for enjoyment? I mean what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, I had a lot of friends who liked to read. So we, we would read books that talked about black history. And we had a little group and different people had different books. And then we would get together and talk about the book. Most of the people would buy the same book, but one person had the responsibility to report on it. We enjoyed or I enjoyed, and my group enjoyed jazz. So every time we had an opportunity to hear, listen, go see, we did a lot of that. And we were kids. So we also played basketball, baseball. Those were the things, but mostly, I worked. I had two or three jobs all the time, since I can remember. When I was very young, I either had a paper route, sold 'Defenders' and 'Jets' and 'Ebony'. I had a, every weekend I worked at the South Center [Department Store], and the big, you know, stores delivering groceries. And then I worked in the neighborhood as a handyman, odd man, doing things for kid--I mean the neighbors, going to the store for them, cleaning their house, whatever because I made a lot of money doing all of these things. And that's how I survived. Story_ID: 12464 Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I went to Corpus Christi [School, Chicago, Illinois]. It was the only Catholic school in the neighborhood. Right down the street from my house was a public school, but my parents [Robert and Mabel Robinson] did not want me to go to the public school. So I went to the Catholic school. So I was the only Catholic person in my neighborhood (laughter). So I took a lot of ribbing from the, from my friends and, and people in the neighborhood because-- Speaker 1: Why didn't your parents want you to go to local, public school? Speaker 2: The quality of education is what they were concerned about. They wanted me to have a, a good education, the best education that they could get me. And they thought that I could probably get that at the Catholic school as opposed to the public school. And they were right. And when I grew up, I did the same thing. I put all my children in Catholic school too because the public schools were very poor and, and still are. Speaker 1: Okay, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed it. And there were a lot of activities. I was an altar boy, and I was in everything they had in school. I was on the basketball team, baseball team. It was a Catholic school, so I was altar boy. And every organization they had, I was a part of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so that makes you pretty busy cause you got jobs and then your-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --got school activities too. Speaker 2: And I had another job. After school, I worked in a garage. The guy who owned the building that my parents and I stayed in owned a garage about two blocks from my house. They repaired automobiles. And he hired me to clean the place up because I was just a little guy. And from there, I learned how to fix a car. Before I left there, I could almost put an engine in by myself. So, the only thing my parents didn't like about it is, you know, in garages the guys used rough language. So (laughter) I became familiar with a lot of language that I probably shouldn't have at an early age. But I was smart enough not to use it (laugh). Speaker 1: So, how old were you then about? Speaker 2: Well, I was in grade school. So, I was under fourteen. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any teachers--now, you said, you said you all had a study group, you and your friends. Did you have a mentor or anybody guiding your study or somebody that suggested this idea? How did that come about 'cause it's not the normal or common thing for kids to do. Speaker 2: Well, it--and we did have mentors, people who would help us and make suggestions, older guys who, who knew jazz, for instance, real well, guys who had gone to the university and were well-read on black history. And, and that's what encouraged us. It, it was purely that. We always wanted to hang around with the older guys because we could learn so much from them. And we were lucky that we hung with guys who had something to offer us and not guys who were into other kinds of things, crime or whatever. Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that were into black history and jazz? Speaker 2: I can't think of the names. This was so many years ago, and I'm bad on names. After a while, if I don't use the name, I forget it. It just goes out of my mind. I couldn't tell you the names of the guys that I even hung around with or my schoolmates in those days. It's just, was a fact that I let go. Story_ID: 12465 Speaker 1: It just seems like an unusual group, you know-- Speaker 2: It was, and, and it helped me quite a bit. But then I was doing a lot of strange things. You know, I didn't have a lot of time to play. So I used it carefully. And that stayed with me, and all the way through college, I found similar kind of people from high school through college, that did the same kinds of things. In fact, that's one of the reasons that I met [Edward] 'Buzz' Palmer. He did a lot of that kind of thing too. And when I met him, he was doing the same kind of things, and so we had a natural relationship. And we weren't even--he wasn't a policeman, I wasn't a policeman. So that came later. And, but we were interested in black history, and we knew people at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And we used to go over there. And we were in, you know, younger, go over there and listen to the lectures and go to the plays and go to the activities over there. We weren't students or anything, but we would get in and nobody would say anything. So we enjoyed it. I met Ralph Ellison over there, giving a talk at the university; and a lot of other people like that. So that was something I learned young, and it just stuck with me over the years. Speaker 1: Now, what was Ralph Ellison like? You want to tell that story on what, how you met him? Speaker 2: Well, he had wrote the book, was it 'The Spook that Sat by the Door' [sic, 'The Spook Who Sat by the Door'] or 'The Invisible Man'? Speaker 1: 'Invisible Man.' Speaker 2: 'Invisible Man,' yeah. And he was, he was a very, very interesting guy. He was very smart, very well-read. And I considered it a privilege to be able to meet him. I bought the book; obviously, I read it. But he encouraged me, not so much in a personal way, but in general, to keep learning more about yourself, keeping learning more about your own history. Keep trying to understand the condition that you were in and what you could do that would help make it change. And I think, ultimately, later in life, those kind of experiences contributed to what I did later cause I think that all of that had something to do with it because it was part of my sub-consciousness and part of me. Story_ID: 12466 Speaker 1: So, how would you describe yourself as a youth? I mean what kind of a young kid were you? Speaker 2: I was probably average in many ways. Less--I loved, I loved sports and, but I had a very strict family. And so I had to be in at, you know, I had curfews and that kind of thing. And then I had duties around the house and I had all my jobs. And, and I had responsibilities with my family and my siblings. So I didn't have a whole lot of time to, to go to the peps and do other things like that, although I did get there every now and then. So, you know, I danced and, you know, participated in as much general activities as I could. But my schedule was almost set. And after school, I had to go to work. Speaker 1: So, at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois], you continued to be (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was still, yeah, at Hyde Park, yeah. I had--in Hyde Park, let's see, how many--I worked at Walgreen's. I was a Assistant Fountain Manager, had a job at a shoe store on 63rd Street, selling women's shoes. And I had a paper route in Hyde Park, which I went to before I went to school, get up at 4:00 in the morning. I had to be at the branch at 4:30, did my papers, you know, and came back home and then went to school. After school, down to Walgreen's. After Walgreen's or the weekends, I would go to the shoe store. So-- Speaker 1: And what time would you get home? Speaker 2: Oh, Walgreen's closed at, I think it was 10:00 o'clock. So 11:00 o'clock, 11:30, I was at home cause Walgreen's was at 63rd and Cottage [Grove]. I lived 63rd and Ellis [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was close to home, but it sounds like you would be tired (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No, I, I wouldn't be that tired, you know. You're a young person. I'd go on to Budland [nightclub, formerly Birdland, later The Beige Room] , even though I was too young (laugh), and dance for a little bit and then go home. Gene Ammons had a place right across the street from Walgreen's. And I'd go over there too, listen to Gene, even though I was too young (laughter). They weren't as hard on people then about checking I.D. and that kind of stuff. So-- Speaker 1: So it's not like really, (unclear) busy all the time, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I, my childhood was, was good. Speaker 1: Now, did you have any idea in high school what you wanted to do when you got out of high school? Speaker 2: No, none at all. I knew I was going to college. And, but I didn't have any specific thing that I was chasing or trying to be or any of that. You know, I wasn't--my father [Robert Robinson] didn't try to steer me to be a doctor or a lawyer or this or that. Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors in high school that tried to guide you or took an interest in you? Speaker 2: I had a lot of people that took interest in me, but they were related to activities I was involved in. At Walgreen's, I had a guy there who was, who helped me out in many ways as far as that was concerned. As far as school was concerned, nobody comes to mind right now that stands out. But there were a lot people who I would talk to, talk with, and my father was probably my biggest friend and guiding, guiding person in my life and, of course, my mother [Mabel Stevenson Robinson]. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about graduation from Hyde Park, and what was that like? Speaker 2: Well, I, the one thing that stands out in my mind is, we were practicing for graduation, and I was clowning during the practice. And the Assistant Principle, who was also the disciplinarian in the school at the time, Mrs. , plucked me by the ear out of line, and suspended me, sent me home, with not let me come back without bringing up my parents. Now, classes were over. We're practicing for graduation, but she wouldn't accept any foolishness. And that stuck with me, you know. Discipline, and, you know, I was clowning and making jokes and lying and everybody was laughing. No, you're supposed to be quiet (laughter) and listen to the instructions, follow the instructions. That's how school was in those days. Now, these kids do whatever they want to do. But in those days, you didn't. And I never forgot that. I had to promise to be a good boy and not, you know--and, you know, school was over, out. So, but that taught me a lesson. Other than that, we had a good time for graduation. And we, we had a good prom. We went out afterwards to the Chez Paree, which don't exist any more. And we went to The Blue Note. It don't exist any more. Both featured jazz. One was a supper club. Of course, you were too young, but of course, they knew that (laughter). But after that, some guys went to the military, others went to school. Story_ID: 12467 Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do after graduation? Speaker 2: I went to school. And I went to University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] for one semester, and then there was some problems at home. I had to come back after the semester (sneeze) Excuse me-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) --went to Champaign? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't have a four-year here at the time. So I came back and went to work full time. Ultimately, I got married, and after I got married, I went to work for the Police Department. And, and then I went back to school--had a child and went back to school. Story_ID: 12468 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you choose to, I guess, take the test for the Chicago Police Department [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, I, I was looking for a job. I was a printer at Union Tank Car [Co.]. And I was looking for a job that paid more money. I was married, I had a baby. And the pay at Union Tank Car was not enough. So I applied for [R.R.] Donnelly [& Sons Co.], as a pressman, which was a pretty good job at the time, and I also applied with the Chicago Police Department. Well, Donnelly wanted me to sign a commitment to work for them for, I don't know how many years it was after I got their training. The salary was great. But I absolutely did not want to commit to--I didn't want to be there the rest of my life. And that's what they were trying to get you to do, although they didn't say it. That's what it was. And the Police Department, from the time you apply to the time you, you get called to take the test, it's usually a year. So I pushed that out of my mind. I didn't really care. And then I found another job. I took over as the head printer for a drug manufacturer, which paid me quite a bit more than I was making at Union Tank Car. So I went there, and I was happy. I made more money there than I had made anywhere else. And, and I didn't have to commit, and I didn't have to go through that, which I didn't want to do. And after I had been working at this place for about four months, I got a call from the Police Department saying that they had a shortage--I didn't realize then, but the shortage was minorities. They had a shortage of policemen and they were asking people if they could come in and take a test, and they had to hire a number of guys right away. So I took the test, and about--and I realized that it still was gonna be a year, so I didn't worry about it. However, they called me in a week and said that I had, I was one of the top scorers on the test and would I come down for an interview? Well, I was shocked. So I told my boss, I had to tell my boss then. So he said, I will increase your salary by 35 or 40 percent, I want you to stay here. But I went down to the interview anyway. And they weren't gonna pay as much as the other place, but I thought I'd get the benefits. I had a baby. I needed insurance and, you know, the whole nine yards. They paid for me to go to school. So I decided well, I ain't gonna be, stay a policeman either, but I can get the benefits and help my family right now, get insurance, all of that. So they gave me a week to make up my mind, and I finally decided, and I went in. Well, when I got there, on the first day I got there, they--and you won't believe this, but in my class, that first day, was alderman Ed [Edward M.] Burke's son [Edward Burke Jr.], who is the current alderman, [Richard J.] Brzeczek, who once was the superintendent. It was a whole bunch of guys. We're all little kids, you know. In any event, they--once I got there, they called me out for some interviews. I hadn't been there for twenty minutes. After they did the general orientation, then they said, we'd like to talk to you. So they took me to a room, and a police lieutenant, two of them, interviewed me. And I didn't know why, and they asked me all kinds of questions, about where you live, what goes on in the neighborhood. We have a very special assignment, and we need a special person for it, and we were wondering if you'd be interested. And so my mind quickly went to working for the Internal Affairs Division, which was spying on policemen. So I said, I don't want to work for Internal Affairs, I'm sorry. So they said, why not? I said because if I decide to make a career out of the Police Department, starting off working in Internal Affairs is not the place to do it. And I'm all for honest policemen, but I don't want to be the one that is investigating them. So they laughed. And they said, no, this has nothing to do with that. This is a different kind of assignment. So I said, what is it? And they told me it was Vice and Gambling, and they wanted me to work for the citywide Vice Control Division. Sounded exciting to me. I said, you got me. So they said, go home, right now, and we'll contact you. So I walked--I was there twenty minutes. I went through two or three interviews, and they sent me home. I was home a couple of days--and first they told me, you're on the payroll. You're a policeman. And I got no training, no badge, no gun, no nothing, but I was a policeman. And they said, you'll be paid like everybody else on the 1st and the 15th. So about two, maybe three days later, I get a call from the same guy, one of the guys that interviewed me. He said, I want to meet you, and he met in a restaurant around the corner from my house. And he explained that this was gonna be an undercover assignment. And I was gonna work vice, gambling, all kinds of vice, which included gambling, prostitution, narcotics and all the other derivatives, prob--you know. So, I thought that was good. Story_ID: 12469 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you have, to your surprise, some sort of an undercover role now. Speaker 2: Yeah, they [the Chicago Police Department] told me they wanted me to--they would assign me to certain areas. And they said, look, what we want you to do is to be yourself. We want you to identify everything that's going on in that area, wherever there is vice. So they wanted me to identify the wire rooms, which were the bookie joints. They wanted me to identify the games, the poker games and dice games, the big ones. They wanted me to identify the places where there was prostitution in the joints, the taverns, places like that. They wanted me to identify the policy stations, and they were all over the place. And they wanted me to identify the drug houses. There was no crack cocaine at that time. It was heroin, marijuana and cocaine, primarily. And, yeah, acid hadn't come along at that time either. So, and that's what I did. They'd say, you go in this area between here, here, here and here and tell us what you find. And I'd go into an area and find everything and write them a report, identifying where these places were, their addresses, what floor they were on, the hours that they operated, who was in charge, etc. And I'd write a report, sign it 'The Fat Man,' and they had different drop places for me for to leave stuff and--but I never went to police headquarters. I never met them anywhere other than a restaurant or a place like that. They never came to my house. And, and my check came in the mail. Speaker 1: So, what year was this? Speaker 2: '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, that's (unclear) you didn't have any day-to-day interaction, I mean, well, not face-to-face and you're not actually down to headquarters? Speaker 2: Oh, no, never went near headquarters for nothing, you know, for nothing. And I had no police identification, nothing. Speaker 1: Did that make things dangerous for you? Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: You're investigating vice without any police identification. Speaker 2: Of course, it did. But, see, the, the trick to it was, you don't act as a policeman. You act as a civilian because you aren't a police--I mean you don't have any police authority and you don't have any gun or any of that kind of stuff so you act different than if you did. And you're more effective. Story_ID: 12470 Speaker 1: Okay, but couldn't that [having no police identification] not put you in jeopardy with the police? Speaker 2: Oh, it did. It did. Ultimately, that's the reason I got out of it. I had work all over the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and all over the West Side. The West Side to me was the most dangerous, I mean very dangerous over there, all right, cause I didn't know anything about the West Side. And I knew all the big gangs were over there and all that, but I didn't realize how dangerous it was over there. Now, that's where it was really dangerous. South Side, I knew the South Side. I grew up over here so I knew everything. But on the South Side is where I got tripped up. I was working in an area, and I was identifying policy [illegal gambling] stations . Two white policemen in a squad car in uniform came to get their weekly payoff. They saw me sitting in an old raggedy car, and they got suspicious, cause I had been there more than once. They decided to check me out. So they stopped me, asked me where I was going. I gave them an excuse. They searched the car. And they searched me, and they decided to take me to the station cause they were very suspicious for whatever reason. So they took me on to the station and at that point, I said, okay, take me to the commander's office. They said, why you want to go to the commander? I said, just take me to the commander's office. So they took me and put me in a cell. And I said, now, I got a right to make a call. If you don't want me to make this call, you'd better take me to the commander's office. Well, tell us, meanwhile, what you're doing and blah, blah, blah. I said, "I'm not telling you anything. Just take me to the commander's office." "We ain't taking you to the commander." I said, okay, whenever I make this call. So now they were shook up. So they finally went to the commander's office, and I guess the commander said, you'd better-- (laughter). So they brought me into his office. And now, everybody in the station has been made aware that I'm there. They think I'm a plant from IAD [Internal Affairs Division], and I know they think that's what I am. So I finally call my number downtown. And they called the commander and say, "Hey, back off." So the commander finally came into his office and said, okay, tell me what's going on. And I told him that I was from Vice and Gambling. He said, the guys think you're from IAD. I said, I have nothing to do with IAD. I said, I don't even know those guys' names, and I'm not concerned with them. He said, well, you know what the deal is? I said, I'm not concerned with them. My job is Vice and Gambling. So he said, well, they absolutely tore up your car, he said, and they found a police check pay stub. I had cashed my check, and when they saw, when they got ready to approach me, I took the stub, rolled it up real small, and stuck it down in the cushion of the seat. And they tore the seats and found it. So, anyway, he was ordered to release me. And they had to put my car back together. And that was the last day I was undercover. I called up, and I told my contacts, I said, that's it. I'm through with this. I said, I haven't, you know, I said, it's one thing to be out here, I said, but to have the police suspicious of me and to think that I'm from IAD. I said, I told you I didn't like that in the first place. And these guys are scared, and, you know, I want out. So they tried to convince me to stay, but I wouldn't. That's when they arranged for me to go back to the academy as a brand new recruit. And that's when I met [Edward L.] 'Buzz' [Palmer] and all the other guys, they happened to be in that class. I wasn't in school a month and these same guys got promoted to detective, and when you get promoted, you got to go back to the Police Academy for your training. They came in and they saw me, they went bananas. They told--they spread a rumor throughout the school that I was a plant from IAD, and everybody better watch their butt. It created such a problem that the superintendent of the school called me into his office, and he said, we got to send you home. He said, this is, this whole thing--he said, I don't know what happened, but he said, these guys have got everybody in here shook up about you. So they sent me home. One of my commanders, former commanders had to go down to the school and explain to the class--you know, to all the classes that I wasn't from IAD, that I had worked on an undercover assignment in the VCD, Vice Control Division, and that, you know, that these guys were wrong. So, two days later, I--they, I went back to school, and everybody laughed. But, you know, that's what happened. So that was not good (laughter). Story_ID: 12471 Speaker 1: Well, it sounds as if, now, it sounds to me like the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois] has an atmosphere of tension and distrust regardless of--and we're not even dealing with race now, we're just dealing with who's who in the Police Department. And there's a lot of tension around there, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was a lot of corruption. Corruption was a daily thing throughout the department. I mean let's just call a spade a spade. That's what the problem was. I mean the department was corrupt, through and through (laughter). There's no doubt about it. I mean it was so much corruption going on in Chicago Police Department, and there still is, but, you know, that was the problem. But the culture, the society fosters it. The politicians foster it. You don't have a choice. If you want to go up, you're gonna play the game. Story_ID: 12472 Speaker 1: So did that presentation by the commander about trying to--did that help? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that solved the problem. I went back to class [at the Chicago Police Academy], and, you know, that was it. I graduated and went. And the guy who, who requested me to work for him was the same commander who I was in his office, and these two cops had took me in there [when he had been arrested while working undercover]. When I graduated, you know, normally, they give you random assignments to different districts, he personally requested me to come work for him as a Vice Detective. So when I left school, instead of becoming a regular beat officer and getting in, wearing a uniform and writing traffic tickets and all that, I went right back into plain clothes, as a Vice Detective for this commander. Speaker 1: What district did you work in? Speaker 2: It was the tenth district, it was Marquette [Road, Chicago, Illniois]. It was on the West Side. And I worked for him until the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League [now African American Police League] started. When the League started, they called me in, and they said, look, this is not good. You want to be a sergeant, we will put you on the sergeant's list, and we'll make you a sergeant. And we think you got a bright future with the Police Department. Don't mess around with this group. It's trouble. So that was the first challenge to me. Story_ID: 12473 Speaker 1: So well, how did you--how did the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League [now the African American Police League] get started? And maybe you can talk about that, how the League got started and what was your initial role in it? Speaker 2: Well, it was a group of guys who, who got together and we talked about the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois], in general, the conditions, the lack of black officers, the brutality, really the brutality and the treatment of blacks by the Police Department was really the issue. And it was just so bad in the street for the average black, man, woman, old man, old women, child, it didn't make any difference. The police were just absolutely abusive in every way you can think. I mean they had no respect for black people whatsoever. And it just, it was so bad in every station, the, the wanton brutality and the mistreatment of people for nothing, was just awful. You couldn't take it. I mean we couldn't take it. I mean we got together and this is just, it was just so bad. We couldn't participate in it, you know, and we just said, no. This is--we got to figure out something. And, and those conversations led us to formulate the organization, the, the notion that the police were like--and again, this goes back to our little study groups and black history and all of that [independent black history study group formed by Robinson and friends as teens], you know, we said, "We got to do something about this." Story_ID: 12474 Speaker 1: And we knew, when we started talking about it [forming the Afro American Patrolmen's League in response to racism and brutality in the Chicago Police Department], that we were gonna be in trouble, that the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois] wasn't gonna tolerate it. When I refused to stop participating in the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League activities, they did what they called a telephone transfer order. And that's sort of like a slap in the face, when they transfer you over the telephone. And they sent me to a South Side district in uniform for the first time in my career, took away my prestigious job and, you know, we had plainclothes cars, and we had our own cars and all of that; took all that away, zapped me to make everybody around me realize, don't do this. And my boss, my immediate supervisor at the time, was the president of the Sergeant's Association, which was an all-Irish group. But he, he wouldn't listen to me and the League. You know, he said, man, that's a bad group. That ain't, you know, you talking about something else. So once they bounced me, then I went full blast with the League, I mean full blast. They made it very difficult for a lot of the guys. And a lot of guys quit, that were part of the original group. One guy that was part of the original group, turns out that he was telling on us. And it was unfortunate. He's a judge today. So they knew a lot of what we were doing. They classified us as subversives. The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was called in to, to investigate us. We found out later that they monitored all of our phone conversations, all of our travels, all of our everything in those days. Speaker 2: Now, these were the Red Squad, right? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Can you talk about what that is, 'cause this is historic. Speaker 1: The Red Squad was put together to investigate, originally, groups that had subversive activities. And what they meant by "subversive" were groups that intended to do something against the government. It was not supposed to have anything to do with civil rights. It was supposed to be groups that had nefarious purposes. Speaker 2: Communists? Speaker 1: Communists was always the bug-a-boo that they used to cover themselves, Communist-oriented groups, okay. And anybody that was anti, or protested the system, you were a "Communist" or you were a "Communist sympathizer" or you were "subversive", which was sort of a general word that covered anything that they didn't like. Later we found that, from the first day we announced the forming of the organization on 63rd Street, back in '64 [1964]--no, it wasn't in '64 [1964], it was '68 [1968], the FBI was, was there at the announcement, along with the Red Squad recording everything we said, and, as we found later, they had planted bugs in our telephones and, you know, the whole nine yards. And we were a bunch of misplaced college students who shouldn't have been on the Police Department in the first place (laughter), who had other goals in mind. And one of them was to try and change our own circumstances and that of our own people. But that was bad news. [J. Edgar] Hoover branded me an official subversive, which I found out later. And I was even a subject at the Police Training Acad--I mean the FBI Training Academy in Quantico [Virginia]--I was an example of the wrong kind of guy, bad guy, policeman gone bad, etc., etc., etc. And I didn't know that until one of our police commanders went to the school and came back and told me. (Laughter) He said, you're a movie star. He said, they got a whole movie on you. So, you know-- Speaker 2: They actually had a film? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, me making a speech, yeah, I was--Hoover hated me. But, so that's how things got rolling. Story_ID: 12475 Speaker 1: What were the, I guess the seminal issues that the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League [now the African American Police League] had, other than police brutality? And that's one, right? Speaker 2: Right, we wanted to change the relationship between the Police Department and the black community. We wanted the institution to change from being an oppressor and an occupier of our communities to service oriented; reduce crime in our neighborhoods. Give us, provide us with police service. Don't just beat us up and harass us and disrespect us cause that's what they were doing. So we wanted to change and fracture that old relationship, and change to one like it was in the white community, cause that's what they were in the white community. They were servants, they were helpers, they were assistants. They, they prevented crime. They did the kind of things that they did not do in the black community. They respected women. They didn't respect black women. I don't care, they never respected black women. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: The, the issue of police brutality, the relationship, and we wanted to make black cops equal to white cops. Those were our goals, plain and simple. Story_ID: 12476 Speaker 1: What do you think about--you ever heard of the "5/95 Rule" where they say like 5 percent of cops will always do the right thing and 95 percent will always do the wrong thing, and 90 percent will do, you know, depending on what kind of day it is, they're having. Speaker 2: I haven't heard of that rule, but there's a lot of truth to, to that in many ways. Speaker 1: So there's a lot of follow-the-leader type stuff going on in police work? Speaker 2: Well, it's a culture. It's a culture. And it's one where if you want to get along, you join it. If you don't join it, then you get isolated. And if you get too isolated, then it makes the job very difficult for you. If you want friends and you want people to associate and talk to you, you join the culture. And it's very, very strong. Black cops were forced to not be black cops, to be want to be white cops, even though you were black, and they treated you black. They never let you forget you were black, and they don't today. But, you know, there's such a marked oppression in black people that they accept that for whatever the reason. And it was just difficult for some of us to accept. Speaker 1: Now, you all were a different kind, as you said, a lot of college-educated, some people had some college; some had a lot of college. I know you mentioned, you know, off-camera you mentioned [Obaseki] Hodari. He was a school teacher, and became a cop, and there are other examples of people that were in other professions who became a cop later on in life and were more mature and more seasoned than a lot of other rookie cops when they came on. Speaker 2: That's true, but there was, there were, there were white guys who had college educations too. And they, it didn't make any difference, I mean in terms of the culture thing. They were right in the middle of it. So it's, it's a situation where the police role, one that's part of the culture, and that was anti-black and anti, you know, minority. And, and it was bad, very, very bad. Story_ID: 12477 Speaker 1: So was it hard to get other black cops involved in the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League? Speaker 2: Absolutely, the guys were scared. They were scared that they'd lose their job or that they'd bad, you know, we always had bad assignments. But they thought they would have even a worse assignment than what they already had. You know, that's why, for instance, they put me in the alley. It was a way of playing into that culture of "We'll punish you; we'll give you a terrible assignment." Believe it or not, the white guys would have given their right arm to get that job in the alley cause they don't want to do nothing. They don't want to get, you know. Only the real hot shots want to be on the street where they can beat up people. The older guys, they're tired of beating up people. Now, they want to get out the street and get out the, the limelight. They want to sit in the alley or sit at the hospital or sit, you know--they don't want to duke. The younger guys get punished when they do that. That's why they send you to an assignment like that. So our guys were scared. They were scared of the pressure from their white sergeants who would give you efficiency marks. You got bad ones anyway. That's why nobody ever got promoted. But they were just so afraid. They wanted to keep the friendship of these white bigots. And it was, it was sickening. But that was the only way you could get ahead. And we understood that. We understood that some of our guys had to be Uncle Toms cause otherwise, there'd be nobody in the higher ranks. And all of the guys in the higher ranks were Uncle Toms, period. There was no other way. And many of them were friends, but we had to meet, you know, away from the job and etc. They couldn't appear to be too friendly towards you because they got banged by the whites if they did. Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard that, and even today-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's the same thing today. Speaker 1: --there are people that, in the upper ranks that, well, they have concerns, but they won't openly meet with anybody who's about any change. They might meet secretly with them or, you know, or whisper or something, close the door. But they won't come out (unclear) and talk. Speaker 2: That's true. The same problem still exists. Once we went away, except for the court orders which stayed in effect quite a while, everything started to revert back because that's just the way it was. Nobody is gonna stick they neck out. They're afraid. Speaker 1: How many members did the League--well, we were talking about membership, how hard it was to get members. How many did you eventually get and how--what did you have to do to get them? Speaker 2: Well, there were a number of things we did. We appealed to some of the wives, who embarrassed their husbands and made them join. As long as they could join and not be put on, what we called, "front street," a lot of guys would join and pay their dues by personal check. And, but they didn't want to come to meetings because the meetings were surveyed by the Red Squad and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. They would sit there and write down people's license numbers and, you know, and the guys would, some of the guys knew some of these guys. So they would say, man, you know, they're out there writing down everybody's license plate number. Well, that kind of stuff frightened these guys. You know, they had houses and mortgages and kids, just like we did. But they didn't want to jeopardize any of that. So it was very difficult, very, very, very difficult. I mean even some of the guys that originally started the League quit, so, you know it was difficult. They couldn't deal with it. So, you know, it wasn't easy. Nobody wanted to stick their neck. Nobody wanted the wrath. Everybody was afraid. Speaker 1: Now, on a police brutality issue, I know, I--help me with the chronology, but I know that at one point, Ralph Metcalfe stepped up and started, you know, speaking against police brutality after his friend, Dr. [Herbert] Odom was beaten by the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois]. Was that during the time the League was forming, around the same time? Speaker 2: No, that was much after, and it took a whole lot to get Ralph to speak out. I mean I must have spent hours and days and weeks talking to him. He was scared to death too because he was one of them. Ralph, to his credit, he got pushed into speaking out cause it was embarrassment not to, when it was such a vicious act of brutality, to someone he knew personally, who was also his campaign manager and chief fundraiser. So he had to say something. He didn't want to, but he had to. And the further we pushed him out there, the further estranged he got from [Mayor Richard J.] Daley. And he told me, he said, this is gonna be a disaster for me and my career. He said, they're gonna take everything away from me. And they did. They took all of his clout. And that's what these black politicians live for, is the little clout, the little crumb drops that they give them. I remember we had breakfast one morning in Amy--not Amy & Lou's, but Gladys'. And he said, "I'm gonna have to raise my own campaign funds. I'm gonna have to appeal to people on my own." He said, "I haven't had to do that before." He said, it's scary and it's frightening, Renault. He said, but I'm out here now, and I don't have--what can I do? And I said, "Ralph, it's gonna be all right. You're gonna get overwhelmingly re-elected." [Note: He was.] I said, "Relax," you know. But he was scared. And that fear transmitted all the way down the line to all the black aldermen and all the black state representatives and black state senators and appointed black officials, they all were chicken-shit and scared. So, you know, I had a lot of friends among them. They were people that I liked, and, but I understood their fear. I didn't criticize them for it. I criticized the issue, you know, in general, that the fear was so pervasive that these guys, they, they just couldn't, couldn't deal with it. Speaker 1: The former mayor, Richard J. Daley, really had a chokehold on the, a lot of people, I guess you'd say. He had a lot of power. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he was all powerful. I mean he ran this city. He ran the county and he ran the state. And all of the federal jobs in this area went through him. That's a powerful man. Story_ID: 12478 Speaker 1: We were talking about how the city [Chicago, Illinois] was kind of locked down by Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, and how tough the Daley Machine was. Now, you engage in this struggle with the city, could explain--I know you just explained it, but explain again, you know, on camera what happened and how you finally engaged in it? Speaker 2: Well, in 1970, I think it was, we filed a lawsuit against the city charging discrimination in all of its employment practices on the [Chicago] Police Department, hiring, promotion, assignments and discipline. The issue was to try and break open the hiring so that more minorities could get on the job. We had concluded that we weren't gonna change these white guys. You just weren't gonna change them. We needed more black cops. Our belief was that more black cops would have more empathy for their own community and would have more respect for black women and black kids and black people in general and wouldn't do the kind of things that the white cops were doing, the random traffic stops of people, you know, going to church or coming from church, searching the trunk, emptying your pockets on the hood and all that kind of stuff, it was demhumil--it was dehumanizing to have that happen on a regular basis all the time. The Flying Squads that were operating in the black community, it would be large groups of police on motorcycles. They would go into an area and just harass everybody. I mean it was just all kinds of activities going on. And we said, the only way they're gonna even begin to approach this--cause these white guys, they hate black people first of all, so there's nothing you're gonna do to try and soften them up to change their attitude. So we filed a lawsuit, and the first set of attorneys we got also had major city contracts. And they took our case pro bono, no fee. The Daley Administration called them in, called the senior partners in and said, we're gonna see that you lose your major account if you don't drop this lawsuit. So they dropped us. We had to scurry around--we went to the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], the--one of our friends was an ACLU attorney. And he said, man, the ACLU ought to take this case up. So we made a full presentation to them, and they turned us down. They said it would hurt their fundraising if they participated in a lawsuit against the city. Speaker 1: So this, wait a minute now, this is-- Speaker 2: This is the ACLU. Speaker 1: This is the ACLU. Speaker 2: Right. They refused to take the case. They said it would damage their fundraising, and they were afraid. Speaker 1: It's shocking to hear this-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm telling you, that's what happened. I was, I was shocked too. The great bastion of whatever, whatever, and yeah, but they wouldn't take the case. Their board members--the Executive Director wanted to take it, but the board members would not, saying that it would kill their fundraising. So you figure that out, you figure that one out. So we eventually got a Republican law firm to take the case 'cause we figured, they would have less issues with the city, and they did. Speaker 1: And because, just for the sake of history, Chicago is so Democratic-- Speaker 2: A hundred percent. Speaker 1: --the city, you know, is Democratic and a hundred percent, the county government, all governing pretty much. A Republican (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Didn't exist. And at that time, they didn't exist anywhere with any, you know, you know, they didn't have any real power anywhere. They have very little now, but they didn't have any then. I mean now, they've got a governor, and, you know, they--but they, they didn't have nothing in those days. Speaker 1: But at the federal level, during those days, the president was Richard [Milhous] Nixon, a very strong Republican on the national scene. Okay, I just wanted to set that up. Speaker 2: And during the time, Jim [James R.] Thompson was the U.S. Attorney, very helpful person. I used to go to his office every other day with a brutality complaint. He prosecuted more policemen than any other U.S. Attorney for police brutality. He was, he was really good. He was really good. A lot of great people came out of his, his team that are federal judges now and that did a lot to help us during those days. I mean they really did. Anyway, we got the Republican law firm. The first judge we picked, or that got randomly picked, was a black judge. But he was a Democrat. Although we had helped his son, who had been beaten up by the police, and we raised him, his son got a $275,000 settlement out of the city, this guy was so scared that he recused himself and got off the case. It shows you the power of these people, man. And also it shows you about oppression. Even a black federal judge was scared. And I, I really had an education. I mean, you know, the fear was everywhere, at every level. Speaker 1: In this circumstance, it says something character too. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: It's hard to swallow that one. Story_ID: 12479 Speaker 1: He [a black judge] dropped the case, and thank God he did because the judge who eventually got it was the only person that probably had enough chutzpah (laughter) to do what he did and rule against the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And it stood up all the way to the Supreme Court. But it went to another judge, and he had the case. He was a very strict judge, and he was a Republican too. And, but then this, the guy that eventually got the case, Prentice [H.] Marshall, had just been named the federal judge. And each of the sitting judges has a right to take one of their cases and give it to the new judge. And this judge, who had our case, when the black guy, black judge turned it down, he gave it, the case to the new judge, thank goodness. The Lord was looking upon us because he wouldn't have ruled against the city either. I knew his history. But the case lasted a long time, went through a million appeals. We eventually got the Justice Department to join in with us. We eventually got them to sue the Fire Department too. And, you know, over time, we won. During all of this, interesting enough, the city called me in to City Hall to talk about a settlement. I didn't want to go, but my lawyer said, you got to go, you know. You, when they talk a settlement, the way this works, you got to go sit down and listen to what they got to say. So we went in, and they said, we want to settle this case. Here's what we want to do. We're gonna give you $250,000 in damages. We'll make you a deputy superintendent in charge of community relations, and in return, you drop the lawsuit. And you can never refile. So I said, no. My lawyer said, "Whoops, we got to talk." So we went out, walked around City Hall. And he said, you know, this is, this is a hell of a deal. They're scared to death. I said, I know. I said, why would you think they would offer me that kind of money, and I'm making--at the time, I think our salary was something like--it wasn't nothing. When I started on the [Chicago] Police Department, it was $5,400 a year. This was like--I started in '64 [1964], and this was '70 [1970], and so the salary couldn't have been no more than about $10,000 at that time. And here they offer me this kind of money? I had never even seen that kind of money. But I turned them down. I said, no. So, they said, okay. We're gonna stretch this thing out forever; you'll never go to court. So, the only thing that chipped it off was when they passed a Revenue Sharing Act. And I found a little hook that the government, city was taking in all the money from Revenue Sharing and paying the police salaries cause they thought that was the easiest way to do it and account for it. And they took a like amount of money, and they could do what they wanted to do with it. Speaker 2: Now, Revenue Sharing was a [President Richard Milhous] Nixon program-- Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: --where he sent, like big sums of money-- Speaker 1: Block grants of money. Speaker 2: To urban centers around the country to-- Speaker 1: To all cities-- Speaker 2: For municipal-- Speaker 1: Service. Right. Speaker 2: Right, and the city would administrate the money, but the money came with stipulations from the federal government. Speaker 1: And one of them was that they couldn't discriminate. Yeah, that was it. Story_ID: 12480 Speaker 1: So you, on that one you struck (unclear), they were-- Speaker 2: That we did. That forced them [the city of Chicago, Illinois] to have to come to the table and deal with it. And we eventually had a trial, cause we still didn't settle. So we had a full-blown trial in federal court. During that trial is when we found out how extent the--extensive the surveillance was. We requested a copy of my FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] file during the trial. [J. Edgar] Hoover flatly refused to give it up. The federal judge was astounded. He said, what do you mean you ain't gonna give it up? He said, "Oh, no, you're gonna give--", you know. So they ordered--a deputy director of FBI came from Washington [D.C.] with my file. They wouldn't even let my lawyers see it. They, they went in the judge's chambers and showed it to the judge. But they would not allow the file to be put into evidence. And they gave us some newspaper clippings and some minor stuff, you know, about this much stuff, but the real file, we never saw. And they would never give it. And they classified and said, you can't have it. Well, whatever was in there, I don't know. But-- Speaker 1: Is it still classified? Speaker 2: Yep. But they never would let us see it. But even with what they gave us, we could tell that they had been taping our conversations cause they had verbatim conversations with people that I--and this is on the phone, so how are you gonna--you know. They had one conversation, I remember I had with Wesley South, who owned WVON at the time. They had the whole conversation verbatim. And then parts of my conversation with him, they redacted, you know, they blacked them out. They didn't black out my conversation, you know, (laughter), it was stupid. But it was just, you know, it was silly, it was--but these people were in charge, and they were dangerous, as we found out later, how dangerous Hoover was. Story_ID: 12481 Speaker 1: You cost people, you cost the city [Chicago, Illinois] a lot of money in the begin--when you found the Revenue Sharing (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You said, I think off camera, but I wanted you to repeat it. Speaker 2: Well, the Revenue Sharing lawsuit caused, the federal judge in Washington [D.C.] blocked [because of discrimination in employment in Chicago's police and fire departments, for which they were using the federal money] $113 million of Revenue Sharing Funds to the city, block grants from the federal government , which was a crippling blow. They finally tried to get the money freed up, but they couldn't. They tried every kind of legal maneuver under the sun. They couldn't free it up. So, they had to borrow money. They had to borrow. They did a loan with five banks to borrow $55 million and that was to be able to make payroll. It was just that bad. And then, ultimately, they started, you know, as a result of the judge's rulings--the judge had to rule. They never compromised or gave in on anything. They were found guilty on everything, on all the issues that we presented to the court, the city was found, you know, guilty. And it was a historic ruling, and one that we used all over the country, with all our other [Afro-American Patrolman's League] chapters and groups. We would take the ruling to them, and we would get them free attorneys, Lawyers [Committee] for Civil Rights Under Law and different other civil rights groups and get them, and then give them our lawsuit and say, you just have to piggyback on this. And a lot of places, once they filed suit, settled. So a lot of places settled with the, you know, so it was a big impact. It changed the face of law enforcement, nationwide. One of the guys who was a member of the National Black Police Association was Lee [P.] Brown. He was a--when I met him, he was a police--he was sheriff's deputy in Colorado or in Denver [Colorado] or somewhere like that. And then he got promoted to sergeant. And then we influenced him to be a member of the organization. They filed suit there. They tried to fire him. He eventually became mayor of Houston [Texas], great guy, good guy. He went through Atlanta [Georgia]. He went through Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was Police Superintendent in Houston, then Atlanta and New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was around--we had chapters in all those places. So, you know, we did some good. And we made an impact, and we were glad. Story_ID: 12482 Speaker 1: I know it was a lot of publicity around the lawsuit, and I remember you appearing on the Phil Donahue Show several times, and going to other towns, you know, traveling. Did the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois], you know, retaliate against you? Did they try to suspend you or did they--? Speaker 2: Yeah, they tried to fire me. I was--at one point, they had me, had more charges against me than any policeman in the history of the Chicago Police Department. They brought me up for dismissal. We enjoined the proceedings and tied it into our federal lawsuit. And the judge forbid them from dismissing me. But they suspended me. They suspended me during the lawsuit for a year without pay. And then I came back to the department and they put me up on charges of, for dismissal that time, the next time. And, of course, they weren't able to do any of that because of the, we won the lawsuit. And they had to pay me damages for that. Speaker 1: And did threats come from, I mean from individual officers? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had to have--at one point, they had, they had police cars on my children in school. Had, policemen had to stand outside the doors because policemen would call the school and say, "We're gonna kill the little nigger bastards." You could hear the police radio in the background, you know, it was just goofy. And they'd call my wife [Annette Robinson] and threaten her. I had to have a policeman sit on my house, one of our guys [from the Afro-American Patrolman's League], around the clock, unless I was home. I mean it was--she was pregnant at the time. Finally, it got so bad that I sent all my kids out of state to live for a while. It was just, you know, it was too--we were afraid, you know. So, yeah, it was bad. Speaker 1: This is, you know, when you look at this, it really forms kind of a crazy scenario. You have the Police Department compelled to defend you, though they want to get rid of you, but it's not in their interest for them officially harm you because that would make them look bad. So they have to guard you against individual police officers who actually are trying to hurt you. Speaker 2: Right, for the kids, we got official people to come to the schools, people on duty. For my personal, it was [Afro-American Patrolman's] League members who did that, cause they wouldn't provide anything for me or my house. So, but they did put, put guys on the, at the school cause my, my children were in different grades. And so they had to have two of them. But that got to be such a hassle, you know, for my kids that, and then my wife was pregnant so she couldn't--it was just a problem. So we finally just sent them out of state to stay with relatives until some of the heat died down. Speaker 1: Now, did this take a toll on your family--? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Terrible toll. Speaker 1: I don't know what to say, other than to, in what ways? I mean what, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, a number of kind of ways. Speaker 1: I mean I can imagine, but this is a tape about it, so that's why I (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, first of all, there's no money coming in cause I'm on suspension. So the little money I got would come from some donations from people and it was very little. It wasn't even close to what my police salary was. That was pretty tough to, you know--for a long period of time, I couldn't pay my rent. And eventually I had to move because my rent was so far behind. I had, my kids were Catholic, and so the pastor of the school and church gave me free tuition so my kids could go there because I couldn't pay the tuition. And that was Father [George] Clements at Holy Angels. So, you know, if you're--it was bad, very bad. It was a lot of hardship. Story_ID: 12483 Speaker 1: Well, in a nutshell, the city [Chicago, Illinois] was found guilty [in 1983, in a lawsuit initially brought by Robinson and the Afro-American Patrolmen's League in 1970] of discriminating in all of its [police department] employment practices and ordered to, to stop them. The remedy was a quota system where they had to hire so many blacks, so many women, so many Hispanics. Many of the restrictive hiring rules and regulations had to be dropped. You know, if you weren't a certain size and you couldn't lift a certain amount, you couldn't be a policeman. We said that has nothing to do with being a policeman. You don't have to be a brute, and that's the problem now. You want all these guys that are brutes, you know. You--policemen can be anybody cause you use your head and your mind, not your club and your gun. So we, the judge dropped all those, you know--that's why you see all these little women on the job and little guys because all of height and weight requirements and physical strength got dropped. We had the promotional exam, exams were thrown out. And they had to be redone. And they had to be colorblind. The tests were ridiculous, the way they were constructed. There was no way that the average black, even though I was lucky. I, I got through it, and I was in the 99 percentile or something. But, you know, I was a recent college man, you know. So--and I was well-read, that was the other thing. But the tests were bad, and we proved it with psychologists and everybody else that these tests were, were rigged. And they were. They were thrown out. There were police matrons at the time, and no police women. So we got that changed so that there would be police women. They had to promote so many sergeants, so lieutenants and so many captains immediately. I'm sorry, let this go by-- (sound of siren). Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, you were talking about all the influence that-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes, so there was an immediate increase in minorities on the [Chicago Police] Department. They had to, it was almost a 50-50 thing, 50 percent white males and 50 percent minorities, women, Hispanics, black males. But they had specific percentages for black males that had to be hired; specific percentages of women, specific percentages of Hispanics so that they couldn't fudge, whereas before, it was 99 percent white males. So that made a big change in the department. They made a change in the hierarchy cause they had to promote guys. That made a change in other blacks being promoteable because they were then being rated by black officers instead of white officers. We showed that the rating system used for promotion was rigged and was set up so that no black was ever gonna get promoted unless it was one they wanted, like they told me when I was on their side. Don't worry, we'll make you a sergeant. Of course, they could cause they knew what they had to do, which was just give you a high efficiency rating. My efficiency ratings before I got, before the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League started, were always 99, 100 percent. Unheard of for blacks because that's how you got promoted. They always gave you a marginal, seventy-nine and eighty cause you can't get promoted with that. And, and efficiency ratings are 100 percent subjective. There's no scale, no nothing. It's just how the guy feels. So it was easy for them to discriminate, you know. Black officer, eighty; white officer, ninety-seven. You're dead. So they changed a lot of that, all of that got adjusted, changed. They made them pay damages. They made them--they made them change their, their employment practices, period. And they put them under court supervision for years. I think they just got out from under it. So that's the reason you got as many blacks on the job as you have now. But even with a black superintendent and a lot of black in, in the hierarchy, practices are not as bad as they were in those days, but they're still bad. But I'd rather have it like it is today, by far, than to have it like it was then. That was what you would consider the dark ages. Speaker 2: Yeah, and there's certainly a lot that's been done and history has shown that, Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --but I know the city fought back in different ways-- Speaker 1: Every way they could. Story_ID: 12484 Speaker 1: The police, individual police officers and whatever the hierarchy is, fought back. Speaker 2: Oh, they did some things you wouldn't believe. I mean, in the middle of my trial, a very close friend of mine, provided me with a report from the Red Squad's files. In this report, it said that I was the leader of a murder-for-hire ring of black cops, who happened to all be Afro- [American Patrolman's League] members, right, and that we were murdering drug dealers and stealing their money. This was in the Intelligence files, right, of the Chicago Police Department [Chicago, Illinois]. Red Squad files were kept in a secret location in police headquarters. And unless you were in the Red Squad, you couldn't get near it. In any event, my friend got this report for me. I took the report to my lawyers. We immediately asked for an emergency hearing before the federal judge because during discovery, we had asked for any kind of report at all on any member of the League, known or unknown, and any surveillance. And they said, ah, we don't have nothing. So we took this report to the judge, and he hit the ceiling. And he said, okay, you lied. I want this officer who wrote this report in my courtroom tomorrow. They brought this white detective in, and he said, the whole report's a lie. I was told to do it by my superiors. The judge said, "This is absolutely incredible." Speaker 1: That's a big pie in the face of the Police Department, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--among many. So I'm saying that, as a result of that, the judge said, I want all the files from the Red Squad that have anything to do with [Renault A.] Robinson. And I want them ASAP, right now. It was like 12:00 o'clock or 11:30 in the morning. He said, to the corporation counsel, who was defending the city, he said, I want you to go over to Police Headquarters right now, since you've lied. And don't I want these reports to get disap--to be, anything to happen to them. But you're to go over and take charge of them right now. And I want his lawyers to go with you so that they can make sure that none of these reports get thrown away or come up missing, cause the policeman, the white guy on the stand testified that there was hundreds of reports (laughter). This is funny. We go over to Police Department headquarters. It's 12:00 o'clock noon. All the brass was out to lunch, the three-martini lunch. Nobody, the superintendent, none of them were there, none of the senior deputies. You know who was there? The highest ranking guy who was there, a guy named--black guy named Sam Nolan. And he was a deputy in charge of the Community Relations or something. But he was the highest ranking guy there. And so the corporation counsel went and grabbed him and said, okay, take us to the Red Squad. He didn't know where it was. So he had to ask somebody and they told him where it was. It was like up in one of the higher floors, back in a corner somewhere. We went up there, and what was up there was an officer on duty 'cause his bosses were all gone out to lunch too. Had the bosses been there, I think they would have--none of what I'm about to tell you would have happened. Story_ID: 12485 [Note: Story continues from previous tape in which Robinson told of the discovery of a false intelligence report on him in the files of the Chicago Police Department's Red Squad, which led to a court order that all "Red Squad" files be immediately seized.] We were talking about the file. You got to the higher floor [of the Chicago Police Department] and [Sam] Nolan is-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and--Nolan was in charge. He went up there with us. And he told the officer on the door cause, you know, it was locked, that, to let us all in. And that we were from the corporation counsel. We had a court order and we needed to inspect the files. Man, we saw files, rows and rows and rows of files. I started running through the files. And that's when I realized they had a file on everybody that had ever done anything in civil rights, every black politician, every, every community organization. It was the biggest scandal cause that's--I told everybody. And that's what made the Red Squad get all the heat. And the Alliance to End Repression and a bunch of other groups, the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], and a bunch of us sued the Red Squad, and we won. That was a separate lawsuit behind the big one [for discrimination in hiring]. But it--for the first time people realized how extensive these files were. I saw files on people, I mean, doctors, lawyers, I mean just, it was just incredible how much spying that they were doing on legitimate organizations, legitimate people, not people accused of any crimes; not people who had records for peddling dope or doing anything. These are just normal citizens, ministers, lawyers, priests, business people, anybody that supported Operation--it was Breadbasket [later Operation PUSH] then. Man, Breadbasket had files on it, and everybody that was a participant at Breadbasket, they had a file. And it was, it was just gross. And they had lied and said they didn't have that stuff. So we took tons of stuff out of there. The judge just went absolutely ape, and, you know, ultimately, that led to the disbanding of the Red Squad. So that was another side benefit from, from our lawsuit. Speaker 1: And the side benefit was a huge, it was huge, it's striking a huge blow for the personal freedom of people in the city of Chicago [Illinois] and elsewhere. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: The dismantling of this Red Squad. Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was bad news. Story_ID: 12486 Speaker 1: And then remember, in the middle of all this, there was the [Black] Panthers, and the Fred Hampton thing. And we [the Afro-American Patrolmen's League] were in the middle of all of that. The morning of the shooting, we went over there about--right after the police, we got there. Speaker 2: This is 1969. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is before we filed our lawsuit. Man, that was a scene I'll never forget, never forget that scene. Speaker 2: What did it look like? Speaker 1: Oh, it was terrible, man. It was just, bullet holes everywhere. It was a shoot-in, not a shoot out. I mean bullet holes in the bedroom door. Fred Hampton's bed was loaded with blood. The back door was bullet holes all in it where they were just firing through the door indiscriminately. The front door was bullet holes. The bedroom door where Frank, where Fred was, was sleeping was bullet holes. I mean it was just, it was, it was, it was like something that you just couldn't believe that they had done that. A guy we knew was in that raiding party. And we went to his house that evening. And we made him tell us everything that happened. And it was just awful. Speaker 2: It was one black man-- Speaker 1: No, it was more than one, but this one we knew well enough that we could get him to tell us what happened, with a little persuasion. But, and then we raised hell about that. And they eventually appointed a special prosecutor, and ran Hanrahan out of office. Speaker 2: He was the-- Speaker 1: State's attorney, who organized the raid. Speaker 2: Edward [V.] Hanrahan. Speaker 1: Edward Hanrahan, right. And, and the special prosecutor was Barnabas [F.] Sears, who also was the first lawyer we had on our case. Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: Barnabas Sears. Speaker 2: Can you spell it? Speaker 1: B-A-, no, you have to look it up. I don't want to, I don't want mess up his name. It's Barnabas Sears. Speaker 2: Barnabas Sears. Speaker 1: Sears, like the store. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And B-A-R-N-A-B-A-S. Speaker 2: I think that's it, but you need to check. He's, he--it's on record cause he was the special prosecutor that, that prosecuted Hanrahan and that whole raiding party. Story_ID: 12487 Speaker 1: I'm jumping around a little bit, but as things come to mind, but, in any event, the changes were very, very broad. And they helped make a difference. We got a lot of black cops now [2002], a lot more black officers. Sergeants in those days, when we filed the lawsuit [1970], I think there were eight, something like that, ten out of the whole [Chicago Police] Department [Chicago, Illinois]. Captains, I think there were four. Lieutenants, I think there were four. Now, there're quite a few. And we aren't parity, but there're quite a few, a lot more than there was. One or two district commanders, and now there're a lot of them. And there are a lot of people all through the ranks now cause now, they can, they can do that and still control you. It's unfortunate, but even at this late date, the whites still run the department, even though we've got a black superintendent. And he's a good guy, but, you know, he's the ceremonial head. It's always been that way, except during the time when Harold Washington was mayor, and, of course, we played a big role in that too. But I would say we made a difference. I wish it could have been more of a difference, but we made a difference. A lot of the kids on the Police Department now were in grade school, and--when we came along. So they don't even know the history or anything else or why they even got the job. But that's the way it is. Story_ID: 12488 Speaker 1: So when did your career as a police officer end? Speaker 2: Actually, in '83 [1983]. I officially retired from the [Chicago Police] Department [Chicago, Illinois]. And that was as a result of the judge's lawsuit. I actually never went back from the time they suspended me. I never went back. Speaker 1: So that's what year? Speaker 2: 1970, the year, whenever it was until, you know, I was off. So, but they had to reinstate me on paper, and so I ended up with twenty years seniority and, and from there I became head of the Chicago Housing Authority. Speaker 1: Now, how did that take place? I know that by this time Richard J. Daley has died, and his replacement, Michael [Anthony] Bilandic has lost an election to Jane Byrne. Jane Byrne's now the mayor, but she's right at the cusp of a lot of political turmoil, especially with the black community and its people. Rising is this politi--this Harold Washington Movement. So how does she end up making you the head of CHA (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened, she didn't make me the head of CHA. She put me on the board because she was running, she was running alone. Nobody was helping her. Nobody was talking to her. I was, and I was telling her about the problems at CHA and other things in the city. And so she would listen to me, and she would use the things that I told her. But that wasn't what got her elected. What got her elected was the snowstorm and the arrogance Bilandic and the fact that the city Snow Command did nothing to relieve the problems on the South Side. Yet there was snow, and they were plowing away on the North Side. And West Side and South Side, they didn't do nothing. That's what got Bilandic bounced. And Jane Byrne just happened to be the recipient of a lot of angry people who went out to vote for the first time against the Machine, but for another Democrat, which was Jane. Nobody knew nothing about Jane. But they weren't gonna go for Bilandic who had lied and said he was gonna do this and that, and didn't do anything. He was an inept mayor, totally inept. That wasn't his calling. In any event, she put me on the board, and everybody went crazy. I mean the City Council and everybody. But she, she did a recess appointment, and then that's no longer possible. She could appoint me without Council approval. They can't do that anymore. They changed that rule (laughter). Speaker 1: When Harold became mayor. Speaker 2: No, no, they changed it right away. Speaker 1: Oh, did they? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. Yeah, they changed it immediately because they knew what they were gonna get out of me. By this time, [Edward] Burke [Jr.] who started in the Police Academy with me was in the City Council, and he was the Chairman of the Finance Committee. So, you know, (laughter), you know there's no love for him and me. And I had gone through [James B.] Conlisk, [Jr.], , [James M.] Rochford, [Richard J.] Brzeczek, you know, in terms of superintendents. [Orlando Winfield] Wilson and I were friends. And-- Speaker 1: What Wilson was that? Speaker 2: That was the one that was brought in to reform the Police Department after the Summerdale-- Speaker 1: O. W. Wilson. Speaker 2: Yeah, O. W. Wilson, after the Summerdale scandal. I worked undercover during his administration. Mayor Daley did not like O. W. Wilson at all, and neither did the police brass. They hated him cause he was a reformer. Story_ID: 12489 Speaker 1: What happened at CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]? You were on the CHA Board--? Speaker 2: I was on the board, and my job was to get rid of [Charles] Swibel [head of the Chicago Housing Authority]. And I told Jane [Byrne] that's what I was gonna do. I was gonna run him out. She said, good luck. He's been there since 1953 when [Mayor Richard J.] Daley put him in there. And if you can get him out, you'll do me a favor. When I turned up the heat, because being a member of the board, I had access to books and records. And I found out that he had been one of the most corrupt administrators of CHA in the history. There were so many things going on from his brother-in-law getting all the insurance business no bid, to him putting in all of CHA's millions of dollars in Continental National Bank and drawing no interest. And then he borrowed all the money from Continental to build Marina City, and put no money of his own down. And on and on and on and on and on. Speaker 1: And Marina City, to people viewing this in the future, what, they won't know about the Bob Newhart Show, but that's where Bob Newhart stayed in the T.V. show. Speaker 2: It's the two corncobs downtown near the Chicago River. Swibel owned them. And anyway, I succeeded in getting to the point where he was getting ready to be pushed out. At that point, I get a call from Jane. "I got to see you." I went down to see her. And she said, you got to back off. You've got to back off Swibel. I need him. I said, what do you mean? She said, I can't run the city without Swibel and [Edward] Vrdolyak. She said, I need them, and they won't let any legislation pass the City Council. And I just, I, I just--you got to back off. She said, and I'd like you to resign from the board, and I'll give you a--this board didn't pay anything. She said, I'll give you a position where you, you're paid $25,000 a year, and I'll make you a deputy mayor. She said, wouldn't that be better than--I said, nah, I can't do that. I said, I told you what I was gonna do when you made me a board member. And I haven't changed my mind. She said, Renault, please don't do this. I said, I got to do it. I said, I'm sorry. I said, you're in bed with Swibel, not me. I said, he's bad for my people. He's bad for the city, and he got to go. And so I'd sent a lot of this information to the Inspector General. I asked for a federal investigation by HUD [Housing and Urban Development]. I went to the U.S. Attorney. I went to the Justice Department in Washington [D.C.], and I presented tons of evidence of everything you can think of, corruption in the, in the CHA, you just name. I mean it was everything. So in any event, I, I got an investigation. They sent a team out there, and boy, that team uncovered, you know, they documented everything that I had already said. And that was enough. At the time, there was a Republican who was head of HUD, a black guy [James T. Lynn]. What was his name? He was a lawyer, and he was the only black cabinet member, I think that [President Richard Milhous] Nixon had. I used to call him up and talk to him on the phone and tell him. They put pressure on him to back off and not drop Swibel, but he said he couldn't do it unless I cooperated. So he came to Chicago [Illinois] to meet privately with Jane Byrne at her apartment. But he met first with me privately. They didn't know that. I said, I'm not backing down. He said, well, the mayor wants to work a deal, and she wants anything--she'll do anything as long as I let Swibel stay. I said, I'm not backing down, and I don't know how you can back down with all this information on the public record. So, he said, this is a toughie. He said, I'm getting calls from everybody. I said, I know, Swibel is a powerful man. He was the main fundraiser for the Democratic Party and used CHA to do it. All the legal business was going to, you know, Democratic lawyers and money was being kicked back to the party. I mean it, it was gross. So in any event, Sam, was his name, Sam--I can't think of Sam's last name. But anyway, he met with the mayor, and then he called me, and he said, well, I told her, nothing I can do. He's go to go. So then right before Swibel was being forced out, he got, he had ulcers. He caught ulcers or something, and they had to rush him to the hospital, and, you know, everybody thought I was such a terrible guy, poor Swibel, you know, Renault, you're a mean guy. So they appointed another guy Chairman of the Board. And I became persona non-grata. I was already that, but now, with Jane Byrne, I was too because I wouldn't go along, and her man got pushed out. And, oh, it was, you know, wailing and gnashing of teeth. And they really treated me badly, but, you know, such is life. So then we started a campaign against her. She appointed a bunch of people to the CHA Board. And they were bad news, and they were trying--they did everything they could to downplay or block any initiative that I would come up with to improve the living conditions. So we started our campaign. Now, we ran Harold [Washington] for mayor earlier, and he lost. But we didn't expect him to win. We ran him in order to see what it would take to run a candidate for mayor cause we didn't have no experience in citywide elections. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so Harold didn't want to run the last time cause he had just became a congressman, through a fluke, you know, and he didn't want to have nothing to do with running for mayor. He said, un-un. But anyway, we--long story short, we, we got him to run. And, reluctantly, and, and he got elected. That was very tough because black people still were into the Machine [the powerful Chicago Democratic Party political establishment]. And they didn't think that their vote would count. And they didn't think that it would make a difference. And we did everything. I mean we had a radio campaign. We, we, we got all the black dee-jays in town together and we got them to--and we did some stuff that had never been done before and has never been done since. And we got us a black mayor. There will be another, but he will be picked by them. Speaker 1: "Them" meaning? Speaker 2: White folks. Yeah, the Machine. When they get ready, they'll turn it over, but they'll turn it over to one of their, one of their own. Independent politics is dead, dead, dead. You don't know how many black aldermen we got and neither does the average citizen because they never open their mouth and say a word because they're all bought and paid for by the young [Mayor Richard M.] Daley who took, used his father's model and bought off all the black aldermen. It was simple, you know, they give them a few jobs. They give them a budget. They make them, put them on a committee where they got some money to spend and don't have to account for it. They allow them to be in charge of the development in their wards. There's a whole bunch of little things that they, they can do for them, you know. And, for that, they sell out their community, lock, stock and barrel. What can I say? Speaker 1: That's a sad picture. Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's true. And it will be true in the foreseeable future. Story_ID: 12490 Speaker 1: So what have you done since Harold Washington days? Speaker 2: Well, after the Harold Washington experience, I was pretty disillusioned because blacks didn't understand what we had. They didn't understand how to grasp the power that was in our hands. They were, they were too inexperienced at running city government and too afraid to clash with the whites within the government. And we let it get away. So I retired from politics at that point, lock, stock and barrel. I was being pressured by my wife [Annette Robinson] and my mother [Mabel Stevenson Robinson] anyway that--and I was having high blood pressure and, you know, health problems and so I got out, and, and dropped everything. I've been non-political since. I went into business, and that's what I'm doing now. Story_ID: 12491 Speaker 1: Now, looking back at the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League, now there's--you still have an African American Police League, what do you see as the prospects of that league doing things (unclear)? Speaker 2: Zero. Speaker 1: And then, why? Speaker 2: Well, I think that there's a problem with leadership. There's a problem with organizing. There's a problem with--it's purely on the part of the black officers. The League has lost all of its community support and respect. That's what kept the League going. It wasn't the support from black policemen. It was the support from the black community, and surprisingly enough, a lot of people in the white community because we raised most of our money from whites. So the support we got there was huge. Without that support, we would have, we would have perished a long time ago. Speaker 1: Where did that support come from? Speaker 2: It came from me going to the white community and speaking at any kind of group, organization, church, association, you name it. I mean I--that was one of my jobs, was to do that, to raise the funds that we needed to survive. And that's how we did it. It wasn't through dues money from black policemen. Our dues were $10 or $15 or something like that, minimal, because we knew if it was anything more than that, the guys weren't gonna pay. They were afraid anyway, they would--as a nuisance they'd give you a $10 check, go away (chuckle). So, we got due deduction at one point on the Police Department, and so we had a few hundred guys that signed up to pay it out of their check. And that was nice, but by no means anything that could pay our bills. You know, I had to fundraise. It was a hundred percent of my time between yelling and--about brutality and other negative issues in the city [Chicago, Illinois], it was fundraising. You know, I did hundreds of T.V. shows, I made thousands of speeches. I traveled all over the country. I think one year I got the John D. Rockefeller Youth Award, which had a $10,000 stipend, which I brought, promptly brought back and paid League bills with it. I mean, I received probably a couple of hundred awards from community groups and organizations. I got enough plaques to fill up every wall in this house. But--and that's how we raised the money. I think without solid leadership and community support, there's no league, it won't be a league. Speaker 1: Okay, what about the National Black Police Association? Speaker 2: Oh, it's still going on. They're still holding their meetings. They're still--they named an award after me, the Renault Robinson Award. And they give it to a black cop every year at their annual convention. We were having conventions, and we would have--five, six, seven, 800 cops from around the country would show up. And we got support from the federal government. We got support from the Justice Department. I mean I made us legitimate, the best I could. It's still going, but--and a lot of the other associations are still going. They now, a lot of their members have become higher ranking officers and in some cases, the Police Chief. So they've become the Department in some places, you know. And so, it's, it's made a big difference. So, yeah, I'm a little proud of that. Speaker 1: Do you follow the activities of the National Black Police Association-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --and what's going on in other cities? Speaker 2: No. No. Story_ID: 12492 Speaker 1: And what do you see yourself doing in the future? Do you see yourself ever being involved in this kind of struggle again? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets about being involved in the first place? Speaker 2: No, I think that, I was glad to have played a role, to have been a part of it. I was glad to have done something. You know we only pass this way once. If you can make a positive contribution and, and you can, you should. And I did. And I'm glad I did. But it was just very, very tough. I wouldn't, I wouldn't encourage anybody to go through what I went through. I would say that. I wouldn't. But I did it. I had a lot of support from people, family friends. So that extent, I'm glad that what happened, and we made a difference. And we made a change, and we influenced the first black mayor and all of those things. But I'm through. Speaker 1: So it was necessary work? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. Oh, yeah, if we, if it, if it hadn't of happened then, it wouldn't have happened. So, to that extent, I'm glad. And I look back on it, and I'm glad it happened, and I'm glad that I was--I survived and didn't get killed because they did threaten that a whole bunch of times. But I had to eventually come back and take care of myself and raise a family. And, and that's what I decided to do, you know. My kids were growing up without me, and, you know, I had college to worry about. All of them needed money for school and college, and I wasn't getting it. So. Speaker 1: Well, you acted with a great deal of courage it seemed to me, but what do you think, looking back at this, and you're still young. You know, you're not--you've still got a lot of life left. What do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: I think probably people will remember that I created enough controversy and turmoil to really change the relationship between the black community and the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois] from what it was, which was an antiquated, antebellum South-type relationship; that I was major part in the election of Harold Washington, the first black mayor, and that--that's probably how people will remember. I think I did a lot of other things too, but I don't think that, that, you know--except for scholars and history buffs, most people won't ever remember or recall or even know. Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: The man who beat Clout City. Story_ID: 12493 Speaker 1: Mr. Robinson, such an amazing story. I'm just trying to understand, where do you think--you have apparently this, this trait, this like independence and tenacity and willingness to, you know, go up against the system, even despite the odds, but where do you think that came from, to be yourself? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think God. I can only attribute it to God. That's who I pulled my inner strength from. When things got rough and tough, that's who I called to for help inside, deep down inside. The public didn't know that, but that was my buddy. In the darkest hours, that's who I called on. He always came through. So, that's the only thing I can attribute it to. Speaker 1: And then the other thing is, just--I mean because they're obviously, over that periods of time, having such a constant struggle, there must have been times where there was a great temptation to just pack it in. And I know you said, God. I'm just curious like what--beyond that, what sustained you or what were you thinking that you would gain-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --at that point by sticking with it. Speaker 2: I--there was another person who, who was very instrumental in helping me get through the rough times, and that was Father George Clements, who was the pastor of Holy Angels [Church] and one of the people that we went to when we first started the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League [now the African American Police League]. If there was any one individual, outside of my family, that I had to point to that's been the human inner strength for me, it was him. I think for sure if Father Clements hadn't've been here, I shutter to think, but I might have given up. I mean there was a many a time when I spent the evening with him trying to sort out what was going on. And it was so many things happening to me and my family. But he provided me with a lot of inner strength. And he's an amazing man, amazing person. And I think that if I had to point to someone, I'd have to point to him. Story_ID: 12494 Speaker 1: Did you have any goal in mind, as you were going through this, if I can just sustain this, that I'll get to this result or were you really just standing on principle and letting the chips fall as they would? Speaker 2: It was a combination. First of all, standing on principle and letting the chips fall, but also I was heading toward an end. And with the [Chicago] Police Department [Chicago, Illinois], the end was to change that, that old relationship, to fracture it. And I felt the fastest way to do that was through more black cops. I just figured, even though we know now, historically, some of the black cops were just as brutal as the white cops, because they had been trained to be so. And that's how they got to be goody-goods with the white guys. But still I felt that if enough blacks got on the job and some women, they would have to show a softer side of the Police Department, and I might get-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) It has, you know--I mean statistically-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. And it would get to a point where it would make a difference on its own. So that's, that was one thing. The other thing was, other than that goal, I realized in the middle of that fight, that without some political change, I couldn't sustain it because the federal court can only go so far. So that's why right after the lawsuit victory, we went for the politics, we went jugular vein, mainly because the circumstances presented themselves. Jane [Byrne] was weak. We called her one-term Jane, one-term Byrne (laughter). I even printed up bumper stickers. And we fermented all kinds of problems under her, Police Department, Board of Education, CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], and we ended up boycotting Taste [of Chicago], and I'm working on Harold [Washington]. Harold's steady saying, "Nope, uh-uh" (laughter). Actually, if you really look at the record, we tricked Harold into running. That's another story though. Speaker 1: What was the trick? You got (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's another story. It's a long story, but it's another story. Harold had no intention of running, but we pushed him out there. But there were a lot of things we did to, to do that. And, but that's another story. But we thought that with political change, in addition to these other institutional changes, you could start to make the, the city a better place. You're not gonna change--I always realized, you're not gonna change white people. They're who they are, just like we're who we are. And, but you can make them respect you during the eight hours that you got to work with them, that was my saying. You can hate me, but you're gonna respect me while we're working out here as policemen, and you're gonna respect my people while I'm riding with you too. So those were the kind of things that we thought would make a difference even though we couldn't legislate a difference; we couldn't go into people's house and make a difference, but we could make some rules and regulations that would make a difference. You know, like when the city got banged for Revenue Sharing funds being used improperly, they had to change. They didn't want to change, but they had to figure out another way. You see what I mean. So it was using everything available to get at your end, which was to make change that would benefit all of us. Well, we made some changes, but it's still a long way to go. Story_ID: 12495 Speaker 1: And just one last point, and I'm just curious about your kids because they went through a lot of this. You've alluded to that, and I'm curious what they say and think now, you know. Did you have a chance to talk to them about it? Did you they understand the magnitude? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they did because being in school, and then the youngest son [Kobie Robinson] was put in the same room with the older son because it just got that bad, and then their classmates, "Why is they--why are they trying to kill your daddy, and why are they trying to kill you?" (laughter) You know, this kind of stuff didn't help at all. And then shipping them out of town and bringing them back, and, and then the problems we had moving around. And it, it was just--it was hard on them, very hard on them. And then my son [Renault Robinson Jr.] had the same name as me. So that was a problem. He caught hell at school, you know, and everywhere. But they all, they all were healthy kids. They, they're all doing very well now. And they, they have their own families, except for the two younger ones [Kivu and Kobie Robinson]. And they're all grown. They all have jobs, and they're all happy. So I'm happy for them. And I got five grandchildren, so I'm happy for that. Story_ID: 12496 Speaker 1: Okay, this a picture of some of my kids at the Million Man March. This is my son Brian. This is my son, Kobie, and this is my older son, Renault, Jr. And these are two of his daughters and this child here is his daughter. And that's Conrad, Dr. Conrad Worrill in the middle. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson's sons, Brian (left), Kobie (front), and Renault Robinson Jr. (right), and grandchildren with Conrad Worrill (in yellow) at the Million Man March, Washington, D.C., October 16, 1995. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12497 Speaker 1: This at an award ceremony for University Golf [Association], which is run by my son [Kivu Robinson], who founded it. It teaches golf to young children, boys and girls. And this is my grandson, Renault the III, and I'm not, I don't know who this young man is. He's one of the kids who won a medal in competition, and this is the alderman of the Fifth Ward, where this-- Speaker 2: [Leslie] Hairston? Speaker 1: Yeah, Alderman Hairston. And this is at the South Shore Country Club where my son has an office, and where he teaches golf to the kids. Speaker 2: And if you remember what year, approximately. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was last year [2001]. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson's grandson, Renault Robinson III (front right) with Leslie Hairston (back left) and others, Chicago, Illinois, 2001. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12498 Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother. We were at a dinner and someone snapped her picture, one of my brothers or sisters. But that's who that is. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson's mother, Mabel Stevenson Robinson. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12499 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, Robert Robinson. Speaker 2: And what year about when this was taken? Speaker 1: Oh, that photo dates back to, in the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson's father, Robert Robinson, ca. 1960s. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12500 Speaker 1: This is a picture of when I got married. This is me and my wife Annette. That's 1962. Speaker 2: You like 20 years old? Speaker 1: Yes, and she was too (laughter). Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson and his wife, Annette Robinson, 1962. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12501 Speaker 1: This picture, it was taken in the Afro-American Patrolman's League's headquarters. And the black star and fist represents a symbol of black power within the law. The star represents the law. The black fist in the middle represents black power and to circle it within the law. And that was one of our mottos as we tried to distinguish ourself as a police organization. It had a different function than a labor union. Speaker 2: And what date would be assigned to this, roughly? Speaker 1: I think that's about 1970. Speaker 2: [Photo from unidentified publication showing Renault Robinson at the Afro-American Patrolman's League's headquarters, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970. Robinson stands beside a picture of the group's symbol, a black power fist inside a police star. Photo by L. Helterman, Life magazine, Time, Inc. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12502 Speaker 1: That's me sitting at a desk in our headquarters, the Afro-American Patrolman's League's headquarters. And I was visiting New York [New York], and one of the, with some of the New York police officers. They had an Afro-American Patrolman's League there too, and I saw that picture while walking down Broadway [Avenue]. And I thought it was so apropos to all the things that were going on in Chicago [Illinois] with the police, that I brought it back and put it on our wall. It's a picture of [Adolf] Hitler, obviously, under the caption, "Visit Chicago." Speaker 2: What year, did you say the year? Speaker 1: That was probably somewhere between seventy--it was the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson at his desk at the Afro-American Patrolman's League headquarters, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970s; on the wall at left is a poster of Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler with the caption "Visit Chicago." The AAPL were active in protesting police brutality against minority Chicagoans. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12503 Speaker 1: This is Edward 'Buzz' Palmer. He was one of the original members and founders of the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League. I think there were probably about seven or eight of us that put the organization together. And Buzz was one of the prime movers in the beginning. And really did a lot to help us put this organization together. And I think that was in 1967 that that picture was taken. Speaker 2: [Edward 'Buzz' Palmer, ca. 1967. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12504 Speaker 1: This is Howard Saffold to the far left. He and [Edward] 'Buzz' [Palmer] and myself and the other three or four guys were some of the prime movers in the organization [the Afro-American Patrolman's League] in the very beginning. And that's a picture of Father [George] Clements sitting next to Howard, and that was at a press conference that we had in early 1970. Speaker 2: [Photo of Howard Saffold with Father George Clements at a press conference for the Afro-American Patrolman's League in Chicago, Illinois, 1970. Photo is from unidentified book. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12505 Speaker 1: And this picture on the far right is me directing traffic. That was my punishment detail-- Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson in police uniform, directing traffic, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970. Robinson was assinged to traffic duty as a "punishment detail" in retaliation for his activities with the Afro-American Patrolmen's League. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12506 Speaker 1: --suspended without pay for a year for my activities with the Afro-American Patrolman's League. And that was my first day back on the job. And when I came back on the job, I promptly announced that we were filing a lawsuit, charging the [Chicago Police] Department [Chicago, Illinois] with discrimination. And I was downtown at Police Headquarters. I had just come out of the superintendent's office, getting my old star and, and badge back. Speaker 2: [African American police activist Renault Robinson holds up his police star and badge as he returns to work after a year's suspension Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970. Photo printed in unidentified publication. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12507 Speaker 1: The picture on the right is a fundraiser with U.S. Attorney General at the time, Ramsey Clark, and the late Whitney [M.] Young, who was director of the [National] Urban League. They both helped us [The Afro-American Patrolman's League] in our first major fundraiser as an organization. That took place in 1971 at the downtown [Chicago] Hilton Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]. It was our first major fundraiser, and Ramsey came into town to be a primary speaker at, at the dinner. It was a big success. It was a hundred dollars a plate. Speaker 2: [Photo of Renault Robinson with U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark and National Urban League director Whitney M. Young, at a fundraiser for The Afro-American Patrolman's League, which was headed by Robinson; Chicago, Illinois, 1971. Photo is published in unidentified book. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12508 Speaker 1: It's a picture of me and Ralph Metcalfe, who was a congressman at the time. This was in 1972, and this was the issue of police brutality where we had been working with Ralph and his, members of his ward organization, one of which who was beaten up by the police. He was a dentist-- Speaker 2: Dr. [Herbert] Odom? Speaker 1: Dr., yeah, Odom. And as a result of that, we were able to convince Ralph to join the struggle to fight police brutality. Up to that point, he had been totally silent on the issue. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson with Congressman Ralph Metcalfe, Chicago, Illinois, 1972. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12509 Speaker 1: That's a picture taken downtown [Chicago, Illinois] in Loop traffic. They wanted to isolate me so I couldn't talk to other policemen and wouldn't be around white policemen. So they put me on a street corner, and gave me a traffic whistle and a white hat. Speaker 2: The year? Speaker 1: 19--early '70s [1970s]. It was about '72 [1972] when I came back from suspension. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson, leader of the Afro-American Patrolmen's League, with white traffic police hat and traffic whistle; the assignment to traffic duty was in retaliation for his activities with the AAPL, including a discrimination lawsuit; Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970. Chicago, Illinois, ca. early 1970s. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12510 Speaker 1: This picture was taken in the, in the Third Police District [Chicago, Illinois], right after I was transferred from the Detective's Unit, after the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League formed. When I got to the station, this greeted me on, in the bathroom on the wall. It says "Renault Robinson is a [Black] Panther, dog ass," among other things. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson, leader of the Afro-American Patrolmen's League, stands beside a racist cartoon depiction of a 'savage' with his name written below, on the bathroom wall in the Third Police District statioin, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1968. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12511 Speaker 1: This is a picture of me attending school, Roosevelt University. After I'd get out from work, I was a student at Roosevelt University which is located in downtown Chicago [Illinois]. And I went there, and I got a Bachelors and a Masters degree. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson at Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12512 Speaker 1: This picture was taken, I think shortly after I was appointed to the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] Board. That's taken in a CHA hallway over in Robert Taylor [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and they did a story on me, and my efforts to try and improve public housing. June of 1980. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson on the cover of the Chicago Tribune Sunday magazine, photographed in the hallway of a building at the Robert Taylor Homes public housing project, shortly after his appointment to the board of the Chicago Housing Authority; Chicago, Illinois, June 1980. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12513 Speaker 1: Picture taken in a woman's home; there was a brutality complaint lodged against the police. And we went over to the lady's house interview her and to take a statement from her. We had a police brutality complaint service for any citizen that felt brutalized by the police. And we would send officers to their homes or they could come into our office. We'd take formal statements from them, and we would take these statements to the U.S. Attorney and the States Attorney's office. And we would also file protests against the police officer and try and get him fired--these officers fired. Speaker 2: [Unidentified victim of police brutality gives report to the Afro-American Patrolmen's League. African American woman and family, sitting at table in her home; police cap on table; Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Renault Robinson.] Story_ID: 12514 Speaker 1: Our office, and I was interviewing with a young man who had been harassed by the police. And I was taking a complaint. This is his wife next to him, and we filed an official complaint on his behalf. And he received relief from the [Chicago Police] Department [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: [Renault Robinson with unidentified victims of police harassment, Chicago, Illinois. From the collection of Renault Robinson.]..