 Story_ID: 127158 Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to get started with our History Makers interview, my name is Cheryl Butler. Speaker 2: Nice to meet you. Speaker 1: Nice to meet you too. I'll be conducting the interview. We're also joined by Scott Stearns who's the videographer and I'd like you to say your full name including middle name and spell it. Speaker 2: Robin Carolle Robinson. R-O-B-I-N, Carolle is C-A-R-O-L-L-E, because that was Billy Eckstein's wife's name and spelling and that's (laughter) who my middle name is after. Last name Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: When were you born and where? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957] in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: On what day? Speaker 2: August 4 [1957]. Story_ID: 127159 Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 8th of February. Did we decide it was the 8th? That's insane, today is the 8th, 5th, 6th, 7th. Today is the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think it's the 7th. Speaker 2: --seventh. We're going to start this again. Take 999. Today is the 7th of February, 2008 [February 7, 2008]. Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview today? Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois], at WFLD television. Speaker 1: What is your profession? Speaker 2: I am a broadcast journalist. Story_ID: 127160 Speaker 1: Just a few fun questions to get things started. What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color. I real--I just like color. I also like color to go with something plain. So, I like saddle gray and I like black and I like chocolate brown and I like burnt orange and I like Kelly green I like olive green and I like purple and I like pink. I like color--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: --plain and simple. Speaker 1: A variety? Speaker 2: Uh hum. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? I haven't--I, I, I'm not one to bestow favorite status on much of anything, just because I'm, I--variety really is kind of my favorite thing. It's to have a lot of different things so if I gave you a favorite food--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What are some of the favorites? Speaker 2: Oh, some of the favorites, I can do that. I like collard greens and I like catfish and I love a good pork roast rolled in cracked black pepper. I like, I like rice and red beans, I like black-eyed peas, I like pork chops. Let's see, what do I--I love sushi. I like hot-water cornbread. I like--when I am going to cook something for myself that I really want to enjoy, usually I just make a really simple baked chicken with a lot of Cajun seasoning on it and rice and gravy and zucchini and onions. Am I makin' you hungry? Speaker 1: It sounds really good--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, so, (laughter) I like all--it's terrible, I, I, I really--I like food, (laughter) alright, plain and simple. Story_ID: 127161 Speaker 1: Is there a particular season you like better than others? Speaker 2: You are not gonna like my answer to any--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You like all of them? Speaker 2: --of these. Well, I grew up in Southern California, but I spent the last twenty-three years in Chicago [Illinois], and I spent a few years in the interim in Denver [Colorado] and I found something that I liked about all of them. Southern California we have no appreciation for our good weather, cause it's kind of good all the time. But, but on certain days it will be really great and you'll notice, wow, it's not hazy, it's not too hot, it's, you know, it's perfect and you may notice that but you may not even notice because it's never too terrible. I went to Denver where they had four distinct seasons and I mean they change on the calendar date, and I really liked that about Denver, but it was kind of dry, bad on your hair and nails and skin. Then I come to Chicago where we have no spring. I mean, it basically goes winter lasts until June and then you have summer, we have a nice fall. I don't (laughter) have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No spring. Speaker 2: --favorite. In the winter I like to ski, I like the fall 'cause it's, it's pretty and you know, things are changing colors. Particularly coming from California I have an appreciation for the, the changing colors in the fall 'cause we don't have that necessarily in California. And then when things do come back to life after winter I think they come back to a more vibrant life because they died back. In California things are always green, but they're not real green. You know (laughter), it's kind of that--evergreen is not the brightest green you've ever seen because it has to stay green year-round, so my theory is since things got to rest, be dormant, whatever, over the winter then it's just lush, bright fabulous green. Looks like you could just bite into it and that's something that I experienced after leaving California. So, having not answered your question about a favorite season--(simultaneous)--(laughter) Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: --I'm sorry. Speaker 1: No, that's a brilliant answer though--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I just like, Speaker 1: -- you enjoy contrast--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: --complexity. Where do you like to vacation? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm the worst interview--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --I've not--I don't think I've ever been interviewed and this is probably why. I like to--I like to--my ideal vacation would be to go skiing in Colorado, and get all that good exercise and you know, the sun burn in the snow and, and, you know, and, and, work--that and get better and then pack my ski gear up and ship it back home and pack myself up and ship me off to Jamaica. Okay (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --that would be, that would be my ideal vacation. It really would be a stu--a study of contrast. But I do tend to do three different types of vacation. One is to do--get some good exercise in, whether it's hiking or skiing or something. The other would be to just lay around in the sun and the third would be to discover something, explore something, go to someplace historic, you know, I went to South Africa, you know, or if, or if you, go to Europe or you go to Mexico or some place that has some sort of--somethin' you can learn about, somethin', somethin', somethin'--it's kind of an educational vacation. A sightseeing vacation, and some vacations the only sight I want to see is, is the bottom of my glass. Speaker 1: Right, and the beach (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And the beach, exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote or saying? Speaker 2: It's my own. It's that there's no such thing as a dead-end job, only dead-end people. And that's, I, I, I--if I had a person who was working for me and all there--there whole job was to sweep the floor and they swept that floor so beautifully that I could never find anything on it, I would find something else for that person to do. Because if they could do that and, and, and make an art of it, you know and take pride in it, then they can take that and translate it to some other task. So that's--and I came up with that when I finally made myself take a job as a secretary when I really wanted to be Barbara Walters, so (laughter) it was--and it worked out for me. But that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And you were a great secretary? Speaker 2: I was a good secretary. And I was beyond a secretary. I was--and I was not the secretary that said I won't pick up your dry cleaning and I won't get your coffee. I will and I will and it'll be, and it'll be--and I'll do it perfectly (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --okay and I will do it---and I will do other things and you haven't asked me to do so that you can see, you know, how much beyond a secretary I can become. Story_ID: 127162 Speaker 1: I want to find out a little bit about your family --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --background. Tell me your mother's full name, including her maiden name and spell it please. Speaker 2: Okay, it is Mati Delores Huckaby. Mati is M-A-T-I, not because my grandmother [Ruth Bell] was hip, but because she spelled everything phonetically, she did not know that Mattie was M-A-T-T-I-E was short for Matilda, but she liked the name Mati. Dolores, D-O-L-O-R-E-S, Huckaby, H-U-C-K-A-B-Y, that's my mother's maiden name and of course now it's Mati Robinson, but. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born? Speaker 2: Eighty-three years ago (laughter). So I know because we gave her--we don't keep track of our parents ages that readily, oddly enough. But we gave her an eightieth birthday party three years ago and we said that was the last humongous pot of gumbo we were ever going to let her cook, 'cause it seemed like we were cookin' for days and days and we said, shoot she might not live past your eightieth birthday party at this rate. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's her birthday? Speaker 2: November 7. Speaker 1: Has she told you a little bit about her family background? Did she have siblings? Speaker 2: She has--had two brothers they did not have the same father as she did. She grew up in Texas and her mother worked cleaning houses for people, and one of the homes that she cleaned was of a German family and she ended up being, probably not willingly, but she ended up--the father of that family, was my mother's father. And my mother's mother was married to a black man at the time, but sh--here along came my mother, lookin' every bit like her last name should be Mueller, and (laughter) and they called it back then havin' a nigga up a tree. Which meant that he--the, the husband could not like it all he wanted, but there wasn't much he could do but sit up there and, and watch it happen. I mean, you cou--could--you know, did you want--did, did she wanna keep workin'? Did they wanna, did they wanna raise a fuss about it, did he love his wife, did he--it was very kind of an interesting, you know, back in the--which--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And so every--I mean it was clear, everybody knew? Speaker 2: It was clear, and, and, and it was--but it was--she was not acknowledged by him, she was acknowledged by her mother's husband. And she was a part of, of, of my grandmother--her husband's family, and his--then the two sons that my grandmother had with him were considered her brothers and she considered her--that to be her father, her--my grandmother's husband. Speaker 1: So your mother was bi-racial? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And her biological father's last name was Mueller? Speaker 2: Uh hum. Speaker 1: Do you know his first name--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --by chance. Okay, Mr. Mueller--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And, and it took me--my grandmother was eighty herself before she told me the man's last name (laughter). And, and my mother already knew it also, I guess, this wasn't somethin'--it was kinda like--like you said, biological father and, and, and what impact did he have on anybody? None, because he had--he never, you know, he wasn't her father, except biologically, and. Speaker 1: Did everybody in the community know? Speaker 2: Uh hum. Everybody in the community knew and it, it didn't work in her favor very well because she was light skinned with long stingy hair (laughter) and she was, you know, but she was black and she lived in the black neighborhood and she--her friends were black, her brothers were black, her mother and father were black and biological father was, you know, had no, no influence whatsoever, she doesn't think. You know, she says, you know, he may have, you know, done something minor on occasion, you know, bought her something, gift to her mother or something. But she says it was not, you know. Speaker 1: Was there this moment of discovery, I mean was it once your mother was born and they saw her complexion and everything that they realized her father was Mr.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: -- Mueller? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't, I really don't know, as I said, it was, it was not uncommon back in those days in the south or in Texas or in, in many parts of this country. And so, so I don't know how in, in their family they handled it, if they just kinda sai--you know, just everybody knew but nobody talked about it or if, you know, but I know that my grandmother, my mother's mother was a--Ruth Bell, was a very strong woman and, you know, but in those days if you were pregnant you were just pregnant. There wasn't really much you were gonna' do about it and you took care of your kids, or you were worthless (laughter). So, she, she did and, and, and we never really knew anything of Mueller, at all. Story_ID: 127163 Speaker 1: Fascinating story. Your maternal grandmother, what's her name? Speaker 2: My mother's [Mati Delores Huckaby's] mother is Ruth Bell. Speaker 1: Oh, Ruth Bell is the grandmother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh hum. Speaker 1: --not the great grandmother? Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh hum. Speaker 1: And her husband's name? Speaker 2: Huckaby, so that's my, that's--we call her Ruth Bell because later she went back to her maiden name after Mr. Huckaby died. But, so she was really Ruth Bell Huckaby, we think. You know--there are not a lot of records. I don't think that you can find a birth certificate for my mother or for--certainly not for Ruth Bell. And so we were never quite certain of her age, we believe she died at 104, though, because by then she was living with my parents in California, so. Speaker 1: What--in--Mr. Huckaby, your maternal grandfather, --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Kind of. Speaker 1: --kind of, right, step grandfather (laughter) she--he is the one who acknowledged your mother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh hum. Speaker 1: --do you know his first name? Speaker 2: No, idea. I never, never laid eyes on him, from the time that I knew my grandmother she was, she did not have a husband. My mother's mother, she lived on her own in Dallas, Texas and she--it was just her. Speaker 1: Did she separate from her husband after? Speaker 2: No, Mr. Huckaby died, okay, so it's, it's it may all sound very confusing (laughter) but he died and he-my grandmother had my mother and two brothers. So I had two uncles, Uncle Bob and Uncle Joe. And--but that's all I knew, I never knew her to have--I never knew any, any grandfather, stepbrother wise all on my mother's side, it was just my mother's mother, Big Momma we called her. Story_ID: 127164 Speaker 1: What other stories did your mother [Mati Huckaby Robinson] tell you about growing up, especially the fact that she was so fair, you know, with long hair and all that kind of stuff, what--did she tell you stories about how she was treated? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--she was treated, you know, by black people, like you think you're cute, or you think you're all that, and she really was very smart, she was a very smart student and, and, and therefore, people who didn't like the way she looked or the way she performed, you know, really found, you know--talk about haters, I mean that may be a term from the modern days but I think it (laughter) goes way back. But she, but she was, she was scrappy and she was, she was not fearful as a child and Big Momma wasn't havin' any fearful children and it was, you know you come in runnin' sayin,' you know, they're after me (laughter) then, then her mother would turn around and say, then, you better, you better go out there and get them before they get you. And you know it was a very rural Texas upbringing and schooling and lotta, lotta racism. She actually was, she was the best student in her, in her school and she, she did tell me that she--and they were very, very poor and--but her, her good friend's mother was a caterer and they had money and I--we--that, that was her best friend that remained her best friend when they became adults and I, I knew her as my aunt. But she remembers once, Aunt Jean--well, I call her Aunt Jean, but it was her friend Jean whose mother's name was Jewel and who--all her daughters' names began with J, so it was Aunt Jean, Jack, Jill (laughter) and Jewel was the grandmother, but she was, she was very--a very well know caterer to the white families in, in Dallas, Texas and she would, she, she grew her business that way and I don't think they even realized how wealthy they were making this woman, who was my mother's best friend's mother. But my--she said that Aunt Jean, her best friend had gotten a settee, a little, a little couch and, and--with a--you know like a couch kind of a bed thing for her bedroom and my mother loved it so and, and God, it was just the most, you know, the most royal thing she'd ever seen. And so her mother, my grandmother, went out and got some boxes that they--wooden crates that they would bring produce an, an fruit and things in an, and, and, covered them with cardboard and then foam and then fabric and made her a settee (laughter) and she, and, and you know, made her a version of it and my grandmother would make anything out of anything. And she--that was just, you know, that was what she did, and I remember staying at her house when I was young and I don't think we--that anything that we slept on was really a bed, not bed springs and that kind of thing--was all something of her manufacture. Which she could then, really make kind of look like the real thing. We, we, we used to--looking back we think that probably many parts of her home (laughter) were things that she had kinda put together herself to expand on the original one or two rooms. But it was, you know, it was, it was a hard childhood, but she said she had a good time, she said she, you know, she played out in the dirt with the guys and she had two brothers and, and they looked after and she was smart in school and she was determined that nobody was gonna make her embarrassed of that fact. She got a scholarship to the, the better college in town and that she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What was that? Speaker 2: --I have no idea what the name of it was, but she said that's the one regret she has, she did not take that scholarship because she said I can go up there with the rich girls but I don't have the clothes to wear, I don't--I can't maintain the, you know, 'cause back then, even among, among African Americans there was a soc--high society, they had the long gloves and the cotillions and, and, you know, tryin' to be, you know, of, of upper echelon because it was, it was a caste system within, within the downtrodden and, so she said she didn't want to go there, she said it was too far. But really, she said the reason she didn't go was because she couldn't, she knew she would not fit in, and so she went to whatever, whatever, community college it was that, that, that the other poor people went to and ended up getting married to a--her first marriage was not something that, that, this probably kinda--since I can't go off to the college I want to, let me marry this exciting guy here and that didn't work out for her but--and she had one daughter, my oldest sister, from that marriage. Story_ID: 127165 Speaker 1: And you said this was a rural Texas town, do you know the name of the town? Or the part of Texas? Speaker 2: It's--the name of the town, we had one, one--it's outside of Dallas, so, is that west Texas? I--beats me--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, that's great; I'll try Dallas--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Texas, Texas is as big as a country if you drive through there okay (laughter) so outside of Dallas because I know my grandmother [Ruth Bell] later lived in Dallas, in Dallas proper. Speaker 1: And you mentioned that your mother [Mati Huckaby Robinson] faced racial issues, this is, you know, south, what, what kinda stories did she tell you about those racial incidents? Speaker 2: You know she--she's not very specific, I don't think that she had anything really heinous happen to her, that, that, that scarred her ju--but she just experienced the racial hatred from both sides, you know, from black and from white because she was--even though she said that was--it's not like every black person was gonna hate you 'cause you were light-skinned because, she said, you know, it's very common that you know, and, and,and, you know, she says, part of it was because, you know, light-skinned people get together and say, now, we're better than them and she said it was tha, that, whole, that whole self-hate (laughter) thing that was going on as peo--as we worked through, the, the idea that somehow that--s'not just your ethnicity, but the shade of the color of your skin was somehow important in, in your position in life because it was in this country. And that, you know, people buying into that really, self-destructive code for, for quite some time, but that's really when it was in its heyday, you know, so she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, so she experienced that whole--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --she experienced it but she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: colorism and the hierarchy and she got some benefits from it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: and some, and some benefits from it an--but, but because she re--refused to not be black she als--you know, she said was, the you know--I said, well mamma, you know, these days, I remember we--when I was a ba--I don't remember this, but I remember being in these parking lots, and this is skipping ahead quite a bit, when we were moving apparently, my dad says we were moving from--I don't know--I remember a long road trip and we were coming to California so it must have been from Chicago [Illinois] to California in about 1960 'cause I was born in 1957 in Chicago and I remember my brother was, it was me and my brother it was just the two of us at that time and we kept--and the reason the trip was memorable because I was very young is because we were some place in the desert and, and my brother caught a bat and that really made the trip, you know, stand out (laughter) because he told me he was going to turn into Count Dracula and he was going to suck my blood and all that, but the, the reason that we had so much time on our hands we were spending a lot of time in parking lots, we could not find a hotel because they would not rent a hotel room to this black family. And my father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] is black and looks black, he's not, you know (laughter)--it seems so strange to be describing these kinds of things, but you know, he's, he's, he's gotta lotta mixtures goin' on in his background too, but he--you could tell that he is definitely not a white man and, and my mother said that that's the first time in her life that she actually considered just going up to the front desk and rentin' a room herself (laughter) because. Speaker 1: And just passing? Speaker 2: And just passing, but she said it just, she said it wasn't worth it, she said, I wouldn't've, I wouldn't've got any sleep, I would have been, you know, she said you just--you just can't be, you can't try to step outside of who you are and she said it really was never even presented as a possibility in her life growing up, it just wasn't, it wasn't something yo--it was you're black you just light, okay (laughter) and, and that was it. Speaker 1: So she never passed for white? Speaker 2: And never--and she said it never--she said--and when--I remember askin' her once 'cause we were watching that movie, the famous movie about the girl who passed for, for white, oh shoot--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I know that--I know that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --you know the movie? Speaker 1: --movie so well. Speaker 2: 'Imitation of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Life.' Speaker 2: 'of Life.' Speaker 1: Yes, Speaker 2: And I said, Mamma, you, you could've passed", she said, "No, I couldn't have" she said, "'Cause soon, soon as I opened my mouth I was black (laughter) as, as the, as the nappiest, darkest, you know she said it didn't--I could not have, she said, and I couldn't, she said the H--she said this is drama, she says honey this did not happen a lot, she said people really did not, they did not pass because you know peo--you know your own. And it's--she said it's not as, it's not as easy as just looking, you know, like you're white, just being light enough and, and, you know, she says and plus, she says, my hair is straight now but le-let a little fog or, you know, rain come down and there would go, would go back, but she said, she said she, she told me--and I thought that wasn't finish, she said, she thought was more of a, of a Hollywood invention that she did not think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So she didn't know people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now maybe--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: who passed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She did not, she did not, she said it was just not, it just was, she said how difficult would it be, it would be like tryin' to live outside of yourself, you know, what, what do you do with your family. What do you do with your sib--she thinks that's kind of a Hollywood invention, she said, she said I'm not sayin' it never happened, but she said it just, it just, it isn't, it isn't as easy as all that-- Story_ID: 127166 Speaker 1: She went--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --it was interesting. Speaker 1: -- to black schools? Speaker 2: Uh hum, in the black neighborhoods, and if there was a, Jim Crow, she was on the other side of the line, I mean, she [mother Mati Huckaby Robinson] was black and, and I guess, you know people from that, from that era--it's very hard for us, I think these days to comprehend even the consideration of such a thing, and, you know, I do know that in my family, you know, we look around and, and I know my fa--we all have the same mother and father [Louie Robinson, Jr.], me and my, my two brothers and sister, there are six of us together, but, with the same parents, it's myself, my brother and sister, and my brother's a little bit lighter than me and my sister's a little bit lighter than him. So we look like, if you, if you were do--the color scale we would be like stair steps but, you know, it's genetically, it's, it's, it's the most irrelevant thing in the world (laughter) you know, the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, that's the black family. Speaker 2: shade of your skin, exactly, it really is, so. Speaker 1: And you mentioned your mother had two brothers? Speaker 2: (Nodding) uh hum. Speaker 1: Where did she fall and what was the birth order? Speaker 2: She was the youngest. Speaker 1: And, was there more folklore about the Mueller family? Speaker 2: Nope, she does--she really doesn't--it's--as communicative as my mother is, and really doesn't--she's always been very direct, to the point, that, that some people were frightened of her, I don't think it's because she didn't--Oh, it's too painful to talk about it, I just don't think she thought it was important. I don't think that she--I think she, I think she dismissed them as they dismissed her and, you know, I'm sure some psychiatrist could put her on a couch and find out that that really, "You've really got some deep seated, you know, need to know or explore, but, at this point I don't think that's--that she's go--buy into that. I just think--that--they aren't part of my family. Speaker 1: Did your grandmother [Ruth Bell] have the same--did she keep the same professional trajectory throughout her life, was she always working for white families--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Nodding) uh hum, uh hum. Speaker 1: or did she--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, she always, she always--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: do some other things? Speaker 2: --was--she, she, would clean or cook for white families and the last woman that she worked for for a very long time, I, I , think probably ten or twelve years was the one woman who put her on, like a, had her as an actual employee. Paid her by check and paid social security so that when my--when she was older she got social security otherwise there would have been no record of her ever having worked ever (laughter) because everybody else was paying, you know, cash--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Cash under. Speaker 2: --money under the table. So, this, this--so she was able to get social security when she retired. And by then, you know, she--her, her, her kids were, were, they took care of her, they, they--my, my uncles and my mother she wasn't gonna, she, she had made sure that they had gotten educated and, and worked and my uncles actually stayed in Dallas not far from her and my mom's the one that, you know, my mom said, my mom said her, her and my dad, who she did meet in Texas, they did everything they could, their whole goal was to get the heck out of Texas (laughter) so, they managed that. Story_ID: 127167 Speaker 1: Speaking of your father, I'd like to explore his history, what's your father's full name? Speaker 2: Louie Robinson, Jr. Except his, his father is passed and so we understand we don't have to call him Junior anymore but I'm just used to calling him that. Speaker 1: And spell his first name. Speaker 2: L-O-U-I-E. Speaker 1: Where was he born and when? Speaker 2: He was born in Texas, in Mineral Wells, Texas. Speaker 1: Mineral? Speaker 2: Mineral Wells and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Approximately when? Speaker 2: He's about two years younger than my mother [Mati Huckaby Robinson], so, so he's eighty-one, math's not my strong suite (laughter), he started a, an autobiography recently, but we can't, we can't seem to get him to, to, continue it so--he's busy, so. Speaker 1: Okay, I understand that. Speaker 2: He says, he says--I said--he says often that he doesn't think his life was interesting enough to, to, to be a book, but it really is. Speaker 1: I'm sure, well, let's find out about his life. Tell me about his family. Speaker 2: Well, he was actually raised by his mother [Bessie Brown] and his, his grandfather [J.U. Wyatt]. His mother's, mother [sic] who was a porter and was a very nice man, to hear him tell it, until he had a drink (laughter) he said he would say--he said he wasn't--he wasn't one of those friendly drunks. He said, that in fact he would become a whole entirely different person, but that his grandmother [Annie Wyatt], his mother's mother was, you know, wasn't--wouldn't, wouldn't put up with any, nonsense from him so it was, he said he was raised by two very strong people. And his mother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: --was there. Bessie, B-E-S-S-I-E Speaker 1: Do you know her maiden name? Speaker 2: You know what, I don't believe I do. I know her--she--he--she and my father's father didn't stay together long at all after he was born. But I did know my father's father. He moved to Oklahoma and remarried and didn't--never had any more children so my father was an only child. But then my grandmother remarried a man named John Brown who I really knew as my grandfather before I knew my father's father. But I knew I had a grandfather and kind of a step grandfather and a grandfather. So I knew both my grandfather's on my father's side. And--but once she got established with, you know, in, in a place of her own with, with John Brown my dad went and lived with them, but he was raised mostly by his, his grandparents. Speaker 1: What did your grandparents then do for a living on your father's side? Speaker 2: My gr--they were teachers. My grandmother was a teacher, Grandmother Bessie was a teacher, she married a school principal and my grandfather, my, my dad's biological father. Speaker 1: Louie? Speaker 2: Louie Robinson Sr., I don't know what he was--he was in education also in, in Oklahoma, He died quite--he died quite--before any of the other grandparents and so. Speaker 1: And John Brown was the principal? Speaker 2: Was the principal, in Tyler, Texas. Speaker 1: I- my dad lived in Tyler. Speaker 2: You're kidding? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Right--well actually they lived in Troup, but he was (laughter)--which if you--I mean would only--only way you would know of Troup is if you knew of Tyler, Troup is tiny. Speaker 1: Do you know--so they were college educated? Speaker 2: Uh hum. Speaker 1: Do you know where they went to school? Speaker 2: No idea. Speaker 1: Did they go to school in Tyler? Texas College? Speaker 2: No idea. Story_ID: 127168 Speaker 1: What stories has your father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] told you about his childhood in Texas? Speaker 2: He tells me a lot of stories about, about his grandfather [J.U. Wyatt] being very disciplined in showing him, you know, how to shine shoes, dress right, to--'cause as a porter, you know that's, that was kind of a high ranking job working on the trains and then about, you know, and about what a total change it would be if his grandfather were drinking and how that really, really made him think that he didn't wanna ever have, you know, alcohol have control of him (laughter) because if--it could turn, turn into such a totally different person. Speaker 1: What was his name--his--your dad--so your great grandfather on your dad's side? Speaker 2: I don't know Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Isn't that terrible, I, I have it written down somewhere but I don't know off--I should--I, I'll Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: So he was a porter? Speaker 2: He was a porter, and my great grandmother, Annie Wyatt, I know her name, and my gran--so my great grandfather's name--if it was Annie Wyatt. Speaker 1: Annie? Speaker 2: What was, Annie, Annie Wyatt--'cause my great grandmother was still living with my grandmother when I was a child, so I, I knew her--Annie Wyatt, not John Wyatt. I have that confused with John Brown. Speaker 1: What did she do, Annie? Speaker 2: She stayed home. (Laughter) she stayed home took care everybody and, and, and threatened to kill her husband on several occasions and he believed her and (laughter) so did everybody else, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: For drinking, were there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: If there were--yeah Speaker 1: still worries about his drinking? Speaker 2: there were--if there, you know, you drink but if you think you gonna come in here and raise hell in my house, you know, you--have another think comin' and I have--what is--what is granddaddy Wyatt's-- I wanna say John, but I think I have that confused with John Brown, but any way, Mr. Wyatt, great granddaddy Wyatt was the porter, and my and they had--there was another child. Grandmother Bessie [Brown] had a brother, who would have been my father's uncle who died and the one thing that I do recall was my dad always making us get tetanus shots every time we step on a--get to close to a rusty nail we had to get tetanus shots because this brother died of, tetanus. Of, the, you know--he--and it was a slow and painful and horrible death and he died right there in the house and so, you know, just for lack of, of available medical care. But he, he said he, you know. Speaker 1: Was this an older brother? Speaker 2: This was my--I don't know, this was my grandmother's brother is all I know. Speaker 1: Oh, it was your grandmother's brother? Speaker 2: My grandmother's brother, so it'd my father's uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I, I blame him for all the, the tetanus shot's I've had to get. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I've had more boosters, okay than you could--I was also kinda accident-prone as a child, but I've had a lot of tet--tetanus boosters because, he died of whatever it is you get when you don't have a tetanus shot and you get the infection, he died of it, so. Speaker 1: It--did your father's family experience some prestige because they were educated and they were teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, I imagine so, I imagine so. I know that they thought education was important. Story_ID: 127169 Speaker 1: So the name of your father's grandfather, the porter? Speaker 2: It was J. U. Wyatt and that was that--he and Annie Wyatt raised my father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] in his younger days until his mother [Bessie Brown] remarried and he went back to live with her, but he mostly remembers--he said he remembers most of his life lessons as a child being from grandmother Wyatt and, and, ole man Wyatt, as he puts it, so. Speaker 1: And you were going to say that Louie Robinson [Sr.], your grandfather, his profession? Speaker 2: He was a--he was basically maintenance man in a bank in Enid, Oklahoma, and I do remember going to visit him in Oklahoma, that being the first place--and really the only pace that I ever saw a person, with my own eyes--a, a, a, Jim Crow sign. And I--I--I saw a, a, drinking fountain for whites and a drinking fountain for blacks. And I was young at the time, I was probably 11 years old and I remember saying, "Ooh, I'm going to drink out that other drinking fountain" (laughter) and, a, a playmate who was a, you know, a friend's child, was with me at the time said, "Look, you can start that mess in California, but don't come, don't come in here creatin' some big problems in Enid (laughter). And I said, "Well, I bet you the water in that drinking fountain is better, because anybody that would do this, would be dirty enough to dirty your water." And I was, I was young at the time but I do remember--I never seen that sign. I'd heard about it, I'd read about it, I knew about it, but to actually see it with my own eyes and realize it was--it was still in existence in my lifetime was, was a little startling. Speaker 1: Around 1968? Speaker 2: (Nodding) uh hum. Speaker 1: Do you remember anything else from that trip to see your grandfather in Oklahoma? Speaker 2: I, I, no, I don't--I remember--I remember his car, he had a Deuce and a Quarter, as they call it. He had a 225 (laughter). It was a, it was a big long automobile and they lived in a really nice, very manicured, black neighborhood in Enid, you know. It was, it was segregated city, but these were, these were hard-workin', proud, well-kept, you now, almost to a fault they were, you know, it was as if to prove, you know, look we really are, you know, human beings just like, just like you. It was a, it was a different time in our, in our history, and, you know, when we got past that (laughter) said, look we don't care--you know, right about the time we were starting to burn things up and say, you know, if you won't accept that then, then, how about this, you know, it's, it was a different way of, of ,of combating stereotypes and, and discrimination was to just so how, you know how well you could live. Story_ID: 127170 Speaker 1: Now, let's go back, 1957, Chicago [Illinois], that's when you were born, what's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I--my earliest childhood memory that's really vivid that's more--not more than just bits and pieces, I mean I remember vaguely playing in an alley that seemed awfully clean as I compare to alleys that I see today. We had a little dog named Dee Dee and I remember that, I--and I then there's a picture actually of me playing in an alley, with, with the dog so I don't know why that is so memorable for me but I don't remember anything about Chicago, I remember the trip from--that we drove from Chicago, well, that, that--all, almost everybody drove almost everywhere they went then it wasn't like he jumped on the plane, they drove cross-country and we drove to California. Speaker 1: And you said, we, so you did have siblings. Speaker 2: My, my brother and myself, that's who was, was, was with us at the time. My, my--I have lots of siblings--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, so let's get the list of siblings. Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--let's get the list, I'm, I'm the second to the youngest of six. My youngest sister's five years younger than me, her name is Stacy, S-T-A-C-Y. My--the brother just above me is Greg, Gregory Mark Robinson, and then he's five years older than me, but he's passed away. Twin brothers five years older than him, Ronnie and Michael, from my father's [Louie Robinson, Jr.'s] first marriage, his wife died in childbirth, or right after childbirth, from probably inequitable medical services for--in the black hospitals versus the, the hospital where everybody else went in Texas, in the town in Texas that he lived in at the time. And then my mother [Mati Huckaby Robinson] has a daughter from her first marriage whose five years older than the twins, so she would be the oldest, so we always joked that we were on the five-year plan, and he said, with one set of twins thrown in just to (laughter)--so, so it didn't take thirty years to have all these kids, just twenty-five, okay. Speaker 1: What was that like growing up with siblings who were spaced apart five years? Speaker 2: With that spacing we were never all living in the house at the same time, by the time I came along, my oldest sister was--she actually was--went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and when my parents and myself and my brother moved to California she didn't want to leave Chicago and she was in her last year in high school and she stayed with a friend because she knew she wanted to stay in Chicago and she knew she wanted to go to University of Chicago. She went to University of Chicago so she stayed, my--the twin brothers stayed with my father's mother until we got settled in California and then he went and got them and they came out to California. So, it was just my, my--and my youngest sister wasn't born yet so we never all lived in the house at the same time, but I, I, I think probably what it did was it gave my parents lots of experience of, of, lots of different phases (laughter) of childhood, because nothing really seemed to surprise or shock or throw them for a loop, you know, least it didn't seem like it to me. Speaker 1: What do you recall about that trip from Chicago to California? Speaker 2: It was my first time ever seeing the desert and my brother caught a, a, bat and threatened me with it, you know, it's gonna turn into Dracula tonight, it's gonna suck your blood! But we couldn't get a hotel room, I didn't know it at the time, I just thought we spent a lot of time in parking lots and we drove this--we were driving this station wagon and we couldn't get a hotel room because nobody would rent to a black family, and as I was saying earlier, I, I wanted to ask my momma why didn't you just go in and tell 'em you were white and she says, it just--well it wasn't really an option, said, you know it wasn't, it wasn't, it's easier said than done, and you know, you know, she said, I wouldn't have gotten any rest and you know it could have really caused some problems and that, she said and plus, she said she was just too proud. So, I don't know, I guess they finally must have found someplace to stay. I didn't--I don't recall them--I don't recall being stressed out about not having a place to stay. It was all one big adventure and we were camping out in the car. But I later found out that that was why we were spending so much time in parking lots. Story_ID: 127171 Speaker 1: Where did you move in California? Speaker 2: We moved to Pomona, California, which my father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] was going to work in Los Angeles [California] for [HM John H. Johnson's] Johnson Publishing Company, he was going to become the West Coast Editor of Ebony, he'd already been, he'd already written, edited for--well, started out Negro Digest and then Tan and then ultimately it's what we know as Jet, you know, because it was okay to be tan, but you didn't want to really be jet black, back then, but then we got more militant and it became Jet. And, he went to, you know, John H. Johnson--realized that, that Hollywood was starting to spawn some, some black stars and we needed a West-Coast presence so he sent my dad out to head the West Coast office and he didn't want to raise his family in Los Angeles itself, he wo--thought that suburban life would be, would be better and he'd rather commute and he was probably right (laughter). He was proba--'cause I don't, I don't, you know, I, I, I think probably that that was the, the best thing for us at the time, we were really away from many urban big-city problems and we grew up in a very nice community and, you know, lot of grass and trees and it was, it was, you know. Nice track house in, in Pomona. And he, he commuted every day to Los Angeles and so I didn't see him. Really he'd come home late at night, it'd be dark already and I just remember he'd walk in the door and I'd walk on his feet and he'd walk through the house and that was--and my mom [Mati Huckaby Robinson] was home. And then she went to work after--when I went to school, when I went to kindergarten. Speaker 1: She went back to work--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Where did she work? Speaker 1: She worked at Cal-Poly, California [State] Polytechnic University in Pomona. And eventually she was a secretary first in the counseling department and eventually she became a career counselor and she never did finish college herself. And they used to tell her, you know, you could head this whole department but we can't very well let our students know how far a person can go without a degree when we're here (laughter)--we're, we're in the business of, you know, of bestowing degrees and tellin' em how much it will help improve their life and their career. But, she never, she never did get her college degree. Story_ID: 127172 Speaker 1: And you mentioned that your father [Louie Robinson, Sr.] spent some time at Lincoln University in [Jefferson City] Missouri? Speaker 2: (Nodding) Uh hum. Speaker 1: So tell me about his journey through education. Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--Well, went there--he went there and he was interested in journalism at the time, but he ended up getting drafted and, and went in the [U.S.] Armed Forces and because he could type, he got a desk job, thank goodness, my dad's not--he's not really a jock or a--he's--or a alpha-male kinda guy. I couldn't even imagine him shooting a gun, let alone being on the front lines, I mean he's a courageous man, but he's just, he's, he's very, he's a very reasonable, peaceful, logical, gentle, smart, I mean he just not--he's, he's not a fighter. He's not, he's, he's, he's just reasonable guy, jus--it, it's it sometimes just makes you so mad that you know, that you know my step-friends' dads would scream and yell, and, and, you know, and you, you really knew what was gonna happen when you, when you got in trouble. With my dad it was like, "Oh what's he gonna say?" You know (laughter) you knew he was gonna say something that make you feel--you know, know how wrong you were, but. So he went to the army and, and it really--though he--though it interrupted his in--his education, it kind of reinforced his interest in, in, in documenting things, and, and journalism and and, and being an, an observer and reporter of, of real events. And so when he came out of the army he worked for a black new paper in Texas that kind of showed him that, that not the right way to do things so we won't name the paper, but it's kind of like, you know, if this person buys an ad they get the front page story, you know, and, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The politics of journalism. Speaker 2: Exactly, the politics, of, of, of journalism that wasn't really that, that no one really cared about, 'cause it was the black press. So it wasn't like someone--like, you know, the state, state's attorney general was gonna come and, and, and, you know, and, and, and get 'em for that, they didn't care. It was black people talkin' to black people. But then he went to work for the [Baltimore, Maryland] Baltimore Sun, which of course had a wonderful reputation and, after that came to Chicago [Illinois] to work for Johnson Publishing Company. Speaker 1: And so he had a close working relationship with [HM] John [H.] Johnson? Speaker 2: He had a long working relationship with John Johnson, yes. Speaker 1: What do you know about their relationship? Obviously, I mean, this is an enormous responsibility heading up the West Coast office of Ebony/Jet. Speaker 2: Well, it was a wor--editorial really wasn't--it was--it wasn't as if John H. Johnson came in and said, "This is the story we're going to cover in this month's Ebony." He wasn't--he was the, he was the, the business man, you know, he made sure that, that, you know, that the bills got paid and that, and that, and that Ebony and Jet, you know, remained viable entities and he really left the editorial side to the people that he had hired to, to be the editorial experts-- to Lerone Bennett, to Herb Nipson, to, you know, he had, he had, some fantastic talent editorially and then they really put the magazine together so, you know, if they--when they would say, you--he--we need a West Coast presence, you know it was--he didn't then say, okay, here's what I want them to do on the West Coast, so he had a, you know, the relationship was, was, was more with his--with the other editors that he worked with, but he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So what were his responsibilities on the West Coast, your dad? Speaker 2: Well I would say that my dad--when I was growing up he probably wrote eight out of twelve cover stories for Ebony. Because eight out of twelve covers were some celebrity, you know, I mean, he spent a lot of time in Las Vegas with Sammy Davis and Frank Sinatra and, he, he, he, you know, I mean, there's Sidney Poitier, he did the Jackson Five he did Nancy Wilson he did--I mean we knew, we knew these people, we--he, you know, was--and my father was-- he, he, he's not a star struck type of individual he really, he--it, it never even-- it, it doesn't seem to cross his mind, you know, that, that, that, that these are people that, that, you know, hundreds of thousands of people would like to be sitting with. And I think they all--the celebrities also realized that he was treating them as he would anyone else, which was well. And so he was a, he was a perfect reporter because he didn't inject himself into the story and, you know, and we would have personal relationships with people, would grow out of the story, but never, never to lead to a story. I don't know how, how to describe it he kinda gave me--he gave me a good role of, of, a good model of, of how you treat subjects of your stories that just because the rest of the country or the rest of the world is interested in them they really are just people. Story_ID: 127173 Speaker 1: What were some of the stories he [father Louie Robinson, Jr.] covered on people like Frank Sinatra, Sidney Poitier? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--All right, well he'd cover, you know, he covered the fact that, you know, in the--of the rat pack that Sammy Davis [Jr.] couldn't place his own bets in Las Vegas [Nevada], that he had to have his white valet place the bets because African Americans couldn't do it. He, you know, he covered, he covered the, you know, the, the, the Vida Blue, the first black pitcher in the--in major league baseball. He covered, you know, he covered, he covered, it wasn't just entertainment, because you know entertainment and politics and civil rights all intersected at that time in a major way so he was--an he was--when, when the riots broke out in Watts [Los Angeles, California] he was--every talk show was trying to get my dad on their show, they didn't know any other experts about black people that they could find, I mean he was on Joey Bishop's show for, you know, I think five nights running. There weren't--they didn't have other African American journalists that they could turn to because, oh low and behold, they didn't have any African American journalist, so as the media tried to cover what was the biggest story of the decade they realized that they were also part of the story, part of the problem and, and that they had ignored an entire population of people and their problems and that they were--and that they contributed to the problems because they had no black reporters, they had no black editors. They, you know, they, and they--even if they--even if it wasn't intentional they couldn't very well throw stones at the South, you know, And say, you know, we're enlightened Northerners, but oops, where is our black reporter, so. Speaker 1: What do you remember about that period, you know you mentioned the riots in, in Watts and your father being kind of the black expert, I mean the, the educated intellectual expert? Speaker 2: A black journalist. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Which was not something that they could readily put their hands on, within their own media organizations. Speaker 1: Do you remember his appearances? Speaker 2: Very vaguely, vaguely. And, (laughter) I think it's probably at moments like that that they are glad we lived in the suburbs and not in L.A. [Los Angeles] proper. But, vaguely, it was, you know, I mean it was a, it was a turbulent time. And I was, I--at--a--at an age where I could not really fully participate or fully appreciate that I knew that things were going on. You know my older sister who had stayed in Chicago [Illinois] to finish high school and to go to U.I.C [University of Illinois at Chicago], you know, and she graduated, you know, Magna Cum Laude, or something. She's very, very smart and then dropped out of society and went to Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California] and lived with a bunch of hippies, and you know, this kind of counterculture, you know, anti-war movement. And, and, and we moved from Pomona California to Claremont, California, which is the site of seven colleges so there was a huge antiwar movement in, in our little town and I remember marching, you know, the war moratorium protest and, and it--this is all going on at the same time you have the civil rights protests, so it was a, it was a, it was a, it was exciting times, but it was a time of great change and what a great time to be a journalist. And I, I really realized that, that reality and truth were so much more interesting, the heck with stranger, just so much more interesting than fiction that I--that's when I really decided that I cou, I could, I could document this, I could write about just what's going on, why--you know I remember being in writing classes in junior high school and high school and trying to think of sub--of subjects for, you know, fiction and you know, that's well and good, and they--but they always ended up being subjects about something that had really happened or someone that I really knew or a sit- It just--reality was--who needs to make stuff up (laughter) when you got, when something that good is goin' on in, in fact? Speaker 1: That's an exciting life. Story_ID: 127174 Speaker 1: You mentioned all these celebrities--your father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] interviewed people like Sidney Poitier and Sammy Davis Jr. and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sammy Davis Jr. actually became my godfather, he was--they said it happened--they were at a show and my mother [Mati Huckaby Robinson] was sitting in front, 'cause my dad was doing a story on all of them at the time, and she was pregnant with me and he said something on stage about, you bet not upstage me and go into labor, and (laughter) you know, says, I, I'm getting' a piece of that right now, whatever, I'm gonna become--you know, I--so he became my godfather and he was, he was just a wonderful, just a dear, sweet little bitty man, but (laughter) he was just as nice as he could be and I remember going to his suite in Las Vegas when he'd be performing and, and my dad would, you know, we'd, we'd go to visit him an' he had, you know he had some difficulties, you know he married this, this, Swedish woman, what was her name, May Britt, and that caused quite a, you know, quite a, that was--that was quite the controversy, you know, in the--black man, we like you fine while you, you know, while you singin' and dancin' but, don't think you gonna get some little, you know, blonde wife and we're gonna like you then. So, it was, you know, he went through quite a bit. But the one thing I do remember since he died of lung cancer I remember being in his, in his hotel suites in Las Vegas and he had on every coffee table, as a good host, packs of cigarettes in big glass bowls, not individual, entire packs of cigarettes. You know, what a luxury, but you know, but (laughter) now we look back and say, oh, oh that's not good, okay but back then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That was very hip. Speaker 2: --it was as--yeah--and it was a sign of just how well off he was. But I remember, you know, I'm thirteen years old saying, "Oo, look at that!" (laughter) okay, you know, it's not like, like a bowl of candy, it's a bowl of cigarettes, you know. But it was, it--he was just as nice as he could be and just, just, warm and effervescent and just always, always treated me like, you know, like he was my godfather and not like, oh, you now, there's that kid that I said I was going to be the godfather to all those years ago. And it didn't matter if two or three years went by without him seeing me, he was always, always just a warm, nice individual. Story_ID: 127175 Speaker 1: Do you remember him coming to the house? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Dinners and things like that? What's a favorite Sammy Davis, Jr. memory at your house? Speaker 2: He was always the life of the party. He was always the life of the party, which is funny because my dad [Louie Robinson, Jr.], as I said, is a, is a, is a, is a kind of a gentle and quiet person and, and, and--but he's very sociable and loves good conversation. And I think that was why he and Sammy Davis hit it off because they lov--and they would discuss everything from religion to politics to civil rights to--and I do--and I remember that, that he would--he wo--he wanted to get his point across. He wan--he, he was more than just entertaining, he was a--he really had an opinion on so many things. And, he was a big flirt and he'd--everybody was-- he was always flirtin' with my mom [Mati Huckaby Robinson] and just, you know, just, just, down-home regular kinda person as, as, was everyone that was ever in our home. If they were--if it was a celebrity that, that wasn't--then they just were a story and didn't become a friend, I mean, I, I--my mom has stories about [HM] Harry Belafonte and being here in Chicago [Illinois] and, and you know, him have--tellin' her to try this drink, some drink that she--that he had her try then made her so sick that she said, you know, I--she said, I almost threw up in Harry Belafonte's limo, wouldn't that have been a memory that I would have never lived down. But, I mean, just, you know, and these were--not because he was Harry Belafonte, but because he was someone that they liked that they were hangin' out with and it was--and it was all because of the 'Ebony' Magazine connection. And--but you know, there were a lot of people that were tryin' to interview these, these, stars and they felt an affinity, one for the fact that this was a major black publication and that they were talkin' to a, a, black journalist of, of high standards and, and, and integrity, it was--I could tell it was the mutual respect was, was, everywhere. I remember [HM] Nancy Wilson was playing at a, a, a, I can't remember the--Covina Playhouse I think they call it in West Covina [California], which is a suburb right next to Pomona. Speaker 1: What year are we talking, approximately? Speaker 2: Sixty--had to be, well let's see, I was in high school in '75 [1975] so, I got out in--say, let's say '70 [1970], 1970 and she had a matinee and then an evening show and she came over after the matinee to see my parents in, in between. It's only like twenty minutes away, and, I (laughter) remember she laid down and she slept for like three hours (laughter) and so I said, I said, well mom, I don't think that this lady is gonna have any dinner at all, I said (laughter). They had to wake her up to go back to work--because she wanted to come some place where she could relax. She didn't want to stay there; she didn't want to go to a hotel. She wanted to come to some--to friend's home where she could relax. And it was--I mean it was just, it was just that kinda thing, it was, you never quite knew who was going to be at your house. I mean, it was--my dad knew Michael Jackson when he was little. When he was, you know, the front man of the Jackson Five. I mean, he did stories on them. He did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, what did you think because Michael Jackson is, you know, you're a contemporary? Speaker 2: Yeah, I felt that was very cool and I wanted to go with him and he wouldn't let me Speaker 1: (laughter) okay. So I felt--I--you know he said it wouldn't be professional, and he was right, you know. But it was, you know, that was, that, that was cool. But he was--my father was never--he was never exp--you know, like ruffled by, you know or excited by, or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Not star struck. Speaker 1: Not star struck at all. He had, he had not, not nothing about him. Speaker 2: Were you aware that these were celebrities, people who were respected all over the world really? Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Not really, not really. I didn't have, I didn't have, I didn't have that kind of--I was not awe struck. I mean, I mean, somebody like Michael Jackson, yeah, it was, that was, that was, that was different, but you know, the Jackson Five, really wasn't--we weren't--wasn't Michael Jackson, it was the fact that it was the Jackson Five. Because back then it was--that was it. It was, you know, that was, that was a very cool thing. Because he also did stories, you know, about people who you otherwise would not have heard of, who had had great advancements in business or science that weren't necessarily celebrities and the stories about the celebrities who generally about something that they were doing that was not necessarily just about entertainment or about what their celebrity status was for, so. Speaker 2: Some social issue perhaps--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Some social issue, right-- Story_ID: 127176 Speaker 1: What about Sidney Poitier? Speaker 2: Well, now they were very close, in fact, they still are close. He helped him write, 'This Life' and they're actually working on a book right now ['Life Beyond Measure - letters to my Great-Granddaughter' (2008)], that they've just finished up to follow, 'Measure of a Man' because 'Measure of a Man' was such a, a, a successful book that I think Sidney's publisher said, hurry up, strike while the iron is hot and so that book should be coming out in the next year or so. And, and he and my dad [Louie Robinson, Jr.] joke around about how they had to rush and write it 'cause you know we're both eighty-plus (laughter) and he's like, yeah, we gotta make sure that we can be around long enough to write it and then there's the book tour and all that so they. And it's nice because that really is his contemporary, you know that is--and they--and it's nice that they are still working and sharp and sharper than ever, really, it's, it's nice for me (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What are your memories of the kinds of stories your dad was writing about Sidney? Speaker 2: Well Sidney's always been more than just an actor. He's always--it's always been about--in fact, that was, that's the least of yo--celebrity as an entity is not something Sidney Poitier's really interested in. He's only interested in what it, in what it can--what you can do with your life that really makes a contribution and he, as, as anybody who read 'Measure of a Man' realizes, tha, that comes from a very--he didn't grow up thinking that his voice or image meant anything. It's all about what you do, you know, as he said, as a child they didn't even have a mirror (laughter) okay, so the--or no one had a camera, it wasn't like he, he said--he never saw an image of himself, you know-- Story_ID: 127177 Speaker 1: You were talking about Sidney Poitier, and some of his social activism, his intellectual pursuits that kind of thing, during your childhood do you remember the kind of stories your dad [Louie Robinson, Jr.] was writing about Sidney Poitier? Speaker 2: I don't, I remember--you know what I mean, it--there was always something around the time that I knew, you know, something--'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner' came out or something, or something else significant that was making a big splash. But, you know I wasn't--it, it, I wasn't really into it. I wasn't really, you know, I'd see the cover, I'd know he worked on it 'cause I'd, you know, he'd come home and he'd have--he'd be listening to tapes, you know, for hours and hours of interviews he'd done. And he'd be typing in his really rapid fashion (laughter) and, and then, you know, three months later--because you know, whatever I'd see on the 'Ebony' cover, that month was something he'd worked on three months ago so I didn't really keep up with it that way. And I didn't, I didn't probably give my dad's work the attention that it deserved, but, you know, I was a kid, I was a kid--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Do you have early memories of Sidney, Mr. Poitier at the house? Or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You know I, I, I do now, but at the time it was just another friend at the house, do you know what I mean, it wasn't, it wasn't like this was someone that I was excited was at my house, do you know what I mean? I just--I really, really didn't occur to me that I should be excited that this person is at my house. So. Speaker 1: So, friend of the family? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, it was, it was--and it's not like they were there every week or like they were, you know, they were, they weren't like the, the poker-playin' buddies that came over every Friday night to play poker with my mom [Mati Huckaby Robinson] and dad. It was, you know, 'cause he was a very busy person so it'd be, you know, a couple, three times a year or, you know, wouldn't see him for three or four years. It wasn't like someone that I, that I, felt close to. I was not, you know--I mean later my--Bill Cosby was also a good friend of our family and became a closer friend because my younger sister became friends with, with one of his children. So it's like you make the connection or you don't and it really has nothing to do with how famous someone is, it was just, just people that happened to be in the circles that my dad was, was working in and so they happened to be around us, it wasn't because or in spite of their being well known. Do you know what I mean? Story_ID: 127178 Speaker 1: Can you take me around your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well in--it was--it changed. In Pomona, California it was a nice suburb of Los Angeles [California] when we first, when we first moved there, you know, I--that's when my childhood memories really begin. And it was a, it was a--you know, it was fun growing up a kid in, in, in Southern California, you know. We would--with lots of places to explore, we--there are foot hills, we would hide, we'd go with go carts, we, you know, it was a--very much a, a, a, mixed neighborhood, very integrated. And then the neighborhood, it was, (laughter) it was called Valwood was the name of the, of the residential area. And then as the white people moved away and more and more black people moved in and the realtors started, you know, saying, well this is a black area now and so that whole--the, the, housing values were going down. This is all things I found out later, all I know was that by the time we moved from there, they were start--they had--the official name was still Valwood, but everybody from miles around knew of it as Sin Town (laughter) okay. So it was--just kinda had changed, it had, it had gone through one of those urban suburban demographic changes and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, white flight (unclear)--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: White flight, exactly. All right so then we moved to Claremont, California, which was the home of the Claremont Colleges, which is, Pitzer [College], Harvey Mudd [College], Scripps [College], Cla-Claremont Men's [later Claremont McKenna College], Claremont Graduate School [Claremont Graduate University] and I must be missing two more. But there're twenty-two thousand residents and about forty thousand students in that, in that little town and, and it was only five, ten minute from Pomona, but it was just moving to a nicer neighborhood, I guess my dad [Louie Robinson, Jr.] was doing better and had written a couple of books and 'Ebony' was doing well and so on and so forth so we lived in Claremont, and. Speaker 1: How long did you live in Pomona? Speaker 2: Well, let's see from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) what? Speaker 2: Well, in, in that neighborhood from when I was three and I went to first, second, third grade there, and I went to fourth grade in Claremont and I remember because I got to Claremont and there was no more black people. And I, I, I, do know that I was one of two black students at my elementary school; elementary went from kindergarten to sixth. And, I was in the fourth grade and I remember, I, I stood out quite a bit. I didn't have any problem with the fact there were no black people in Pomona I had had friends black and white and didn't really--we, we, we never made a difference of it, you know, my family didn't make a difference of it, no one, you know, it was not a big deal. The, the whole--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So you had a very diverse--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very diverse group of friends--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --group of friends? Speaker 2: --and, and, and, that diversity was not a topic of discussion. It just--it was not even--it just would--just never occurred to anybody, you know, gee, why are--why aren't all my friends black or why aren't all my friends white. It just was not--it--I, I really had a, a (laughter) very insulated little childhood there-- Story_ID: 127179 Speaker 1: --What was the name of your elementary school in Pomona [California]? Speaker 2: Arroyo--Arroyo High [sic, Arroyo Elementary] School. Speaker 1: Spell that. Speaker 2: A-R-R-O-Y-O, Arroyo. Speaker 1: Okay, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A-R-R--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --that was the elementary school? Speaker 2: That was my elementary school in Pomona and then I went--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, what do you remember about that school? Speaker 2: I just remember walking home from that school, because it would--my--I got in trouble because my girlfriend and I took forever, we would walk a couple of blocks and then we'd sit down on the curb and talk for a minute (laughter) and then we'd get up and walk couple more blocks (laughter)it would take us two or three hours to get home, my mom [Mati Robinson] would get in the car and come lookin' for me worried and she'd spank me all the way home because I'd, you know, y'all come home first and then go sit on the curb and talk. I remember that, that we walked to school, I mean, we--this is, this is the kinda childhood that, I don't know, I--sure kids still do this somewhere my kids live in Chicago [Illinois] nobody walks to school. You now, if you live in the suburbs you can do this and, and, I hope they still do. But I remember walking and enjoying the walks from--home from school and it taking a very long time. Then there was a wash, you know, California has the natural air--drainage, so when it rains, it would flood everything that was built there if it weren't for these, these long washes that they, they, they dug and so when it rains the water can go down there. So, it's a big, like a, imagine the street, you know, down low, but then it had to have the tunnel to go under other things and we would, we would try to walk in the wash and then through the tunnel to the rest of the wash and there was a curve, there was a point in the tunnel where you couldn't see behind you, any light, and you couldn't see in front of you any light. And every day we would try to walk through the wash home. And we'd-- maybe once every ten days, we'd make it and the rest of the time we'd turn around and run back, and you know, go home the regular way. But I remember a lot of the--a lot of natural adventures. I was a very--it was a very outdoors time, it was a good--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Were you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: good way to be a kid. Speaker 1: --were you a tom boy or were you a girly girl? Speaker 2: I was both, I was a tom boy who liked boys. I was so, which means, you know, that I had to be cute too, but I was a--but I, you know completely--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But you would run and jump and? Speaker 2: --get lost in the competition of anything. I dare you to--yes I will (laughter) it was, it was--we were, well, we just--it was just a fun, it was a fun way to be a kid, I, I, think, growing up there. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Do you remember your friends in Pomona? Speaker 2: Sure, I still have 'em, I, I remember Cookie, her real name was Anita, but we called her Cookie and she was a fighter. She was tough. She was, you know, nobody messed with her. And, and people were always messin' with me. People were always wantin' to beat me up. I don't know why, my mom [Mati Huckaby Robinson], my, my--Cookie said it's 'cause I thought I was cute. She said, and probably 'cause you are cute. And I said (laughter), well, I don't want to beat anybody else up so why do they want to beat--she said, 'cause you have a big mouth. You are always (laughter)--she said, you're always talking stuff and you can't do anything to back it up. But they would mess with me because of Cookie, 'cause--and we were just, we were just tight, tight, tight friends and my other best friend was Annie O'Reilly (ph.), and she was a, a little white girl whose dad was a professor at Cal Poly [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona] where my mom worked. And her mom was a stay at home mom who was kind of an artist, she was a, a different person, I never met a person quite like her mother. Her mother was very much a free spirit. Kind of like a, like a hippie before we knew there were gonna be hippies, you know. She was--I mean, she always--she wore tie-dye things and she was painting things and, and she just was, was very different. Speaker 1: Did your friends change as the neighborhood started changing from? Speaker 2: Well, Cookie actually stayed in the neighborhood. Ann and her family moved to nearby Genesha Hills, which kinda where a lot of the, the flight went to, but I think it was also just wantin' to move on--move up. It was--I don't think anybody planned to stay in that house in Valwood for ever. So part of it was just a natural progression of people moving up the housing chain. I don't know that it was all white flight, you know, I was a kid at the time, I, you know, and, it, researchers are still tryin' to figure out exactly what causes neighborhoods to change. It's not always just runnin' from black and brown people. But, but they--we remained friends, even when I moved to Claremont [California], we remained friends and did the sleepovers and we were all, you know, all at different schools. And the funny thing was that Cookie and Annie were not friends. I was friends with both of them and they were both almost like my best friends, but they did not really--they didn't dislike each other, they just didn't, they just didn't mingle. Story_ID: 127180 Speaker 1: And so anyway, I moved to Claremont [California] and-- Speaker 2: Describe that neighborhood, take me around the block. Speaker 1: Of Claremont, or Pomona [California]? Speaker 2: Right, what street did you live on in Claremont? Speaker 1: Radcliffe Drive and it was a long street and the--in the foothills of Claremont so that you could, you could look up and see Mount Baldy. And in those hills were the really wealthy people, really, Padua, there's a, there's an area called Claraboya and just, you know, and we, we could walk up, up, up Indian Hill Boulevard, it would, it dead end-dead-ended at the foothills. And then you could walk into the foot hills and we used to hike them all the time. We'd be gone--I'd go with a girlfriend and we'd pack a lunch and we'd be gone all day long just, just hiking around the hills. It's a--it was a long, street of every house was different. It was not--it was a, it was, it was when they decided that, that if you want to move out of track homes, they would build track homes that didn't look like track homes. In other words, you would never--you wouldn't see your home every fifth home (laughter) okay. You would have to, you'd have to work hard, they'd make it look a little bit different so that they looked like--at the time I didn't know track home from schmack home, it didn't matter to me, but you know, at the time it was what--custom, as close to custom as you could get without being a custom home, but. You know they were nice, you know one-level California-style homes, you know. Had nice backyard, and at--my block was probably a mile long. It went between two major streets, Indian Hill Boulevard and Mills. And at the--and we lived near the Indian Hill Boulevard end of it and if you walked all the way down to Mills, you were at my grammar school, which was Chaparral [Elementary School, Claremont, California], was the name of my grammar school. Speaker 2: Spell it please. Speaker 1: Beats me, C-H-A-P-P-A-R-R-E-L [sic] or R-E-L, whatever--like high chaparral, think of the, think of the geographic, you know, like in the Arroyo is a, is a drainage--a natural drain--an Arroyo--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, Spanish word Speaker 1: -- is like a Canyon, okay and a chaparral is, is the plains, so anyway. Chaparral is also--describes the, the, type of, the type of geography there is there in that kind of--right between the beach and the desert, there is chaparral, so, just a little California (laughter), geology, or geography, whatever it is. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So. Speaker 1: But it was a nice neighborhood. Speaker 2: What do you remember about your school about that elementary school? Speaker 1: I do remember that they had--that it was on two levels. They--I mean, physically, they had the field was up high and you walked down this long, long, long, drive way into the buildings and the, and the, the blacktop. And, as I said, I remember now, at the time it wasn't that striking to me that I was the only little black girl there was one other black student and he was a boy. And it was--it was just a new area, and I don't thi--an black people had not moved in there yet, it wasn't--it was not particularly inexpensive, I, I, now it isn't, I don't think it was then either. And I remember--I, I, I, I remember jus--it was jus, just a very regular upbringing. I do know one time that I was brought home by the principal because my dress was too short and I was in the fifth grade. And he drove me home, and my house was right down the street remember, and I remember being happy about it because I--it was around Halloween time and I'd already--I'd taken a bunch of Halloween candy and I'd eaten it all so when I went home to change I put on a different dress and knee socks and I stuffed my knee socks with more candy so that I could have candy. And then my mother [Mati Robinson] came home from work, she was working at Cal Poly [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona] by then, and, you know I told her, I, I got in trouble my dress was too short and, you know, Mr. Case drove me home--said, oh, okay. And I didn't find out until years later, when I was in junior high school, which is right up the street, La Puerta [Junior High School, Claremont, California], which is only the seventh and eighth grade, and, I asked the teacher for a ride home, I'd stayed late to do something, and, and he said, "Are you kidding me? The last person--the last teacher that gave you a ride home almost got fired, your mother had their head in a noose." I said, "What are you talking about (laughter)?" She never told me that she called up and she said, "If my child's dress is so short and sexy at ten years old that you felt she had to leave school then you certainly should not have had her in your car by yourself." And this is long before this whole child abuse kinda thing was out in the open and she (laughter)--and I--and nothing, I mean he did just drive me home and I did just run in and change my clothes and run back out, but she just was not--she, she was--apparently that story got out--got around in the district and we were very--and she also told him that she is certain that there are other little pixie, pixie--what she call 'em? She used to call 'em pixie blondes with--that were--had dresses just as short as mine, but my legs were long and brown, and he wo--and he could notice them. And so, 'cause I was very tall, for my age. She said so, you know, "Just 'cause you, just 'cause you see someone make sure that you are seeing everyone" so that, so you are dishing out this rule, you know, fairly. So, at any rate, that (laughter) was that and, you know, I never--he never drove me home again. Story_ID: 127181 Speaker 1: But, you know, and I went to [La Puerta] Junior High School [Claremont, California] and there were--there--there are disadvantages of being, you know, of standing out, you know what I mean? You really--it was very hard to get away with anything. I remember on the way, the walk to junior high school, we walked through lemon groves and--I'm--I'm sor, I--my childhood's starting to sound very idyllic. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But, we walked through lemon groves and orange groves and grapefruit groves on the way to school for short-cuts, you're supposed to walk around them, we had walked through them but there was this one person's house in front of a grove where they had a pomegranate tree and everybody would, when they got ripe everybody would steal pomegranates out of that tree on our way to school. But I was the only one that got caught because when the woman called and described me they knew just who it was (laughter) but I didn't get in any trouble because my mother [Mati Robinson] told (laughter) them again, the only reason that you're, that you're catching her is because they can describe her. But then she told me, you better be aware that you're memorable, okay (laughter) so, you--that's--you know, that's if--when you commit a crime we're not going to be able to say, but you wouldn't have caught her if she wasn't black because nobody cares. You know, you shouldn't--you shouldn't do it then. She said, that's one of the things that the criminal mind must consider (laughter). She said, is that--are you gonna get caught, said you're not going to be able to be under the radar in this environment. Speaker 2: Was your mom always back and forth to, to the school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: She was--my mother was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --making sure that all those teachers were on track? Speaker 1: --she was very much--she was in the P.T.A. she was League of Women Voters, she was politically active. I remember licking stamps and envelopes for Myrlie Edgers [sic, Myrlie Evers-Williams'] campaign to be on the Claremont city council, because that's where she and her children moved after they killed her husband and--Medgar Evers, and I was, I--friends with her daughter, Rea, and I--we, we, my mother said that she should run for city council in Claremont and we waged a cam--I can't remember if she won, I don't think she did. But just kind of based on the--my mother was very politically active all my life. Speaker 2: She was a, she was a mild, mild sister (laughter) so--the, she was not, she was not, a, a, sit down and take it kind of person at all. Speaker 1: Do you remember the Evers family? Speaker 2: Sure, sure, no, I remember, I remember them. Myrlie Edgars [sic] and, and, Rea and I can't remember the--she had a brother too. But, yeah they, they came and went to school in Claremont. Claremont was a very--Claremont was a very progressive, liberal, highly educated--they have seven colleges so, you know, everybody who wasn't a student was probably a professor or employed by the university in some way, shape or form. And, it was a--you know, we were--it was a very progressive town. Speaker 1: Do you remember talk about the Medgar Evers case? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I, on--I only know that that's where his, his family came to settle, you know, I remember that, that my mom did tell me, you know that their father was a--was very important soldier in the Civil Rights Movement and he was gunned down and the people that did it, you know, gotten away with it and she--I remember we--was a--she seemed kind of sad. And, we, we, we knew why and all that but it was, you know, okay, we're here now and everything's, everything's great around here in Claremont, you know. You're, you're not in Mississippi or Alabama or wherever it was that they, you know, that they did that to you, and it was--I--they--I think that my--I think that I didn't live in Claremont by accident. I think that my parents were, were, very, very, sp--you know, they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Deliberate. Speaker 2: --they meant for me to live--for us to live someplace where the most important thing about me was not necessarily the color of my skin. So that all the other things that we wanted to become important would have a chance to develop without that as a, a, hindrance. Story_ID: 127182 Speaker 1: And so, you lived in Claremont [California] you moved there in the mid '60s [1960s] while the Civil Rights Movement was going on? Speaker 2: (Nod) Um hum. Speaker 1: Any consciousness of the Civil Rights Movement, I know later on with Black Power and the more militant movements, but what about '64 [1964], '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Sure, you know, I mean, it's-I'm, I'm now remember I'm young, I'm just a kid. But I, I, I, you know, my sister was a--I remember more the antiwar movement than I do the Civil Rights Movement. But I do remember, you know, the--Claremont being almost all white and Claremont High School, you know, saying we have to, we have to, we have to, integrate, you know, our school, you know, and, and from where would we integrate it because (laughter) we don't have any black residents. So from neighboring Pomona [California], where there were two large high schools, Pomona High School and Gary High School, they, they bussed kids in. (Unclear) I don't even think that they came by bus, I think they had to get there on their own, but they wanted to come because Claremont High School offered a fabulous education. And at that time, even, even in poor neighborhoods, California schools offered a good education. But Claremont High School, because of its proximity to the colleges had an exceptional academic reputation. And, and so there were, finally when I got to high school, there were some people that looked like me. Very resentful of the fact that, that, all my friends were white because that's who I'd been around. And they all kinda came from the same neighborhoods and, and you know, it was--hung out at the same lunch table (laughter) it was very--it was like integration that was so segregated it's like drop--a drop of oil into the water and it never breaks up and so you're really not getting the benefits. The people, the people who need to know more about black people weren't getting that. The people who needed to know more about white people weren't getting that. There was not the kind of ming--co-mingling that true integration brings. And I don't think that the, the powers that be--that were at the time had any idea of how to achieve that because you have to do more than just put people on the same campus. So. Speaker 1: Do you know the percentage of black students who were, you know, quote unquote bussed into Claremont High School? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--I don't think--an as I said, I don't think they were bussed, but I'm gonna say that Claremont High School probably had thirty-five black students and, it was pretty big high school. I mean, it's the only high school in the entire town so you know. Speaker 1: Out of hundreds? Speaker 2: Out of hundreds, oh yeah, out of hundreds. Absolutely, and there were probably fifteen blacks students who actually lived in Claremont and had actually come up through the Claremont school system. And therefore were not--an, and they weren't part of that--the group that kinda--and, and, and as I look back now I wish that som, that, that that, there had been more of an effort to tell me how to include those students, the black students that came from Pomona into the life of the school. But there was--you know--there--you know there's that thing where you--where I--before you can offend me I will show you how little I care about you? Speaker 1: Um hum. Speaker 2: There was really a hard shell around these students. Speaker 1: How did they treat you, do you remember some incident? Speaker 2: Terribly, terribly, you know, I was the Oreo and I was, you know, all--little black Sambo and, you know, where's your white boyfriend, which I did have a white boyfriend, but you (laughter) know, I said--it was just--it was really, really badly. I think if it were today when people are so more prone to violence it would have been really ugly, but it was back then you mostly just, you know, insulted people and, and you didn't, you didn't come to blows. And, and I was pretty big for my age, still, it wasn't, it wasn't like I was some, you know, some little person, to be--and I was still loud and, and even though I found it very hurtful I was sti--I, I, I, I still, I was--I'd cuss you right out, right back so, it was, you know, it was, it was, kind of an ongoing thing. And, and, eventually, you know, as I made friends one at a time, it's very hard to make friends with a group, you know that's kinda died down and, and, it didn't it wasn't something that--and I ha--I was kinda dismissive of it, you know, if they're gonna be ignorant like that, then the hell with them. And it's a--because at that age you don't--you're not mature enough to realize that they hurt so much that they have to make me hurt, you know. That they feel so out of their element that they have to make me feel out of my element or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Um hum, they felt ostracized--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --exactly, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and marginalized. Speaker 2: And, and, I'm sure that though I've never experienced really any blatant racism from anyone in Claremont, that they were there because they were everywhere, so--and I, I just wasn't a very good victim (laughter). I--so I think that people who might have wanted to, to, to , you know treat someone badly because they were black would pick someone besides me. Story_ID: 127183 Speaker 1: Did you maintain your white friendships through--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --[Claremont] High School [Claremont, California]? Speaker 2: --I did and I was, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a pretty loyal person. And I really wouldn't have any--what excuse would I have for not being your friend any longer 'cause those black people over there don't want me to be your friend? Well when the whole point, you know, I now realize is that--is to, is to not make decisions based on that, you know. But you, you also had to realize what affirmative action is, affirmative action means that I have to consciously act to include some people who act like they don't want to be (laughter) included. So, I have to go the extra mile and, and, and it's worth it, and it's worth it because I've, I did feel disconnected from some kind of raw low-down core of blackness that I, that I've, that I didn't have. And, and I needed to be connected with that, even if I didn't know it at the time, and eventually I was and I am and--because otherwise it doesn't--what good is it doin' me to connect with you know, the, the, the so-called majority, you know, the powers that be if I'm just one of 'em? You know, I mean, I have to--I--it was, it was, a, and interesting process, but I have to say having had to get to know a whole bunch of white people and having had to get to know a whole bunch of black people that African Americans are harder to get to know. We are complex, it is, it is-- a lot of times with, with people who haven't had to worry about being treated badly because of the color of their skin, what you see is what you get. Because they haven't had to, to, to hide behind various other corners to get what they wanted. They are, they are entitled to what they want and they go get it. So, whereas African Americans, you know, having been denied for so many, you know, unjust reasons, have, have had to play so many different roles to get from point A to point B, we're complex, we really are. And so getting back to being comfortable with my own people even those who were not as, you know, educated as me or hadn't been exposed to as many things, you know, didn't know Sidney Poitier and [HM] Nancy Wilson and, and, and, black educators and, and, and, and the people that I'd been exposed to--that it was worth giving back to those people also. Story_ID: 127184 Speaker 1: Now you were in--I just want to get the timeline straight. You were in [La Puerta] Junior High [Claremont, California] the late '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Uh hum, somethin' like that, but junior high's like twelve, thirteen years old. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Right, right. What was the name of your junior high? Speaker 2: La Puerta. Speaker 1: La Puerta. Speaker 2: The door. Speaker 1: And were there problems in junior high? Speaker 2: (Shakes head no) I was runnin' junior high. I ran junior high school. Absolutely did. Speaker 1: In what way?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's jus--I was, I was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --SGA [Student Government Association]? Speaker 2: --I was the, I was the, I was the, I was the most--I was the most socially significant person on (laughter) on campus. In other words, everyone wanted to see what's Robin gonna do. What does Robin say about that. If there's something unfair going on, Robin's going to challenge the teachers on that and the reason that I would do that is 'cause I knew that if it really was unfair then my mother would back me up (laughter). You know, and, and, then I also learned that I couldn't be actin' out, also because, you know, then everybody'd be actin' out and then we'd all get in trouble so I, I kinda, I, I, I I just somehow fell into, into a leadership role because I really didn't fit in any place else. I didn't, you know, I didn't have a boyfriend and, you know, per se. Because even though there was this very liberal little town, it still--it-we still quite--couldn't quite figure out how in the world this 5'7", 150-pound thirteen-year-old dark brown, okay, girl, with--who hair--whose hair wouldn't act right, is going to be with this, you know, cute little blue-eyed white boy. It just was--it jus--we just couldn't quite get there. So they were all my friends and, you know, it was, it was--I mean it was almost like I was a maternal figure or something to, to, to my friends and I do remember having crushes on little boys and they--and just was not within the realm of possibility. Speaker 1: What happened with those little boys in junior high, I guess early in high school? Speaker 2: Nothing, jus--it just never, it just never, it just never was to be. It just never, you know--I mean, you didn't realize at that age--you know, the little boyfriend, girlfriend, I love you do you love me check one, you know (laughter) check one, check yes or no, kinda thing. You know, I mean it's, it's all kind of very elementary, but. Speaker 1: I know that some, some black kids who attended majority white schools, when it came to the dating situation somehow the white boys would send the message, uh, my parents don't really approve, did you ever get that? Speaker 2: Not about the parents. Just that they just weren't comfortable with that. And I'm not so sure I was either, you know. It just--so in other words it was like being a fish in, in waters where there was no other species (laughter) appropriate for, for me. That changed as, as you got older, but, but, but in junior high school when, when you, you--the first little experimentations in, in, in, pairing up and what have you, there really was not that, there was not that, that dynamic for me. Which was okay because I nev--as I found later I ne--I really never liked anybody my age. I always liked older, older guys. Story_ID: 127185 Speaker 1: And this was the time also when you remember the anti-Vietnam [War] protests and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Nodding head yes) uh hum, uh hum. Speaker 1: -- that kind of thing happening? Speaker 2: Absolutely. We Speaker 1: And they were happening at the nearby colleges? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were happening going up and down--I remember thousands of people marching, walking, we didn't march, walking up Indian Hill Boulevard with candles. It was, it was, you know, it was, it was--we were calling for the moratorium and it was, you know, we gathered--what was the name of our park. We had one Indian Hill, on Indian Hill there's a big park in Claremont [California], it probably is called the Claremont Park, but-but that's where we gathered and heard speeches and it was--and I was there with my mother, I mean that was--we were very, you know, we were very much involved in, in that, that whole movement, you know. If there, if there was activism going on for some cause that, that that seemed like it was just, there was my mom [Mati Robinson] (laughter) so there, so there we were. Story_ID: 127186 Speaker 1: We were talking about-- Speaker 2: We can finish up my life really quickly now right? No sorry (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) we were talking about the protests that were happening in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] in your town [Claremont, California]. Some of those happened around the middle school years [La Puerta Junior High School, Claremont] and I imagine early [Claremont] High School years. You talked about the marches, the antiwar marches--remember any other protests? Speaker 2: You know we didn't, you know, Claremont didn't burn, you know, as we say in terms of the Civil Rights Movement. There was a--probably didn't have a large enough black population and hadn't been--lotta people hadn't been mistreated there and it was, it was very, to, to, to, to suburban, to, to really be a big part of the Civil Rights Movement. But we were very aware, you know, of what was going on, you know, in Watts, right, just down the 10 freeway. Speaker 1: What do you remember from that time? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I remember there was a lotta, there was a lotta talk about, you know--among my parents friends about, you know, the right and the wrong way to achieve change. And, you know, and everybody didn't agree. Everybody didn't agree, you know, I mean, I--my mom [Mati Robinson] (laughter) was one to say, well you know they weren't payin' any attention to them till they started burnin' stuff up, you know, and tearin' things up. You now it's a shame that they're tearin' up their own neighborhoods and, you know, but now all of a sudden people are saying, "Oh, those, those black people live over there and they don't have any jobs and they don't have any grocery stores and, and they don't have any"--you know, and it's, it's, it was, it was a lot of debate going on at the time but it certainly made America take notice. And it didn't go unnoticed in Claremont. Story_ID: 127187 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories, sights, smells, sounds of Claremont, California? Speaker 2: I remember it being a very--it was--it was a very welcoming place if you like to do anything outdoors. You know, it was, like I said, it was at the--nestled in the foothills of Mount Baldy and we could walk to--walk up--we used to always say we were gonna, we're gonna--my girlfriend and I would, you know, on a Saturday morning we'd say, we're going, we're gonna go climb that mountain, not Mount Baldy, but one nearby. And you would look at it from where you were and it would like you would really get to that point. And you'd walk and walk and walk all day long and you would still not be at that mountain. And so we would--we, we, found a lot of things to do that were outdoors. I had a horse that I used to have to walk up to feed my horse every morning (laughter) and every afternoon after school, I went through that whole, you know, through my junior high years and actually where I kept her was not far from my junior high school. There were two options, if you had a horse and you had a lot of money you kept him at a boarding stable where they would feed them and clean out their corral and, you know, all you had to do was really come up there and brush 'em and ride 'em and be cute. And then there was my option where someone who had enough land and had a little corral there--would let you keep your horse there if you did everything. If you brought the food in and came and fed 'em and cleaned out their corral and, you know. So basically, there was, there was no staff so to speak. And that worked out just--pe--people would, would rent that out just to make up a little extra money on their land, you know, fifty bucks a month and then, I'd, you know, spend another--by believe me my parents had it all figured out for me, how much this was gonna cost, do you really want this horse. And what was happening was I was going with friends who had horses and renting a horse to ride with them and when they added up how much I was spending renting a horse, it, it worked out that if you're really gonna ride this much, you know, that, you know we can, we can, we can get a horse. Now, I had a horse, my horse's name was Ginger and she was a, a, bay mare, she was half thoroughbred half quarter horse and she was brown with black mane and tail, which is what bay means. And, she was feisty, she was feisty, we, we'd go, we would ride in the foothills and there was a reservoir full of water (laughter) that we were not supposed to be in. And on hot days we would go in on our horses and swim across the reservoir 'cause we didn't use, use, saddles for the most part, we just used saddle pads 'cause 'less you were gonna show or, or go on a long, long ride a saddle was just somethin' else you had to deal with. We would just use a saddle pad 'cause it had stirrups for us, so we had no horn to hold onto so we really, we road like we were Indians or somthin' and then you, then you could swim with your horse 'cause you didn't have to worry about 'em getting' weighed down in the water. And it was, we had a wonderful, wonderful, hours and hours doing that. I, I , I, I, think that--realizing that there are things that you could enjoy that don't have anything to do with, with, very much manmade is I think a good thing for, for kids. I broke my, my, my ankle on my horse. We were--to get to this reservoir that we weren't supposed to be in we had to (laughter) go--there are a lot of fire trails in California because they had to have places for the fire trucks to go to get up to fight fires that had started naturally. Fires would just start from lightening, you know, you hear about the brush fires today, this is nothing new. And, across the trail there was a fence which the fire people would have a key to open up the padlock and open the--and go through. But the fence would go--so you have a trail and on one side is the mountain, on the other side is the cliff, okay, 'cause it's--the trails going around the mountain so--the fence would go down a little bit across the road and up a little bit. So we'd have to climb up the mountain on our horses and come around the fence and it was pretty steep and then--and so coming down my horse slipped and we slid down and my f--leg was between the horse and the mountain. So, I broke my ankle, horse was just fine. She was not real happy (laughter), but she was just fine. So I broke my ankle and that was really the only--my mom said she was always convinced that I was gonna break my neck on, on my horse, but just, just my ankle as it turns out. But it was a good kind of outdoors experience and so I associate that with Claremont. Claremont's much more built-up today, unfortunately, I'm sure people still have horses and it's probably the horsey set, you know, because it's the way real estate has gone, anything near Los Angeles [California]--apparently the house that I grew up in, which probably would have been, you know, 125 thousand or something like that, you know, it's probably a million or something. And they, they've built what they call Disneyland, they, that's what the locals call it because the houses are so whimsical and fantastic, north of where I grew up, and where, where people used to keep their horses. Speaker 1: How long did you ride? Speaker 2: I'd say I was really and every, every weekend, two or three times a week rider for a good two or three years. It was my--it was really--it was, it was a pastime and then my younger sister, as my, as my interest waned, you know, 'cause here's what happens, girls all--girls that age--there's studies about it too you know and how they connect with horses and horseback riding and then they start getting interested in boys and you have to kind of choose because horses are very time-consuming. And then my younger sister started, you know, being very interested and we had a--she had a horse at the same time that I had one for about a year, we overlapped and then, you know, it got to be too many weekends when you're not going and I, I sold my horse. And, but she had a horse named Buck who was bigger than my horse, but not nearly as feisty, 'cause my horse was a, she was, she was, not--she was not all that obedient, (laughter) okay. Speaker 1: Sounds pretty, it sounds pretty idyllic as you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it does, does. Speaker 1: --as you mentioned earlier Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--sounds like, like a fai--now that I think about it, it was a pretty good child--pretty, that's right. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--You went swimming with your horse. Speaker 2: On my, and on the horse. You know, you had to hold on and they kinda, they do a, a, a--they swim and it's like a cantor in the water. But it, it's lunging, so if you don't hold on really tight, and remember there's no saddle so I'm holding on to her mane, if you don't hold on really tight you will fall (laughter) off. You know you'll just slide right off as they lunge forward, but it was--you know, on a hot day after you've been riding, the horse is ready to get in that reservoir more--and it's a dirt reservoir so it's not like we had to climb up or down any concrete sides. She was ready to get in it more than me. Story_ID: 127188 Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities in high school [Claremont High School, Claremont, California]? Speaker 2: You know, at that time, think about the counterculture of that time. It was not hip to be going to football games or the prom or be a cheerleader or any like--there were the "Soc's" and there were the cool kids and I was a cool kid. My brother [Greg Robinson]-my older brother was, you know, was, was, one of the ultimate cool kids, too much so. You know, he looked like Jimmy Hendrix and he wore a black hat. And he, he, you now, he wore his jeans just so and he was like the, you know, the, the, the surly young man. And he hung out with a bunch of other hippies and they hung out at the park and smoked and drank and you know, back then it wasn't, it wasn't, there was nobody saying say no to drugs it was kinda say, it was kinda say maybe. Speaker 1: So that was the norm at, at your school? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--At our school. It--there was a lot of big drug culture at our school. Lot of experimentation going on and I was not inclined to, to take part, it just, (laughter) mainly because I think I was too vain. And everybody that I saw who was high was not paying any attention to how they looked. And they did not look good, I never saw anyone drunk who looked appealing (laughter) I never saw anyone--and there was a big--they, they, did a lot of barbiturates we called them reds--red devils and you know, drop--takin' pills and, and some--an I did--I took 'em once and I, I said you know what I can sleep on my own and all this makes me wanna do is go to sleep (laughter) so I did--so that didn't, that didn't appeal to me and everybody smoked a little grass, everybody smoked a little grass but my brother got involved in hard drugs and, and became a heroin addict and he really--he was very, very--he was real smart, smart like genius smart guy but it killed him in the end. So, there was--you know it was an idyllic place to live, but it, it could've--it could go either way. It was, it was not a lot--we were kinda of, kinda--wasn't a lotta, you know, supervision, you know, because it wasn't thought that there was that much out there that could hurt you. Speaker 1: Wasn't a dangerous area. Speaker 2: No-- Story_ID: 127189 Speaker 1: --Now all this time your dad [Louie Robinson, Jr.] was still working at Ebony/Jet? Speaker 2: (Nodding yes) Uh hum. Speaker 1: What were his various roles while you lived in those neighborhoods? Speaker 2: Roles at home or at work? Speaker 1: At the job? Speaker 2: I, all we knew was that all--the bills were being paid and we were happy and I couldn't have begin--I know now, he was, I mean, he was writin' stories. He was doin' as I said, eight out of twelve covers in any given year were probably stories that he'd written because he was covering the celebrities. He was doing Hollywood [California], Las Vegas [Nevada] as well as a lot of sports figures and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Who were some of the sports? Speaker 2: Hank Aaron and, and, like I said, Vida Blue, who's the, who--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Mohammad Ali? Speaker 2: --Mohammad Ali, (laughter) Thank You. Who is the other--Jackie Robinson, you know, he was doin', he was--if they were famous and they were black and they came anywhere near--an, and sometimes it didn't have to be near Hollywood, they would send him because they knew he could do that type of story. It was--he was not gonna be awestruck and he was, and he was gonna be professional and he was gonna, he was gonna get something more than just, you know, look he made this movie or look he broke this record, he was gonna get something--my dad has a way of getting something personal out of public people. And I think it's 'cause he really does--if you, if you talk to my dad you will be convinced that you are the most important person to him at that moment. That's just how he, that's just how he manages--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: His gift. Speaker 2: --to do, yeah. And it's, it's--he--so, so I always thought I was the most important person in the world (laughter) because I, because I was important to him, and. Speaker 1: Who did he work with at 'Ebony,' [HM] Lerone Bennett? Speaker 2: He worked with Lerone Bennett, in fact, I think that my parents introduced Lerone to Gloria, 'cause Gloria--Lerone, his wife is always known as Auntie Gloria to me, and I still know them today. And I--and their son--not their son, it's, yeah, Lerone Jr. We've done som--we've worked on some things here in Chicago [Illinois]. Pierre Poinsett, Alex Poinsett, I'm sorry, his son's name is Pierre, Alex Poinsett, Herb Nipson, he, for the photographer that he worked with quite often is Pulitzer-prizewinning photographer, Moneta Sleet and he was very, very good, good friend of the family. Herb Mangrum, his--you know, he was--all the old, you know, people that are really--they were trailblazers in, in, in black journalism. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--Were you aware that your father was a trailblazer? Speaker 2: Nope, absolutely not (laughter). Speaker 1: I thought my brother [Greg Robinson] was, he was older than me and he said--I did a story years after my brother died--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Which brother is this? Speaker 1: 'Cause remember I only have one brother that's not developmentally disabled. The twins--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay and the twins we didn't get that on tape--the twins Speaker 1: --the twins, My twin brothers who are from my father's first marriage who are, who are older than my brother but younger than my oldest sister, the whatev--the sa--the toxemia that killed their mother, right after childbirth also affected them. And, and, and the--mentally retarded is what we called it then, developmentally disabled is what you call it now. They never really progressed past, past a very young child's brain capacity, but their, their--but they've done a lot more than what the first doctor diagnosed them said they would do, who said they'd never talk and they'd, you know, they'd never be able to take care of themselves, they were, they grew, grew up to be, you know, gorgeous, polite, you know, engaged in what they were engaged in, young men. They love music and they may not be able to--they, they'll, I mean they, they can't live on their own, they'll never drive a car but they can come in and operate your three-thousand-dollar stereo system after very little, very little training from you because they love music (laughter) they want to figure out how to work it. But--an I say they even though only one survives, my, one of the twins, Ronnie Robinson, died of, of cancer of the spine several years ago, so Michael is still--and he lives in a, a home with other developmentally disabled adults and they--you know, they have an adult caretaker, who, who, tak--cooks for them and he goes to work and he does, you know, but. Speaker 2: So he lives a full life. Speaker 1: Yeah, he lives a--I think it's a full life, and, and I enjoy him. Story_ID: 127190 Speaker 1: And your brother Greg [Robinson], then you said, was a trailblazer? Speaker 2: My brother Greg was aware that my father [Louie Robinson, Jr.] was a trailblazer. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: And I, and I did a, a story about his, his becoming an addict, ultimately contracting AIDS and, and dying, just ki, kind of a, you know, addiction in general has a lot of things in common and this resurgence of heroin use among young people because they don't have to shoot it to get high they've, they've the heroin's so pure now that they, they snort it and, and, it's just the whole, the whole new drug culture. It's, it's very disturbing, you know and, and it's always the smart people because those are the people that think they're smarter than the drug and I'm too smart to become addicted and what have you. I did a whole series on addiction and went back, had the chance to go back and interview some of his friends that he--who also had been heroin addicts. One of whom became a, excuse me, one of whom became a, a teacher later and so he didn't want to be identified 'cause he teaches in Claremont High School [Claremont, California]. And he told me that, that Greg used to say, "I know I'm supposed to be the great black hope, you know, my dad's Louie Robinson, he, you know, I'm, you know, I'm one of premier black families in Claremont and I'm supposed to be this that and the other." And he said he just felt like, like Greg was just intent that, you know, I , I, he said he just couldn't take the pressure. That he--and he said, it's not like anyone was putting that pressure on him, but that he, that he was--in his rebellion, it was like you know, I'll show 'em, you know, I'll do what I want to do, I'll do, you know--an, and nobody really noticed that this was going on. Because he, he, he, he could, he could appear to be so confident and so in control and so I don't care what you think that it was really enlightening for me to see how success can beget failure. Because if you don't, if you don't try to succeed you don't have to worry about it, okay (laughter) you know what I mean, you don't, it's, it's--it was almost as if I'm Louie Robinson's son and I'm supposed to be a big deal how in the world am I going to live up to that, Oh, the hell with it. And, and it was, it was kind of a harsh realization for my parents I think, but, as my dad said, they might not have done everything they could a done to save him, but they did everything they knew to do. And, peo--the more experience people have with, with things that go wrong with, with youth, with your kids, with the people that you want to succeed and be happy and content, you know, we find out more every day, you know, it's like, you know, we used to think, we use to think if you didn't spank a child they had no chance of, of succeeding and now we figured out, dang if you spank them, then they grow up and become abusers, I mean there's just too many, you know there's, there's, there's, there's no manual and, you know, so the, the, the guilt that the families and parents have when--an, and when I did that story about my brother I've never gotten so much mail, so many phone calls. People sent me pictures of their loved ones they thought--everybody things that, that they're the only ones in the world who, otherwise have a great family except this, except the fact that, you know, addiction--that somebody they love, loves something destructive, whether it be drugs, alcohol whatever it is, crime, gambling, sex, something that, that, that takes you away from your humanity. And it was--and people were so surprised that I would have a brother that would be a, a heroin addict. Speaker 1: I mean they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Someone, yeah of your stature. Speaker 1: --just say--they were so--an someone of my--and I kept thinking, you--this is a human being thing, this is not (laughter)--you know, (unclear) it's young, old, rich, young, rich, poor, black, white, it's not it doesn't discriminate. Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--Did he, he began in high school, drug use in high school? Speaker 1: (Nodding) Right. Speaker 2: And how long did it continue before--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Ever, forever--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: How many years before--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh you mean before he-- Speaker 2: --before he died? Speaker 1: Oh, we have no idea when it, when it became--when he became an addict. Actually, talking to the experts in addiction that I talked to doing this story, he probably was addicted pretty much right away. That what happens is some people are--have an addictive propensity and you don't know if you're one of those people until you try something that you become addicted to, so it's not really--it's kind of like an answer to a question you didn't know you were asking and you thought you were just asking, am I going to like this, what you're really asking is am I going to become addicted to this (laughter) and you really don't know until you try it. And so he, he, he, he lived with his addiction for a long time. Speaker 2: Did he go to college and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --and have a career? Speaker 1: No, he Speaker 2: He rebelled. Speaker 1: didn't even graduate, he did not even graduate from high school. He, he completely rebelled and just--and I mean at that time there are a lot of young people kinda droppin' out of everything and you know, "I'm not gonna be in this constant pursuit of, of money, like the man or like my parents or like whatever", but, you know--and that was kinda okay 'cause that's what my oldest sister did also. But she never acquired any habits so that when she decided to drop back in she still had her degree, she still had, you know, she still had her, her abilities and her mind and she's, you know, she's doin' very well today. I mean, she, she lived in a commune and, and, you now, and was a hippie but by the textbook definition of hippie, you know, they grew their own food and had the communal meals in the dome and all that but she, you know, she didn't, she didn't have any --but if you--any time you put a, a an addiction, a drug addiction in, in whatever life philosophy you have you're doomed. Story_ID: 127191 Speaker 1: When did your brother [Greg Robinson] pass away? Speaker 2: He passed away, what year was that, it's the year that--'86 [1986], Lauren is ten--so we're in 2007, 1996. Speaker 1: What did that do to you, the whole journey of this addiction? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--Well, he lived with--he, he had moved to Chicago [Illinois]--we had been through--to be honest with you, his death was not nearly as traumatic as his life. His life was, was, was very traumatic for us because it was constantly, you know, wanting to help him but not wanting to support the, the, the acquisition of drugs. So he lived in Northern California and, and, and after he got AIDS, you know, we thought, well now he'll quit. Guess what, he didn't quit (laughter) so, so--and I think he lived--and he was one of the first people diagnosed with AIDS, before we knew what AIDS was. And he just kept, pas--falling out and going to the hospital and having pneumonia and they finally figured out what it was. And he--I, I wanted--he was one of the very first people in this country diagnosed with AIDS and, you know, he--we had this whole kind of you know, come, coming together, the whole family and it was such a disaster and you know, he was gonna quit, you know he was gonna go into rehab and he was going to get on methadone and he was going to do this that and the other and my dad, who had, who had basically washed his hands of him, said, you know what, you've--this is the life you've chosen and I, I've you know, we've tried everything we can, you know, got reinvested into the possibility that he might at least live the last years of his life as something besides a drug addict, but he didn't quit and, and he still lived ten years, after the diagnosis and not--and after not quitting heroin. So, I, I used to tell him, boy you have strong stock (laughter) because you should have been dead by now and it was only those last couple of years when he was in a nursing home and, so ill that they were, there was really no--he, he aged out of heroin, is what happened, he, he, he aged out, his body aged out of it and it's almost like we had him back. Because you didn't have to worry that everything that he told you was part of a scheme to get drugs. It was really--you, we really lost him to heroin, I didn't, I, I didn't, I didn't lose him to AIDS, I lost him to heroin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but by then he had moved here because he was a, a career criminal, a, a, man who would steal your purse if you left it over there but would never take it from you. So he had no violent crimes (laughter), it was all, it was all burglary no robbery, petty theft, that kind of thing, the kind of thing that nickel-and-dime junkies do. And, he had done--in California they have the three strikes thing and so he had, he had stolen--I, now I'm not kidding you, like a bottle of shampoo from a, from a drug store and they, got, got I have his rap sheet because I, I pulled it for the--when I did the story on him and (laughter) the judge was like (laughter), there's nothing we can do with you, they were gonna send him to San Quentin and so, and he was not going to live but another three or four years, so I said, "All right, dammit, you can come here." You now, I'd rather have him be a fugitive then spend his last three or four years of his life in, in prison. Speaker 1: So he came here and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, I got him on methadone, you know, and, and I got--and he found his way around quite well in Chicago. And went found the Howard Brown Clinic and found the Southside Help Center and places, he went places that I didn't even know he went to, and after he died people told me, Oh, I knew your brother. I said, my brother only lived in Chicago, four, like four years and he, met people--and they told me, and he was so proud of you, he would have nev--he never mentioned, he never mentioned anything like that to me. But he was, he was a personable guy and he was--I, I don't know--it's very, my brother's another--that's a different history maker altogether--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so let's just say that we--that we--that they--that, that I know how genius can go wrong and that it really can and I'm, I'm, I try not to be a completely hovering mother, but I am much more vigilant than I would have been if I had had not had the experience of my brother. Because if, you know, and if's are all, you know, you know how many if's--what if, what if, what if, but if there had been an ac--an ac--an acknowledgment that it was even possible for him to be involved in something that serious and that detrimental and if there had been a harsh intervention, you know, earlier on, I'd have nieces and nephews. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, so. Speaker 2: You took a different path. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, that's--definitely, but I was, I mean I was not a goody two shoes by any means, but, then I might have just been luckier. Let's not say, you know, that I was just smar--I wasn't necessarily smarter than my brother, I might have just been luckier. And, and had different friends and made different choices and I was cognizant of different things at different times. He was older than me and, and, and at that time--by the time, you know, I got to be old enough for people to be talkin' about drugs we knew a little bit more about it and, and as I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And the repercussions. Speaker 1: --an the repercussions, and as I said, I think my vanity really kept me away (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: From a lot of the, a lot of bad stuff, because the people that were doin' that stuff, they didn't look good, and I did not wanna be--I did not want--it's like they say--when I did this story about addiction, the drug education in, in, areas where they don't have, you know a-- in rich areas, it's very hard because it's someone standing there in front of a blackboard telling you how terrible it is. But in the ghetto, drug education is that man over there at the gas station beggin' for quarters because he's got to feed his habit, that will educate you quicker than someone telling you what will happen. You see with your own eyes what happens to the crackhead, what happens to the, the, person that decides to shoot dope, what happens to the person that decides they're going to have a drink first thing in the morning, you know, you see with your own eyes, so, it's, it's worth a thousand words. Story_ID: 127192 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate [Claremont] High School [Claremont, California] and what did you do next? Speaker 2: I graduated in 1975 and I went to San Diego State University [San Diego, California] because, when I looked at all the catalogs from the California state universities they had the most pages on journalism, and so (unclear) Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--How'd you now that you wanted to be a journalist Speaker 2: I, I liked--I discovered that I liked reality. If I'd only known I would've been the, the--I would've started reality television and I'd be a billionaire now. But (laughter) time, I was, I, I always liked to write and instead of writing for the school paper because I was kind of a rebel, I started my own little newsletter that just dished all the dirt on everybody and everything that was going on whether it was teacher, students, grades, affairs, what have you. And they put a stop to that kinda quickly, 'cause it was kind of an unorthodox, un--unauthorized, unorthodox--it wasn't anonymous, I mean I, I don't believe in anything anonymous journalistically or source-wise either. But, they made me stop doing that, but I, I , really liked, I liked what was really going on and I thi--and I realized early on that the, the same event as reported by two different people could be seen completely differently and at--the more I--I took a mass media law class in high school, as I told you Claremont High School was, was, pretty well set academically and it was the most fascinating class ever--if I could have taken the class again, I would have taken the class again. And Mr. Lee was the, the, what's his name? Mr. Lee, I cannot remember--I cannot believe I cannot remember that teacher's name, but he made a big impression on me. And I, I just enjoyed it and to learn about libel and slander and sources and all that. And I said, there's a science to this. There's a reason that two untrained people look at the same event and come up with two different stories, but if we, if we knew the rules of journalism you, you, the stories shouldn't be that different. It should be somewhat the same. And so I just--I had always been interested, also in drama. I think for a long time my parents were afraid that I would become an actress, but I, I, my problem with acting--and I did do some plays and things in school. My problem was that, that I kept wanting to change the script, I kept wanting to ad-lib. They don't like when you start ad-libbing Shakespeare. And then I remember in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream,' I of course was Puck, okay (laughter) but I doubt--I gave a lot of--I took a lot of leeway with it, and that was in junior high school and in a summer at drama class and I realized I didn't want to stick to the script. You know, it's not true anyway so why do I have to say it like that. And you know, authors don't appreciate it when you, when you mess with, with what they've written, so I had the performance aspect and the writing aspect in broadcast journalism because I--you could still write, it was still reality, it was true, it was fact but if you didn't on some level perform in a way that people--to catch people's attention then it didn't work. So broadcast journalism turned out to be kind of the good blending of the drama and the truth and the writing for me, so...