 Story_ID: 615387 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Christopher Robert Reed [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Reed], R-E-E-D. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 11, 1942, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm now a retired history professor. I spent approximately forty years in higher education teaching history. Speaker 1: Okay, and you--you cur- you just retired from Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I retired from Roosevelt University in August of 2006. Speaker 1: All right. Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date, this is a good question (laughter), is December 17, 2009. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 615388 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] wants us to ask five questions-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that are sort of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Do I have a favorite food? I don't think so. I'm a very plain guy. I mean, I don't think so. No not really. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Now the last one is (laughter) do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Thank you God. Story_ID: 615389 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and your father's [Robert Reed] side-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you please give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: She was born Josephine Slaughter [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes], S-L-A-U-G-H-T-E-R. She was born in Hillsboro, Ohio. She was a twin, her twin was Charles [Charles Slaughter]. And she was born July 25, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? What do you know about the ancestors on her side? Speaker 2: Well, the--her mother was a Trimble, Beryl Trimble [Beryl Trimble Slaughter], B-E-R-Y-L. And the Trimbles had arrived in Ohio in the area around Hillsboro before statehood. They came as slaves and they were freed by the patriarch of the famous Trimble family of Virginia. The family that gave Ohio a Governor Trimble [Allen Trimble] and the famed and popular Mother Trimble [Eliza J. Thompson] of the early 19th century. The Trimbles established themselves--selves in Hillsboro and became subjects of a--of a history of the town called 'All in the Same Spaceship' [Wayne L. Snider] dealt with the African Americans of Hillsboro, Ohio. Speaker 1: 'All in the Same Spaceship'? Speaker 2: 'All in the Same Spaceship.' A little small book, yeah--same spa- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who wrote that? Who's the author of that? Speaker 2: A gentleman, a minister, a white minister who lived in the town. My mother's father was Charlton Slaughter, C-H-A-R-L-T-O-N, and his parents were Kentuckians. In fact, my maternal grandfather's father, my great-grandfather maternally was a slave who served in the Civil War and I've been carrying his photograph daily for about fifty years. I was known in college as that fellow who has the great-grandfather who served in the Civil War. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: Henry Slaughter. Speaker 1: Do--can you tell us what unit he served in? Speaker 2: 116th infantry regiment [116th Regiment], U.S. Colored Troops. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was a regiment raised in the area around Fort Nelson, Kentucky in 1864. They served in the eastern theater, fought at the battle of--and siege of Petersburg [Virginia]. They were part of the massive assault force that chased Robert E. Lee out of Richmond [Virginia] in late March, early April 1865 for a hundred miles westward where they cornered him in Appomattox, Virginia [Appomattox Court House, Virginia]. And the 116th with my great-grandfather was in the middle of the battle formation that Lee saw when he decided to surrender. The 116th was accompanied by troops of the 31st infantry regiment [31st Regiment] from New York, a slave regiment, although raised in New York, fought under the New York flag, and by an Illinois regiment, the 29th infantry regiment [29th Regiment] originally out of Chicago [Illinois], but whose--but in whose ranks were thousands of--hundreds of men from Maryland, Virginia, who never heard of Illinois or Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. That's quite a story-- Speaker 2: Yeah, now on that Trimble side, there were at least two Trimbles who served in the Civil War. They were free men of color who served, but I don't know their regimental designations. Story_ID: 615390 Speaker 1: Now my mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] and her twin brother [Charles Slaughter] left Hillsboro [Ohio] during World War I [WWI] during the time of the Great Migration because of the impoverished condition that the Trimble--the Slaughter family had fallen into. And it could've been the drafting of my grandfather, Charlton Slaughter, who served in World War I with the 365th infantry division [365th Infantry Regiment]. Whatever the--the cause of this impoverishment, the twins were sent up to Chicago [Illinois] to be with their father's sisters who were doing quite well in the city, and they had established themselves before the time of the Great Migration 1916, 1918. By the way, during the Great Migration also, the patriarch, Henry Slaughter, the Civil War veteran who is now a widower, was no longer able to take care of himself and he came up to Chicago also to be with those two daughters who were married and doing quite well. Speaker 2: Now, whe- where did they live? Speaker 1: Well they lived somewhere around, I've seen the census report, somewhere around 36th [Avenue] and Dearborn [Street], and then later they were to live at 3159 South Park [South Parkway] which is now 3159 South King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], and that family established itself as devout and contributing members of Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] which had relocated to 3101 South Parkway by 1918. Speaker 2: Did the black veterans form an association? I know that GAR was very strong in those days? Speaker 1: Well the black men who had fought the 29th Illinois [29th Regiment], the black regiment, were members of the GAR, the Grand Army of the Republic. They--they founded John Brown Post No. 50 [Chicago, Illinois]. Now my grandfather, because he was in the 29th and only arrived in Chicago late in his life around 1917, 1918, he was not a member of John Brown Post No. 50. But Chicago did have a--a GAR footprint, a large footprint. Speaker 2: Was Chicago--was Chicago like the kind of place where a lot of the former Union, the black Union soldiers, would congregate? Speaker 1: Well, the--blacks were always coming to Chicago before the Civil War, during the Civil War, and after the Civil War. And a number of veterans did live here, Chicago being a place known as a haven for those that wanted to exercise their citizenship rights. You could vote in Chicago by 1870. In 1870, you could live in a lot of different places in Chicago then. Your children could go to the public schools in Chicago and there were--there was work available in the service and nonindustrial sectors of the economy. And then there were a few blacks actually who did work at the stockyards and were in manufacturing here and there. A number of blacks were also self-employed as blacksmiths, barbers, et cetera. So Chicago in the period after the Civil War and before 1900 was a rather open city with limited--limited opportunities, but there were still opportunities and you would not have expected the violence that occurred in the South to have occurred in Chicago. You would have not expected the totality of restrictions that occurred in southern life to appear in Chicago, and they didn't. Chicago had its first black fireman in 19--1862--1872, excuse me. First black fireman 1872 [sic. 1873], first black policeman 1872 [sic. 1871], first black elected official 1871. Speaker 2: And that was-- Speaker 1: John Jones. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: John Jones was the first elected official, followed in 1876 by John W.E. Thomas the first black elected state official. Politically, most blacks belonged to the Republican Party, but there were a few Democrats scattered here and there. There was a black newspaper [Chicago Conservator] that had been started by Ferdinand Barnett [Ferdinand Lee Barnett], and a small black community, very cohesive was developing immediately south of the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Is this the beginnings of the Black Belt at this time? Speaker 1: Yes, the beginnings of the Black Belt could seen--be seen by the 1890s, and then in full in the 1900s, even before the Great Dep- the Great Migration. And it was referred to as the Black Belt before the Great Migration. What the Great Migration did in depositing fifty thousand new persons in about a three or four year period was just to enlarge the boundaries of the Black Belt in an intensity--the intensity of, of spirit in the Black Belt, which saw the growth proliferation of many black institutions, churches, businesses, fraternal orders, et cetera. Speaker 2: Okay. So your relatives lived on South Park, which is now King Drive? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In the 3100s you said? Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh. Speaker 2: I know that a man we interviewed a long time ago, a Mr. Gaten [HistoryMaker Junius "Red" Gaten] delivered milk in 1915 along the same stretch where Ida B. Wells lived, John Roy Lynch [John R. Lynch], and a number of other-- Speaker 1: Yeah, if you could live--if you could get on South Park you felt pretty proud. That--that was the boulevard of note or of notables. Speaker 2: Okay. Now ar- are there any stories in your family about the Columbian Exposition [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: No. I heard something from my older sister [Wallene Evans] once, I can't confirm this about any presence at the 1893 World's Fair. Story_ID: 615391 Speaker 1: Now did your--are there any--any other anecdotes from your mother's [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] side of the family to share with us? Speaker 2: No. And you're probably gonna ask me about my father's [Robert Reed] side. Speaker 1: I will. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: But first I wanna ask about your mother's own stories of growing up in Chicago [Illinois]? Now she--she came here as a little girl, right? Speaker 2: Right. Oh let me--let me say this, my--in living with her uncles and aunts, one uncle was a barber, the other uncle was a Pullman porter, one aunt performed domestic work, the other was a caterer. So they were able to live pretty well for African Americans during the war and after World War I [WWI]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then some other older members of the Slaughter family came up to join them in Chicago. Now the original members of the Slaughter family though had come up as early as 1889. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What did your mother say about growing up, now did she tell good st- stories about what it was like? Speaker 2: Well my mother enjoyed growing up in Chicago because being a quote, unquote, adopted child, the niece of two women who didn't have children, and very fe- none of the Slaughter girls had any children at all, and only half of the boys had children. She was pampered and had a very enjoyable life. She saw her parents [Beryl Trimble Slaughter and Charlton Slaughter] only infrequently though because of the distance between Hillsboro [Ohio] and Chicago, and then later Covington, Kentucky where her mother and father moved and Chicago. So that wasn't the pleasant part of growing up, but she did say that the relatives, you know, afforded her a great amount of love and a very comfortable existence. The schools were solid, they were good, and she mentions that she had a chance to attend the old, the first Lucy Flower High School [Lucy Flower Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] which first was on the South Side before it moved to the Garfield Park [East Garfield Park] area on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And interestingly enough, she had an opportunity to go to college, but decided she didn't wanna go away from home to Washington [D.C.], to Howard [Howard University]. She said she regretted it later in life. Speaker 1: So what did she do for a living basically? Speaker 2: Well, she graduated from high school sometime around 1929 or '30 [1930] and I don't exactly know what she did, but the work limitations on black women were such that you only had a couple of dozen black women who were school teachers and she wasn't a school teacher. And by the way at that time you didn't--you didn't need the amount of education you needed to teach in the Chicago Public Schools. I'm not qui- quite sure what kind of work she did, but it would've been probably something in the service sector or maybe in light manufacturing. There were a number of black women that made lampshades, made aprons, made dresses, that kind of thing. But the limitations were vast, worse for women then for black men. And black men didn't break into the industrial sector until World War I, they broke in in large numbers and there were a number of women. But they worked in the stockyards where work was very hard, yeah. She didn't work in the stockyards. I remember her once saying she worked at Campbell Soup Company for Campbell, but I don't know when that was. Story_ID: 615392 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name Robert Albert Reed [Robert Reed]. Originally spelled R-E-I-D, but my father, living with older brothers down in East St. Louis [Illinois] when he was in his late teens, followed their lead and they changed the spelling to R-E-E-D. So half of the Reeds out of the Pine Bluff area of Arkansas are E--R-E-I-D and the other half R-E-E-D, and even within my youngest uncles family, the boys are R-E-I-D and R-E-E-D (laughter). In fact Robert Reed [ph.], my father's nephew, my first cousin is an R-E-E-D, but his brothers are R-E-I-D, just like their father (laughter). Speaker 1: That doesn't make--yeah, yeah. Okay. So--so he was born in Pine Bluff, Arkansas? Speaker 2: Well really outside of Pine Bluff in a place called Sherrill, Arkansas. Then the family moved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell Sherrill? Speaker 2: S-H-E-R-R-I-L-L, S-H-E-R-R-I-L-L. It's on the map. But interesting enough, the older members of the Reed family would always pronounce it as one syllable, (pronunciation) Shill. So I looked on the map once for Shill. There's no Shill, Arkansas, but there is a Sherrill, Arkansas. Then they moved into the small town of Pine Bluff. But my Grandfather Reid, Grandfather Frank Reid, at one time was a sharecropper and then he rented farm land and then he may have worked in Pine Bluff. It was rough going for the Reid down in Arkansas though. And my Grandfather Frank Reid, my--my Grandfather Frank Reid was described as a very tough man, very mean man by his children. I saw him several times, but I saw him in his later years when he was a very mild and kind man. But the explanation for his disposition related to his father being murdered by a white man down in Arkansas after the Reconstruction period. And that turned Frank Reid into a pretty toughened character, except you know, when he was dealing with his children and he was known to put his hands on either white or black men who offended him. He didn't look for trouble, but he wouldn't back off. And my father tells the story of the Reid children going to the local store in Pine Bluff with only pennies in their pocket because they were impoverished, shopping to buy the best candy and that the, the pattern in the store had been to intimidate black children and black adults, sticking pins into people, putting electric charge on the outside colored water fountain when they went to drink. But whenever the Reid children came through the store, everybody backed off and moved away from them. Let them saunter around, buy their little candy and leave. And that's because they were Frank Reid's children. Story_ID: 615393 Speaker 1: Arkansas is an interesting place. There are a lot of surprising stories about Arkansas, I you know-- Speaker 2: Yep, a lot of Chicago [Illinois] politicians, not a lot, but some went to Arkansas after the Civil War to become involved in politics and the Arkansas-Chicago axis is a pretty strong one in politics and law. Speaker 1: I'm sure it is. There's the Helena axis with the Strogers, Helena, Arkansas? Speaker 2: A lot of, yeah, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] is from Arkansas, Congressman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], so a large number-- Speaker 1: A large number, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I had just talked to a high school friend whose family was from Arkansas. So in addition to the Mississippi migration, you have plenty of stories from Louisiana, Texas, Alabama, Tennessee, Missouri, Arkansas, and of course the focus is usually on Mississippi. Some outstanding Mississippians have come up repeatedly through the ages, not just--they were coming up during the Civil War, after the Civil War, before the Great Migration, during the migration and they've continued after the Great Migration. Some of the biggest names, biggest luminaries in Chicago history were born or reared in Mississippi. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. But that Arkansas connection is, is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very strong. Speaker 1: --is there--do you have a theory about--it seems to me that a certain point after Reconstruction, there was a migration to Arkansas and there were some schools built. You got the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas], Shorter College [North Little Rock, Arkansas] and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--I really don't know too much about Arkansas history. I had relatives who attended AM and N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College] which is now University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff. But I--I don't know. I know it's--it's not a typical southern state because the agriculture differs depending on what part of argi- Arka- Arkansas you're in. Racial pattern is different pol- level of political a- depends on what part of Arkansas you're in. I remember people even going down to Arkansas looking for diamonds, which did exist. Right now Arkansas is behind Louisiana as the nation's largest rice growing state, isn't that interesting? During the time my father [Robert Reed] was a boy, it was a cotton growing state. Story_ID: 615394 Speaker 1: Now did your, your father's [Robert Reed] people have anything to do with the university [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] at all? Speaker 2: No, no. These were just members of the, the agricultural, I guess, proletariat working class, if you wanna call non-industrial workers members of the proletariat. Just ordinary people, the salt of the earth. Speaker 1: Okay. So was there a story about how your grandfather [Frank Reid] left Arkansas with that attitude he had? Was there some incident-- Speaker 2: Well he didn't--he didn't, he stayed in Arkansas. His children in later years migrated around the country, mainly the southern Illinois into Oklahoma. He--and his--and most--well in fact half the children remained in Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so your father came up, what was the story behind him coming? Speaker 2: Yeah my father came up to live with his oldest sister and her husband in East St. Louis, Illinois. And when he got there, there must've been five or six Reed children in East St. Louis. There was plenty of work in East St. Louis, around East St. Louis, and of course across the river in industrial St. Louis [Missouri]. And the infamous race riot of 1917, which preceded the Chicago [Illinois] race riot by two years, that East St. Louis race riot was caused partially by the influx of black workers, you know, seeking jobs and getting them and competing with whites. But there was plenty of work in Arkansas during the riot and after, through World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: Okay. So your father is born in 1912? Speaker 2: Yeah, December 1912. Speaker 1: So about when was it that he came to East St. Louis (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he left, oh I'm guessing probably around the time. He had a little note on his jacket when he was sent up to East St. Louis, I'm joking, I'm--I'm guessing--I'm guessing maybe he--maybe around 1920, '21 [1921], '22 [1922]. And then, within ten years, ten or fifteen--he worked at East St. Louis for over a decade, finished school there. Then he was to--and he moved up to Gary [Indiana] and then before that I think he was in the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] during the Depression [Great Depression]. Story_ID: 615395 Speaker 1: He [Reed's father, Robert Reed] was a CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] boy-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because he used to--used to assist in--used to be the assistant to a doctor. And he tells a story about he had some interest in the human body and medicine because he helped that doctor and then helped him when he studied to become a barber in Chicago [Illinois], which he, he successfully entered the barbering profession in the late '40s [1940s] and spent over thirty some years as the proprietor, as well as active barber at Reed's Barbershops [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At one time he owned two and a total of three up and down 35th Street. Speaker 2: All right. Having a barber myself for a father, I know that the barber's test, they ask you to name all the bones in the body, some other things like that? Speaker 1: Oh yes. My mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] helped him. He studied, study, studied hard, passed--passed that exam and was happy to be independent. He wanted to be independent. Previous to becoming a barber he worked for others, and this is typical of a lot of African Americans. They want the what--tap into what makes an American an American, being independent, not having a boss. Whether you're a wage earner or a slave, former wage earner or former slave, you wanna be independent in regard to your work production. You wanna earn what you can earn and keep your earnings. So happiness for him was becoming the proprietor of Reed's Barbershop by the late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Okay, so. When did he become pro- proprietor of Reed's Barbershop? Speaker 1: I don't know '46 [1946], '47 [1947], 1946, 1947 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, '46 [1946], '47 [1947]. So that's after the war [World War II, WWII]? Speaker 1: Yeah. During the war he was--because of his age--he was in industrial production. He helped produce artillery pieces, precision. He was a precision machine worker during the war. Story_ID: 615396 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: How they what? Speaker 1: How they met? Speaker 2: How they met. I don't know, the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] was a rather, as expansive as it was--and, and the thing about the Black Belt it was always expanding, always expanding. As expans- expansive as it was, it was also quite congested and restrictive. And so socially everybody would've gone to the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] in the late '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s]. Everybody would've been down at the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. Everybody would've been at all those fabulous clubs at 31st [Street], 35th [Street], 39th [Street], 43rd [Street], 47th [Street], 51st [Street], 55th [Street]. They would've been at the same churches. They worked in the same things, they ended up knowing the same people. So we have a family photograph, which I didn't bring, of my father [Robert Reed] as a dapper dressed smallish man, although he was to (laughter) balloon up at 240 pounds at one time. He wasn't small. He was dapper and my mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] very attractive, elegant, you know, right at the time they were married, 1941 (background noise). But people in Chicago [Illinois] took a great deal of pride in appearance during those days. And I think one of the most telling things about how they thought of themselves in terms of personal appearance are the famous photographs of people lining up to go to the Regal Theater, which it opened in 1928 or 1929. Everybody always looked great, they were always dressed up. And everybody that went to church on Sunday looked great. The people on the streets around 47th and South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] as described by Drake [St. Clair Drake] and Cayton [Horace R. Cayton, Jr.] in the book 'Black Metropolis' ['Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City'], they took great pains to appear, to look their best at all times. Story_ID: 615397 Speaker 1: We were describing what Chicago [Illinois] was like when your father [Robert Reed] and mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] got together. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so--so your father, whe- when did they get married? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty [1940]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, 1940, you were born in 1942. Do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a--a--I have a older sister [Wallene Evans] who is alive and a older brother who just died two years ago. This was my mother's second marriage and my father's second marriage. And they were gonna be divorced by 1948, and each was to have a third marriage, but no children, you know. So I have a older sister who is now seventy-seven. I don't refer to her as a half-sister because we always had good relations. And my mother's first marriage to wh- in the 1930s was to a member of the Williams family whose leader was the famous religious leader, Reverend A--L.K. Williams of the Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] and the National Baptist Association [sic. National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]. So from her first marriage there were two children. Speaker 1: Well she was pretty prominent in the church I guess if she married the pastor? Speaker 2: Well it--yeah down at that church, they were in fact. And--and then my--the aunt who reared her was a mother of the church and Olivet was one of the big churches in the tw- in fact, Olivet during World War I [WWI] had a membership of ten thousand, even as late as the 1960s, Olivet Baptist Church at 31st [Street] and what is now King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] was one of the largest black churches--churches, period in the country. This is before the megachurches came into being, you know. Speaker 1: Right. The National Baptist Convention still remains the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was the biggest yeah. Speaker 1: --largest black organization in the world. Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Story_ID: 615398 Speaker 1: So, now when you think about your parents' personalities and talents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and their appearance, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I don't know, my wife [Marva Coleman Reed] tells me I walk like my father [Robert Reed]. They both were very assertive individuals, both independent in spirit. Both as I've mentioned before came up through hard times. Most family stories are like that. I mean, no silver spoons and they knew the value of work and of dedication to a cause. They both were encouraging individuals, positive individuals. Because a part of my success today, in fact the--yeah I mean a great--to a great extent I wouldn't be a member of the academic class if it weren't for their encouragement. So they were both intelligent people. I remember my father up until he--he died in his nineties, up to the time he was about to die always saying, "Son, did I pronounce that word correctly? Did I use that word correctly?" Always concerned about good language, not pretentious language, but good language. My mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] very intelligent. And before she died in 1969, she had moved up in--in occupation to become the vice president of a maid service up on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois]. But she always had a elegance about her. My father, before he hit his eighties, always was what we used to call in the black community, a sharp dresser, you know, always looked good. But they were independent thinkers. Both committed to the African American people, family related people, and just good solid folk, good solid folk. Now, other personality traits, I mean they--I--they were never persons who got angry. My father told a story once, I don't--and then I had to challenge him on this. The story was that he met Joe Louis in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] while he was drinking water from a fountain and Joe was training, that Joe supposedly bumped him (laughter). And my father, at the time--I remember the first time I heard that story he made it appear as though he challenged Joe Louis because he didn't know who he was. Then upon finding who Joe was, (laughter), you know, he backed down. But then he said, "Well really it didn't quite happen that way." He said, "I did." Everybody met Joe Louis 'cause Joe Louis was on the streets of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. And by then it wasn't called the Black Belt, later it was just the South Side. So, but my father, as I said he 240 pounds and was six feet at one time in his life, you know (laughter). So he had the personality trait of being assertive and he wasn't a pushover. To run a barbershop [Reed's Barbershop, Chicago, Illinois], a three chair barbershop on 35th [Street] in that area during that period was a big thing. My mother, a very assertive, intelligent woman, got along with everybody. I had gotten to the point where I would make up stories about her to classrooms. I would talk about my mother helping out my sister [Wallene Evans], we had a large family, taking six apples that was shriveled up and almost rotten, one cup of flour and a half a cup of sugar and making ten apple pies and one cherry pie. Well I mean (laughter) when you make up stories like, you must be impressed with her cooking and her abilities to make something out of nothing. But, but quite a lady, yeah quite a lady. She was a member of the West Side women's club network late in her life and earlier had been in the South Side network of women. Story_ID: 615399 Speaker 1: She told a story of, of being a piano player at church and of being a piano player when Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson] first got started in the Republican Party yes--I mean, I'm sorry, Democratic Party. He had started out as a Republican in the '20s [1920s], but in the late '30s [1930s] and into the '40s [1940s] he was a Democrat, and she said there were meetings held at our house at 3159 South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] early in the '40s [1940s]. And she would sometimes play a piano song. Then my oldest sister [Wallene Evans] talked about she and my brother coming and eating up all the leftover food after political meetings, you know, during that period, yeah. By--after the war-- Speaker 2: Excuse me, I'm sorry, was your father [Robert Reed] like the, the person who invited the political figures over and you know, around there? Speaker 1: I don't think so. I don't know how--I don't know what the connection was, but we had a very nice house. I, I remember it as a very young child. We lived on the corner of 32nd [Street] and South Park, the northeast corner, almost mansion like. It wasn't a mansion like the ones you see along Michigan Avenue in the 4000 and 5000 block, but a very nice place. And there were no bedrooms on the first floor. All the bedrooms were on the second floor. And as one of my mother's friends always said, "Oh yeah the family had that house well decorated, well appointed, and all the rooms were different shades of blue. And it was--and they cooked in the basement and sent food up the dumbwaiter." You know, and there's story--I don't remember a lot, I asked my brother, I asked my sister, asked my father, because I didn't remember I was so young before we moved west after World War II [WWII]. But there was a space there I know and everybody seemed to be involved in politics or church life or fraternal life or something. People were very sociable back in that period. And I remember the pe- the high level of sociability until the '60s [1960s] when see- something seemed to happen in the black community that wasn't good. People don't seem to be as sociable as they used to be. Speaker 2: Okay, I guess I was asking was your mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] the social center of the political meetings or-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no. They--no they weren't political leaders at all, neither one of them, no. But they were part of a large group of supporters and everybody was involved, you know. They weren't leaders in any sen- any sense no, unh-uh. Speaker 2: So they basically provided a space and amenities for the meetings? Okay. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, yeah. And--which is the basis of a solid political organization. It's the little people who are available to support the effort and the candidate, and the process that make things go. Story_ID: 615400 Speaker 1: Your mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] and father [Robert Reed] they moved into that--the house at 31st [Street] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah the family house, yeah. Speaker 1: Family house, okay, after they were married? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And in 19--your father starts a barbershop [Reed's Barbershop, Chicago, Illinois] in 1946 or '47 [1947]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and at the same time we moved to the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay now when was the West Side move? Was this before--now-- Speaker 2: Oh I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had a divorce in '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You'd been about six, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: So were you--did you--yeah, I'm just-- Speaker 2: Oh I don't know, there's a lot I don't--I don't know. I know we were moved west. I know he had the barbershop at the time and then they divorced. Speaker 1: Okay, so about right 1948 was about the time that they moved, plus they-- Speaker 2: No, no, moved before then. We were west I know when the divorce took place. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there--do you know--understand why they moved to the West Side since they were so established on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well because--well because of the housing restrictions. I--I mentioned people got to know each other because of the congestion. The South Side was like a overinflated tire that was about to explode. And the population, the density of population was so great that something had to happen and it could've been bad. What happened was rather good in that areas like Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois], south of 63rd Street opened up, housing was available. So blacks headed south and then the West Side around the area immediately south of California [Avenue] along Warren [Boulevard] and Washington Boulev- opened up. Whites had a chance to move out of the city for the better areas after World War II [WWII] ended, and that's what they did. They freed up housing. But everybody will tell you, the story of housing in late '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s] was a story of a possible social explosion. Speaker 1: Okay. This is-- Speaker 2: People were jammed up. There were--there'd been kitchenettes for maybe twenty years on the South Side, kitchenette apartment, people living in these small housing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We need just to put this in perspective. These--there are a lot of big townhouses on, on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. Speaker 2: Mansions you mean, that's how I-- Speaker 1: Mansions, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they'd been cut up-- Speaker 1: They'd been cut up? Speaker 2: Yeah into kitchenettes. So maybe like where we lived in later years after we moved, let's see there were people living there, one, two, three, maybe four units, can't remember. But there was a extreme housing need in the city and people moved out. In fact, in the late '40s [1940s] up to the early '60s [1960s] you had what I as a historian like to describe as the process of depopulation of the South Side. People had to get out. Now in the late '40s [1940s], now I don't remember this personally because I was too young, but I read about it, hundreds of people had to guard black homes in the area south of 63rd Street or on the West Side because white mobs didn't want blacks moving in. Whites were moving out but they if, if somebody was gonna move in they weren't supposed to be Negro families. So unf- my wife's [Marva Coleman Reed] family, which they come up from Mississippi during the war, they moved as far south as 71st [Street] and Calumet [Avenue], and there were police out there protecting black homeowners, hundreds. By the '50s [1950s] the famous story of Trumbull Park [Trumbull Park Homes, Chicago, Illinois] makes the news where you have a couple hundred police out every day, every night protecting the six or seven black families in that housing project out on 103rd Street. I mean it was--so there was a lot of trouble in Chicago around housing. So when we moved west we moved into housing that was predominantly white. So I grew up with kids and went to school with white kids, had white friends all through high school [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But there was a cer- certain amount of tension and the black community kept growing and growing. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you moved into what's called East Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The East Garfield Park community, yeah. I just moved out of that house five years ago. I had left and then came back, but I was there for the last thirty years. So it's an interesting story, housing in Chicago. Speaker 1: That's the Chicago in Lorraine Hansberry's play ['A Raisin in the Sun']? Speaker 2: Right. In fact when, when they moved into their home, they didn't have the--well there was a rock thrown through the window and that was tame compared to some of the things that happened to other people in other neighborhoods. People will fight and kill over housing. And the whole story of housing in Chicago is a volatile story. Just think of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being hit with the rock in 1965 or '66 [1966] in Chicago, '66 [1966]. In America if you own a home you're in control of a castle, that's it. You may own a home, you may own a car, you made it. And so people will do a lot of things to protect that castle. And people will do a lot to what, secure possession of a castle. Story_ID: 615401 Speaker 1: Now you were six years old or so when you--or almost six-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you all moved? Speaker 2: No, no, I must've--no before that because I remember being in kindergarten, that's '47 [1947]. And we were--there were only six black kids in that whole school when we entered there, I remember that. Somebody in that school referred to me either a colored person, a Negro, the N word or something, and it upset me 'cause I remember going home--my father [Robert Reed] brought this up to me not too long ago, before he died, he said, "Yeah," he said, "you remember that's--what happened?" I said, "Yeah I remember a kid call--said something." He said, "Yeah I had to come up to the school," this must've been 1947 or something, "and--and the principal and I asked, 'Well what are you?'" I said, "I'm like everybody else, I'm white." I thought everybody in the world was white, that the people were white (laughter). I didn't know--black families didn't teach distinctions, you know, you're different then somebody. You were just a kid. And so for this kid to know I was different and call me different upset me, and my father said, "Yeah well your answer was, you're like--I'm like everybody else, I'm white" (laughter). So I've been confused ever since, since 1947. Story_ID: 615402 Speaker 1: What happened with your parents in 1948 and, and how did that-- Speaker 2: Well we don't wanna get into that, that's the divorce, yeah I mean-- Speaker 1: But I--I just wanna know how--what happened to you in terms, did you stay with your mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] or? Speaker 2: Oh for the most part I stayed west, but then I did spend some time south with a few older relatives that were still over on South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So did your father [Robert Reed] move back south or? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. He kept the barbershop [Reed's Barbershop, Chicago, Illinois] on 35th [Street]? Speaker 2: Yeah. He kept his barbershop on 35th, 18 1/2 East 35th until he was forced to move down to 79 East 35th down on--near--where the police station is now. Yeah he was right under the "L" [elevated train] at 18 1/2, yeah, 35th. Speaker 1: Okay. He was near that the south side Y, I mean the YMCA [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois] and all that I guess? Speaker 2: No, no, right at 35th and Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First under the "L" and then yeah. When you go over there to that new elevated stop, you're standing right where he used to be. That was a great spot for a barbershop. Story_ID: 615403 Speaker 1: All right. Now we always ask this question. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights, smells and sounds. Sights, sounds and smells. Smells negative: during the summer you could smell the stockyards on occasion, but we were so far west that wasn't something that you smell with regularity. Smells positive: Christmas cooking, Thanksgiving cooking, my mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] cooking the turkey and other delights. My relatives making eggnog from scratch that smelled good. Sounds, I remember during the 1950s the emergence of--of what was finally labeled R&B. Now the music had always been around but there seemed to be a change in the late '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] from singers such as who is that, the, The Mills Brothers harmonizing to single singers like the late Johnny Ace, a name you probably don't remember, but tho- people older than my older brother and sister [Wallene Evans], they had records. Emergence of people like Sam Cooke, The Platters, then Motown [Motown Records] comes in later. New sounds, you heard that everywhere. And in the sound of jazz we're very impressed in the '50s [1950s] with jazz. If you wanted to be--impress people, you were seen walking along the street with a jazz album. And I can remember a group--a group of fellows on my block sitting around listening to Duke Ellington and listening to him and listening to his music. And we're all aware of Dizzy Gillespie, Diz and Prez Lester Young, and Miles [Miles Davis] and Bird--Charlie Parker, yeah. Those are the sounds you heard. You didn't hear gunshots. You did hear mothers calling their children to come in 'cause it was dark, okay. You did hear the sound of people singing, doo wopping, doo wopping came in early in the '50s [1950s]. And let's see, sights. Those are smells and sounds, let's see sights. One very impressionable sight was the sight of the opening of the Midwest Boys Club at 3250 West Washington Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois], half a block from where I lived. And I ended up having a fifty year relationship with the Boys and Girls Clubs of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], over fifty years, almost sixty. Because now I sit on the board of directors of the Martin Luther King, Jr. Boys and Girls Club [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boys and Girls Club, Chicago, Illinois]. Here's a pin with Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] on it. I've been a past president, pr- past vice president, past secretary, assistant sec- whatever. That's a sound. When that facility opened, an old mansion, it was a Godsend because instead of us just playing on the streets, we had very small backyards or playing in the alleys, and these weren't garbage filled alleys, but they were alleys nonetheless. We had this facility which later within--opened in 1953 within sixteen, seventeen years would be an even newer facility with a swimming pool, gymnasium, theater, et cetera. That still stands, it's over a million dollar facility, and I'm affiliated with it. My sons [Robert Reed, Malcolm Reed and William Reed] came through it. Very--played a very prominent role in keeping the cohesion of the community. We had community meetings, political meetings, meetings on education, everything community betterment. That's one of the major sights. Story_ID: 615404 Speaker 1: But another major sight, beside the sight of home and a Christmas tree, was the sight of John Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I attended Marshall from January 1955 through January 1959, and that was a great period in my life to be with the Big Ms: Midwest Boys Club [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boys and Girls Club, Chicago, Illinois] and Marshall High School. Marshall was a racially integrated school with high standards, academic standards. And as a bonus, we had a championship basketball team. But the--but the major facet of life that I remember at Marshall High School was the teaching core and the standard of, of learning to which you aspired. You always wanted to get the best grades and reach the honor society, which I only did once. Oh the courses were tough, it was competitive, but did I learn. And I remember we started out in English early on with Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] after we had finished 'Beowulf,' and we ended up in the senior year with ten college words a week and reading adult novels, and discussing them and analyzing what would go into a term paper, things like that. That was a great experience. I was a member of the band for a number of years. I was in the visual aid department showing films, and I was a member of the cross country team. One of the worst athletes that that school ever produced (laughter). A great experience. That was a sight to see Marshall High School, to see the kids in the high school, to participate in activities, big deal. It was a big positive deal. Speaker 2: Let me ask you, I'm gonna get back to Marshall, but when you were growing up you, you went to John Marshall Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] too, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 615405 Speaker 1: What were you like as a little kid? What were you thinking about, what did you like to do, did--were you exposed to historical information when you were a youngster? Speaker 2: As a youngster I was very shy, didn't say much, little frail fellow physically. Always protected by family and friends. I have friends today that I've known since the 1940s, guys that looked out after me. Everybody just seemed to look after me, tough guys, good guys, bad guys. Yeah, I knew some very tough people, they all seemed to recognize me as having potential. And I noticed that, I think back to the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s], boys and girls were supportive in those days. This--this attitude today that you should be violent either in heart, tongue or head against people wasn't the way I remembered things. People were supportive. Some of the toughest people around, the softest people around. Everybody supported and encouraged me to reach my potential. And people said, "Oh you're smart, you're going somewhere, you'll be somebody." And that's a track I got on, that I entered and haven't been detoured from or derailed off. Speaker 1: Okay so you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have to achieve, yeah, because everybody says I have to achieve, they expect me to achieve, belie- they believe in me. So I've always said on a religious level I was blessed and am blessed, and then on a social level, very, very, very fortunate. I don't have any enemies that I know of and I have many people who have supported me through the years. So I, I really feel happy. I get a Christmas present every day being alive and being well received. I--I do know that--I do remember that as a youngster I was told I should become a lawyer when I grew up, and I do also remember my neighbors down the street, the Phelps [ph.] family, who were oddly enough Roman Catholics. Their, their youngest daughter was a competitor of mine in school, you know, who would be the smartest, would get the best grades. Their--at their home, we had intellectual sessions in my preteens, you know, I remember after learning what an intellectual was and who, who composed the intelligentsia, you know, going on. But that was common in our block, you know. On our block, 3000 block on Warren [Boulevard], the north side of the block competed with the south side to see how many kids go to college. This is a working class neighborhood over in the East Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And then Marshall [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] was a school, as I mentioned, that was a school where learning was encouraged and I think of the [U.S.] Marine Corps motto, "Our standard is excellence" [sic.]. So that was an inspiration to me. Story_ID: 615406 Speaker 1: Now what is odd, though, what interested me when I was very young, there were a lot of things I didn't know. I do remember my brother's friend, Daniel [ph.], who had artistic talents drawing in cartoon fashion scenes that showed Jomo Kenyatta and his followers fighting the British imperialists in the '50s [1950s]. And I remember scenes of (laughter) Jomo Kenyatta and his warriors throwing spears high into the sky and knocking out British Sabre jets (laughter) that was something. Speaker 2: This came out of the imagination of one of your brother's friends? Speaker 1: Yeah, well that was in the news then. Mau Mau fighting for independence with Jomo Kenyatta as a--who became prime minister with independence. And then I remember in 1957 something odd happened. I was in class and I was talking while the instructor was talking. This was unusual for me, I was a quiet guy, followed the rules, didn't make any waves. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I remember Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] vividly. A social science class, I was caught talking, something I didn't normally do. And when the instructor said, "Mr. Reed [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Reed] would you wanna--would you like to share this with the class?" Well I hadn't been talking about anything of substance to this fella George [ph.] next to me. But for some reason what I said was this, and this has stuck with me through the years. "Mr. Katz [Gerald Katz], I was talking to George about my great-great-great-grandfather who was an African chief--or king." Now why would I make that comment, I don't--I don't know. Through the years I've thought about and I said well it shows an affirmation of what the African experience, but why would I at age fourteen, fifteen say that. I know we talked about Africa in our neighborhood [East Garfield Park, Chicago, Illinois] and at depth, you know, beyond what teenagers usually talk about. And I began to wonder through the years maybe I had heard something from my [maternal] great aunt, Mrs. Russie Berry [Russie Slaughter Berry], one of the Slaughter girls, one of the Civil War hero's daughters. She may have told me that her father [Henry Slaughter] might have come from Africa. I might have gotten it from her, but I can't remember the things that she and her husband told me or that other great uncles and an aunt would've told me. I just can't separate these things into categories and say with clarity I remember so and so saying this under these circumstances. Speaker 2: Now did you--were you exposed to Negro History Week [Black History Month] when you're coming up. Did they do that at--at Marshall? Speaker 1: We didn't have Negro Hi- Negro History Week started in 1926, but we didn't have Negro History Week in the Chicago Public Schools to my knowledge, and I went to an integrated high school and we wouldn't have been talking about one group in particular. It was a matter of all kids being molded to become mainstream Americans, middle class Americans. And so we didn't have that. But I did get tidbits here and there in the neighborhood. I remember hearing about Martin de Porres, the African American priest, down in the Caribbean or Peru or somewhere. I remember hearing about Toussaint L'Ouverture, the hero of the Haitian Revolution. But there are a lot of people I didn't hear about, well I did know about George Washington Carver, I read about him and Booker T. Washington. But--and I was aware of Ralph Bunche. But this was not bona fide Negro history. And so this puzzles me to this day, how I came up with this lie to this teacher about such a substantive subject. Story_ID: 615407 Speaker 1: I was just asking if--about African American history influences. I don't know when you were coming up did you know of Hammurabi [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb] and the House of Knowledge [Chicago, Illinois] or, or the works of [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs, 'cause you're on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] now and I, I know there were some Hebrew Israelites on the West Side and different kinds of Mus- Muslims that have a history that's even those mythological? Speaker 2: It's interesting. This town is so big that there were things I just didn't hear about having been separated from developments on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I met Mr. Hammurabi who founded and headed the House of Knowledge, but it was in later years. I went by the original DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] when it was the Ebony Museum [Ebony Museum of Negro History and Art], but that was in the '60s [1960s] when they first, Margaret and--Burroughs and her husband-- Speaker 1: Charlie. Speaker 2: Charles Burroughs had started. Yeah I went by Michigan Ave [Michigan Avenue] but it was really after my high school days [at Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I was not aware of quite a few things. I remember when I first heard of the Islamic influence, that was 1958, somebody was talking about the Nation of Islam. But there were things we knew about and quite a bit of things we didn't know about. And I was reading--but I'll tell you what, a major influence on my intellectual development about African Americans was Ebony and Jet magazines. In fact, when I see Lerone Bennett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett], to whom I look up to as a intellectual influence. I always thank him because when he started that series that lead to his book 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America'] when he started I believe back in '62 [1962] or '63 [1963], that had a profound influence on me. After 'Before the Mayflower,' there was a slight increase in the number of publications on African Americans. But the book was well written, a series, a monthly series was well written and inspiring. And that raised my level of consciousness greatly. Speaker 1: Okay you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But by and large, you're not really talking about a high consciousness of African American achievements until deep into the 1960s and into the black power period. Nowadays what appears to be commonplace in the information flow about African Americans was quite unusual back in those days. Speaker 1: Now did you ever check out Rogers' columns, Your History in the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] and the Defender [Chicago Defender] or? Speaker 2: Let me correct myself. I read 'From "Superman" to Man' by J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] down at the Phelps [ph.] household. It must've been in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]. So I did re- that was a very influential book and it's a book that I've mentioned in one of my latest productions which deals with black life between 1900 and 1919, the book I'm having published at the University of--I believe it's Northern Illinois University Press [DeKalb, Illinois]. It'll be called 'Open Up the Door of Opportunity: Early Black Chicago History' ['Knock at the Door of Opportunity: Black Migration to Chicago 1900-1919,' Christopher Robert Reed]. But J.A. Rogers was very influential. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad I asked about him. Speaker 2: Yeah and--and I remember--I remember the value I placed on having my own copy that I bought back in the '60s [1960s], of course that was like a fifth or sixth reprint of 'From "Superman" to Man.' By the way, he appears in my latest work because he came to Chicago [Illinois] to write that. He was a Pullman porter, 'course he was a Caribbean, he was born in the Caribbean, he came to America and he was a Pullman porter around 1917, '18 [1918], '19 [1919], and he wrote it here. Another influential figure in Chicago literary history. Speaker 1: I--I didn't realize he wrote it yeah that's--that's yeah, interesting. Yeah I know he spent some time here. Speaker 2: Right. He was here about the same time that Langston Hughes was here, and Langston Hughes' information in 'The Big Sea' [Langston Hughes] was partially related to his experience living over near Wentworth [Avenue] around 27th Street, 28th Street. He was here for a very short period, but he was here. Story_ID: 615408 Speaker 1: Now did the fellows in the barbershop ever really talk about history to, to the extent that you learned new things? Speaker 2: Oh yeah at Reed's Barbershop [Chicago, Illinois] they talked about black figures and they tried to analyze what was going on now. One of the most important figures I met in the barbershop was a man by the name of Pop Helton [Jesse "Pop" Helton], who when I met him was a hundred and some years of age. And he talked about his activities during the 1930s during the Great Depression. His activities in placing people back in their homes after the sheriff's deputies and the police had set them out on the streets for nonpayment of rent or for nonpayment of mortgages. Pop was part of a group called the Black Bugs, the, the Black Reds, the Reds. And Pop had what he called a bunch. It was a group of young black men unemployed who are angry about the status of all citizens during this period. So they went around putting people back into their apartments and homes after the police and the bailiffs left. Speaker 1: Okay, well correct me if I'm wrong, I might be, but I think--was Ishmael Flory part of the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] scene? Speaker 2: No Ishmael Flory arrived in town about 1935 and he was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], very active on the South Side. Story_ID: 615409 Speaker 1: There are quite a few things that you picked up on. Did you think when you were coming up that you wanted to be a historian at all? Speaker 2: No I wasn't thinking it, I was supposed to be a lawyer. One thing I didn't know, I didn't know anything about the glory days of black business along State Street and around the access of 35th [Street] where Reed's Barbershop [Chicago, Illinois] was to be established in the--in the late '40s [1940s]. I remember talking to my sister [Wallene Evans], who's older, and her mentioning that there had been a black bank or some black banks on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] earlier than the period, you know, then, then her you--then her younger days. But it wasn't until, oh, the 1960s that I realized the significance of the Binga bank and then the Binga State Bank [Chicago, Illinois] from 1908 on. And then the Overton [Anthony Overton] bank, which was Douglass National [Douglass National Bank, Chicago, Illinois] and a couple of other black banks, the Hunter bank [Hunter Banking Company, Chicago, Illinois], the Woodfolk bank [Woodfolk Banking Company, Chicago, Illinois] and there was another bank that a man by the name of Chavis [ph.] ran. But there's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are more than just a few black banks? Speaker 2: Right, right and I, I mention them in my new book that's at the University of Illinois Press [Champaign, Illinois]. A book entitled 'The Historical Black Metropolis' ['The Rise of Chicago's Black Metropolis 1920-1929,' Christopher Robert Reed]. Hopefully that book will be out at the end of 2010-- Speaker 1: When you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'The Historical Black Metropolis.' Story_ID: 615410 Speaker 1: When you were coming along, was there very much talk of du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I don't remember hearing much about du Sable until maybe the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know we have DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], that dates from the '40s [1940s] right? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-five [1935]. Speaker 1: Thirty-five [1935], okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And the reason it was named DuSable was people were very well aware of du Sable. Now I also covered du Sable historically in that 'Historical Black Metropolis' ['The Rise of Chicago's Black Metropolis 1920-1929,' Christopher Robert Reed] because it turns out that I'm convinced, and I mention this in a book I had published in 2005, that al- du Sable--that although du Sable left the city in 1800, he sold his extensive holdings to a French Canadian by the name of Le May [sic. Jean La Lime]. I'm convinced that the small frontier community of Chicago [Illinois] had people that whispered and talked openly about this black man who had been the first permanent settler. I mean these people didn't have a lot to do except talk. And so I'm pretty sure there would've been from a whisper to an exclamation of amazement on points of reference to du Sable. I've been looking for documentation on du Sable, recognition by the Chicago community and by the black Chicago community. Eighteen eighty-five [1885] was a year when the first formal history of Chicago was published and that was published by a A.T. Andreas [Alfred T. Andreas] and he mentions du Sable and he mentions the documentation to establish du Sable's permanence in the claim that du Sable was the first permanent non-indigenous settle- settler in town. Interesting enough, a black business directory published in the same year 1885, did not mention du Sable. That's rather odd to have a business directory, the first one done and not mention this figure who was more than legendary, who was real, more than symbolic, but real. You know, who was the father of Chicago business, and therefore, the business--the father of black Chicago, the black built Chicago businesses tradition. Very interesting. Then by the 1890s there are references to du Sable. But I found it strange that at the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 [Chicago, Illinois], that the Haitian pavilion, the first pavilion built on the fairgrounds did not have anyone talking about the connection between du Sable, who was of Haitian descent, the Haitian pavilion and Chicago. I found no reference to it. Although in the white newspapers there were references every now and then. By the early 20th century, there's a formal introduction of du Sable, once again into the popular man as a permanent settler and significant in the economic sphere. In 1903, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] graduated a young African American who had finished his master's thesis on Negro property owners and that thesis starts out with an explanation that the business tradition starts with this man who was a late 18th century figure. That was Monroe Nathan Work and he made the pages of the Chicago Tribune. Young colored scholar finds out information about the city's first permanent settler, city's founder. That was 1903. So I'm pretty sure people were quite proud. In the years that followed the next decade, there was complete acceptance of du Sable as the founder of the city. References were found in--in novels. One of the leading white socialites by the name of H.C. Chatfield Taylor in his book 'Chicago' in 1917 talks about du Sable, although not in positive terms. And then The Half Century Magazine published by soon to be banker, Anthony Overton. I had a featured article that talked about black business history and talked--and it mentions du Sable. By the 1920s, there's such a widespread acceptance of this historic figure that the Men's Division of the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] renames itself the DuSable group [Jean Baptiste DeSaible Club] that was led by Dr. Arthur G. Falls. And then by 1927, in anticipation of the 1933 World's Fair [Chicago World's Fair, A Century of Progress International Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], a group of black women led by Mrs. Annie E. Oliver [Annie Oliver] starts the DuSable Memorial League [Jean Baptiste Point DuSable Memorial Society; Chicago DuSable League]. Once the fair takes place, blacks are successful in their attempts to have a replica of du Sable's homestead placed on the fairgrounds. Unfortunately, the replica wasn't historically accurate. du Sable did not live in a log cabin. du Sable lived in a, a homestead, a compound, which had several buildings and they would've been built in the French fashion, which would've been vertically noticeable rather than horizontal. And would've been quite a spread, he had a bake house in it. He had a--he had place to keep the dairy cows, he had a place for storage. He had this, he had that. But I asked someone who was there in the fair working at the cabin in 1933, did you know it was an inaccurate depiction. And the lady said, "That's the best we could do back in 1933." And then within two years, a new high school, the new Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois] was opened and named after du Sable. Jean Baptiste Point DuSable High School in 1935. Story_ID: 615411 Speaker 1: At the present time, I'm active with a group that's working to have DuSable Park become a reality, and that park exists down by the Ogden Slip immediately west of the Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois]. It's immediately south also of Lake Point Tower [Chicago, Illinois] and should be in the outer footprint to the east of the Spire [Fordham Spire] which has been designed by the Spanish architect Calatrava [Santiago Calatrava], and hopefully if there's proper funding, the Spire, Chicago's newest skyscraper will be up in maybe six, seven, eight years with DuSable Park as its eastern footprint, although it's a public park. Speaker 2: This is a group [Chicago DuSable League] that Linda Wheeler is in and the other? Speaker 1: Yes Linda Wheeler belo- in fact I got involved with that group. I had known about it and then Linda Wheeler said, "Look come on over to these meetings," so I got involved with them and was there when two years ago Calatrava just showed his plans and said, "Oh yes I'll cooperate with this group and we'll have a plaza to the east and then across the roadway there will be DuSable Park which we will incorporate into our ap- architectural design and it will be a, a unified park and architectural complex." Unfortunately, the depression has hit now and the money that would've come through the Irish developer has stopped. They're slowly trying to get money together to do more than (gesture) have foundations in the ground for the Spire. Story_ID: 615412 Speaker 1: I'm gonna take you back to Marshall now, Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did you run for any class offices in high school? Speaker 2: I was a member of the student council early on and then when I was a senior I was I think assistant class treasurer. But I was one of many cogs at this very large high school. We had about twenty-five hundred students in the 1950s, a very large high school. And I was, as I said I was a member of the band and our band had over a hundred members. Everybody wanted to be in the band or our orchestra or in our big choir. The band was an integral part of the yearly spring festival which was almost adult level professional in execution. So that was a big thing. I got a band letter and as I said I was on the cross country team in my senior year. And a member of the visual aid group. Speaker 1: So the visual aid group? Speaker 2: Oh we showed films. Yeah that was pretty big 'cause we got to go around and start class sessions off 'cause we were the guys who brought in the projectors and knew how to get the film going, that was a big deal, visual aid (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Okay. Now Marshall is, for those who are not from Chicago [Illinois], is a huge facility. How many students were there when you were? Speaker 2: Well about twenty-five hundred, yeah and Marshall had been built in 1899 a very huge structure. Three levels and then four--some sections four levels. Several gymnasiums, great big auditorium, swimming pool, many, many classrooms, an indoor courtyard, quite a--quite a structure, and there was an elementary school attached to it. Story_ID: 615413 Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers in Marshall [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] that mentored you or took a special (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, well I mean when I think back to mainly teachers in English. I just was reintroduced to a teacher I had forgotten who was inducted into the Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] hall of fame about four years ago. He remembered me, I had forgotten him until I went back to the course book and noticed I was in fact an excellent student. He said, "Yeah I could see your potential then." I didn't realize that I'd been doing so well in English. A Mr. Wolfe [William Wolfe]. And then I remember my senior year teacher, I had the same teacher for two, two semesters, Miss Rosemary Van Pier [ph.] who became Mrs. Rosemary Van Pier-Robinson. An aspiring teacher, she was the one that had our, our class learning ten college words per week, you know, college words that I still use today, you know. And I remember being introduced to English in the freshman year, my freshman year by Mr. Thrasher Hall [ph.], you know. So those English teachers were very inspiring. Miss Carolyn King [ph.] and some of the others. Speaker 1: Now you had black teachers at, at Marshall, right? Speaker 2: Very few. Marshall had no more than a handful of black teachers. And most of the teachers there who were white had master's degrees. Story_ID: 615414 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, was your family involved in any of the community organizing efforts on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well not my family. My mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] was, of course, in that West Side women's organization, but we had a block club. They were--they were active in our block club which was founded in early '40s [1940s] to fight against the restrictive covenant. Everybody who bought a home on our block shouldn't have been able to buy a home because they were Negroes and the restrictive covenants on the deed said no white person can sell to a Negro. Otherwise, the other whites can sue and court damages, costs will be paid by the offending party that sold and the Negro families that bought the property. My block club, the 3000 West Warren [Boulevard] block club, fought that and won. This is in advance of the U.S. Supreme Court decision of Shelley v. Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948]. And of course it follows the decision in 1940 Hansberry v. Lee [Hansberry v. Lee, 1940], which only had application to the unconstitutionality of the Washington Park Subdivision of Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] area, where Lorraine Hansberry's family lived. But my family was part of the block club and in later years as I moved away but moved back to our Warren avenue home, I became active with the Midwest Community Council which was headed by Nancy Jefferson, and community activities operating out of the Midwest Boys Club, then later Martin Luther King Boys and Girls Club [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boys and Girls Club, Chicago, Illinois], and with the local schools because I was president and held other offices with the local school improvement councils. And then when school reform came in in the late 18--1980s rather, I was active as president, vice president of the Local School Council, LSCs, and was part of the district office operations and on the first school board nominating committee under the reform act of 1988 [Chicago School Reform Act of 1988]. I also was active in the 1983 campaign to elect Harold Washington working with the Westside Coalition for Unity and Political Action. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a later development basically, I mean you were really involved. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact there, there were much--there were many more community organizations that evolved when I became an adult, yeah. Not so many during the 1950s because that was a period when the African American community was just getting settled on the West Side in the East Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Now the older African American community had been farther east going all the way down say to Racine [Avenue]. Racine up to California [Avenue], 2800 West, 1200 to 2800; 1950s, not a lot of activity, you have to remember this is pre-civil rights 1960s some and then a proliferation by the late '60s [1960s] into the '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 615415 Speaker 1: Well in high school what were your prospects--well were there any other--who were some of the students that you remember or were there any notable students that we, we would know now in high--in high school with you? Speaker 2: No, I can't think of anyone who any the national reputation except we had a basketball player, George Wilson, who was all-state, Olympic 1964, NBA [National Basketball Association] played eventually at the end of his career with the Bulls [Chicago Bulls]. But there's no one else who has local or state or national prominence. Good people, but very much like myself, cogs that did a job in support of building a foundation. But no famous people like DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] claims Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dinah Washington. Speaker 2: --names, Washington names like that, right. Speaker 1: Okay, well did you have good counseling when you were coming out of Marshall [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] to think about going to college? Speaker 2: Not really. My interest in going to college came from my neighborhood [East Garfield Park, Chicago, Illinois]. I remember meeting a Ph.D. My first Ph.D. was a--that I met was an African American from Alabama who had friends on the block, Mobile [Alabama] and he was headed towards the state university system of New York [State University of New York System]. Dr. Brown [ph.], I remember that, that was encouraging. I remember my medical doctor, Dr. Jack Lewis [ph.], whose father had also been a medical doctor on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] for decades was inspiring, you know, knowing that he was there. We had a few scattering, a few school teachers around, very few. But I would say the word had gotten around that college was the thing to do when you got out of high school, but I didn't have any money. My family didn't have any money when I first got out of high school, so I went to Crane Junior College [Theodore Herzl Junior College] which later was gonna become Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois]. And then worked full time until I had enough money to enter Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] in 1960. Speaker 1: Okay, where did you work? Speaker 2: I worked for the government in [U.S.] Social Security Administration. And I was to have off and on employment with either the Social Security Administration or its counterpart for railroad workers, the [U.S.] Railroad Retirement Board off and on between 1959 and 1969. Most of my employment was with the government. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--was that--was that good in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh that was good because the gov- you know, you are always paid when you work as a government worker. In addition, I worked as a file clerk from 1959 on and that gave me experience in handling records and seeing the value of records and keeping records in order. Because today, I have my own record file and I think back to my days of social security and the Railroad Retirement Board, you know, records, documents. I learned to interpret documents later at the Social Security Administration when I became a claims authorizer. So that was very good, that was a very good building block. Story_ID: 615416 Speaker 1: What year did you go on and ma- matriculate into Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well 1960. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], okay. So that's basically a year after graduating from Marshall [Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had just--I was just--had just turned seventeen when I graduated and so I entered the college world very slowly through the city college system. Later on I was to return to Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] in 1969 as an instructor, then twelve years later as a dean, it was very interesting. Speaker 1: Okay, you see those changes over the years? Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Well, this is as good time as any, how, how did it change over the years? Speaker 2: Well, the school got bigger. I mean Crane Junior College [Theodore Herzl Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] was I think much, yeah pretty sure it was much smaller than Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College] which was to become Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]. And there were only a few colleges during that period, let's see there was no Daley College [Richard J. Daley College, Chicago, Illinois], there was no Loop College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois]. There was a Wright College [Wilbur Wright Junior College; Wilbur Wright College, Chicago, Illinois]. There was no Olive-Harvey College [Chicago, Illinois]. That was a small system that kept getting bigger and bigger, and a greater number of students were able to take advantage of first two years of college, good experience for all Chicago [Illinois] and it's still doing a good job. Story_ID: 615417 Speaker 1: At Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] now you--now how did you like Roosevelt? I, I seem to get an indication you made a lot of lifelong friends at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. At Roosevelt, I met distinguished historian John Bracey [John H. Bracey, Jr.] who was--who I'm bringing in to speak in Chicago [Illinois] in March. When I say I'm bringing him in, I happen to be the chief operative of the Black Chicago History Forum, and--and we want people to come who can talk about the Chicago experience. So he'll be coming in from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts]. Darlene Clark Hine was someone who--well I didn't actually meet her at Roosevelt, I met her at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] after Roosevelt where we studied under a professor who had been at Roosevelt. She is the president of this Black Chicago Forum. But I met a lot of people who became outstanding historians at Roosevelt, and friends. In fact one of my distinguished professors, Charles V. Hamilton who recently retired from Columbia University [New York, New York] was my--well he was my professor of political science at Roosevelt. He's back as one of the co-chair emeriti, he's co-chair emeritus of the Black Chicago History Forum. Yes, I met a lot of good people at Roosevelt and have maintained relations. In fact, I only retired from Roosevelt three years ago. I, I was doing part time work at Roosevelt in the '70s [1970s] when I was elsewhere and came back full time as associate professor of history in 1987 and retired as full professor in 2006 August, and now hold the rank of professor emeritus of history. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are big figures in black history, Charles V. Hamilton wrote 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America'] along with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]. Darlene Clark Hine who is--really remade the landscape for black women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For women. Oh yes she is the pioneer. Oh Juliet E.K. Walker. I brought Juliet up in my role as secretary of the Black Chicago History Forum. Juliet Walker came up from the University of Texas at Austin [Austin, Texas], but she received her undergraduate degree at Roosevelt 1963 and her Ph.D. of course under [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and then she spent a quarter of a century down at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Distinguished in the role--in her role as a business historian. She is the business historian for black America though. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--I said an August group, you know, John--well I said that I didn't even know I was doing it, but August Meier has something to do with this group, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, August Meier--John Bracey led the group, the Negro History Club that brought Meier to Roosevelt I believe in 1965 or '66 [1966]. And we, we studied under him. And then he got this golden opportunity to go to Kent State University in Kent, Ohio to assume this super professorship and I can't think of the title they, they had, but it was a super professorship there at the university. So I studied and received my doctorate in American history at Kent State. Story_ID: 615418 Speaker 1: What was the atmosphere like? I think you there--I read some place you all formed a Negro History Club at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, that was formed in 1964 or '5 [1965]. Br- John Bracey [John H. Bracey, Jr.] was the key brain, the mastermind of--Bracey is an outstanding scholar and a lot of my success is related to being associated with Bracey through undergraduate and graduate years. Speaker 1: All right, okay, and so was this--this is Negro History Club was, was this the first Negro History Club that had ever been established at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Yes and that--and that relates back to a answer I gave you earlier as to when there was this mature consciousness of the need to place professional level of scientific black history into any curriculum. Yeah, this is the same time, mid-'60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s] going into the black power period. Because the black power period brought in this--this need for a much more sophisticated level of appreciation of blacks in American history-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and in African history. Story_ID: 615419 Speaker 1: Talking--I'm going--jumping back to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] though, we had outstanding professors white and black. Now if you know the Roosevelt tradition which goes back to, back to its founding in 1945, Roosevelt was a school specifically set up to pave the way for what America should have been educationally, open to all who had talent and were willing to work hard to use that talent to, you know, absorb learning and contribute to scholarship and society. So, St. Clair Drake, the noted St. Clair Drake was there, I studied under Drake. Lorenzo D. Turner. Speaker 2: Let's see, let's, let's dwell on these people for a moment. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: St. Clair Drake-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --has been described as a genius by lots of people. Speaker 1: Yes, he was a Ph.D. from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. His major study was not 'Black Metropolis' ['Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City']. He wrote up the findings of a number of people and worked with Horace Cayton [Horace R. Cayton, Jr.] to get that out. And that is recognized as an outstanding scholarly work or a tome. But his major interest was in Africa and his Ph.D. dissertation was on the workers of Cardiff, Wales, men of African descent who were part of the Cardiff, Wales society. And then of course I studied some sociology under him, but I also studied African life under Drake. Speaker 2: Yeah, was he writing 'Black Folk Here and There' ['Black Folk Here and There: An Essay in History and Anthropology,' St. Clair Drake] you know, at that point? Speaker 1: He was aware of what he might be doing then, 'cause--I mean we talked about he knew Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] of Ghana, he knew Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure]. He talked to those things. I don't know if he had plans to write the book 'Black Folk Now and Then' [sic.], but it's natural progression would have lead him to, to do that two volume work, which he, he did complete before he died in 19--1990 I think, yeah I think he died in 1990. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He left Roosevelt in 1969 after almost twenty years at Roosevelt, or about twenty years. Lorenzo D. Turner, the distinguished linguist who is known for his work in the African Gullah dialect, African based Gullah dialect. His famous book of course is 'Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect' [Lorenzo Dow Turner]. The Gullah dialect being the language spoken by people who lived on the Sea Islands off the coast of Georgia and South Carolina. They are highly Africanized and, and only lightly Americanized. They were isolated for most of the Africans brought in as slaves who became Americanized. Speaker 2: Now these people and there's some people I think in New Orleans [Louisiana] in AfricaTown [Alabama] are, are amongst the last Africans brought here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The remnants yeah. Speaker 2: --who maintained these Africanisms. Speaker 1: Africanisms yeah. Speaker 2: --that's something that up, up through probably even now, some people don't even realize there are any Africanisms in the black community? Speaker 1: Yeah, I was telling one of my colleagues that you can go to the dictionary, Random House, Webster, any big dic- and you look up the word goober, G-O-O-B-E-R. The origin is nguba from West Africa meaning peanut. And there are several words like that. The most noticeable will be goober because there's this product, you know, chocolate covered peanuts called Goobers. In fact, thinking about Goobers makes me wanna go out and buy a bag wherever you can buy them now (laughter). Our most famous president of course was Jimmy Goober Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] (laughter). And, and there are other words you don't hear too much of them words like buckra and maybe canoe, maybe banjo that are part of the--of some African language, one of the many languages of the different groups of Africa. Speaker 2: Yeah, so Lorenzo Dow Turner was ahead of his time. He was doing work with African people similar to what Alan Lomax was doing I guess in a way recording the dialect and analyzing it? Speaker 1: Yeah, Turner, his last major work was the Krio, K-R-I-O, not like Creole, but the Krio, K-R-I-O, language of Sierra Leone. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. So he was one of your teachers, so you got, you got-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Charles V. Hamilton in political science, you know, we studied legislation and other things under him. Very notable people white and black, and females at Roosevelt. Many trained at the University of Chicago, all trained well and excellent teachers. Story_ID: 615420 Speaker 1: Okay, now [HistoryMaker] Timuel Black was there [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] too right? Speaker 2: Well Tim is before my time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've, I've been knowing him for, oh now, I didn't realize this until recently, probably about nearing forty years. But Tim is one of the early guys, 1940s, 'cause he went to school after he returned from combat in World War II [WWII] in Europe. And he was around with Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis]. Tim and Dempsey Travis, Charles Hamilton [Charles V. Hamilton], Lerone Bennett, Jr. are four chair emeriti of the Black Chicago History Forum. Speaker 1: Okay, did [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett teach any? Speaker 2: No, no, he wa- he was strictly a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] man who was at Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company]. But he's been in Chicago [Illinois] so long now, you couldn't have an organization without bringing him in because of his contribution. Speaker 1: Yeah. And Mr. Black, was he, he was primarily a high school teacher at that time? Speaker 2: High school teacher, then a junior college--community college administrator. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah in every other group that ever existed in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter). Story_ID: 615421 Speaker 1: So it sounds like you should've been in heaven on some level? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. I mean that's why I said not only, you know, I said religiously my life has been blessed and socially it's been a very wonderful life. Chicago [Illinois] has been a great place in which to be reared and to grow and to retire and grow old in. Speaker 1: Okay, so during this exciting period of time when black history was be- was coming to the forefront, everybody wanted to know what it was. I mean there's a TV program called 'Black History: Lost, Stolen or Strayed,' that fea- featured some of the people we're talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah the interesting thing about that program which was narrated by Bill Cosby is that in the years that followed as more and more work was done, as a result of the black power interest and really placing blacks into mainstream history, and at the global history, we found out that black history wasn't lost, stolen or strayed, it was there. As I mentioned earlier in this interview, I completed a six hundred page book in 2005 entitled 'Black Chicago's First Century' ['Black Chicago's First Century: 1833 - 1900,' Christopher Robert Reed], and I covered the years 1833 to 1900. Now who would've imagined back in those days that there would've been documentation on the dynamics of black life, on the black experience, but the records have been there. Some were released after the '60s [1960s], but for example you could look at the Booker T. Washington papers in Washington [D.C.] which were available in the '70s [1970s] or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] papers in Washington at the Library of Congress available in the 1960s, after the '60s [1960s]. And there was a lot of information on Chicago. In fact, I did a book, the history of the Chicago NAACP, 1910 through 1966 ['The Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership, 1910 - 1966,' Christopher Robert Reed] based on NAACP papers on what was going on in Chicago. I had a another book that was published in 2000 on blacks at the World's Fair of 1893 ['All the World Is Here!: The Black Presence at White City,' Christopher Robert Reed]. I was amazed at the amount of material that exists, it's--it is there. Now I went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] to get information on Wilberforce. And I was down at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at that library, I was at the Huntington Library [Collis P. Huntington Library] at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], I've been all around. But there are a lot of materials just in Chicago, newspaper on microfilm, what have you, manuscript collections, that'll have something on blacks--on Chicago. There are materials around on blacks. And so, the history wasn't really lost, stolen or strayed, it was ignored. And it was ignored including by African Americans for years and this is to my--not to my credit, to my discredit, I had ignored a book we had at our home entitled 'Progress of a Race,' the new 'Progress of a Race' [John William Gibson, William Henry Crogman, Booker T. Washington, and Fannie Barrier Williams]. And this book had been published in 1925. Somebody in my family had it for years. Should--I should've been reading it intently, I wasn't until later on. Then I was able to purchase 'Progress of a Race,' the first version back in the 1890s. These books were around for us to read, we weren't reading them. Luckily in Chicago if you went to the Horace collection [Horace R. Cayton Papers] at the George Cleveland Hall library [George Cleveland Hall Branch Library, Chicago, Illinois], 48th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], which subsequently has been moved to the Woodson Center [Carter G. Woodson Regional Library, Chicago, Illinois] out at 95th [Street] and Halsted [Street]. You can read, read on black history. Black history was being collected, and for example when the Hall Library Branch opened in 1931 part of the collection was made up of books that the distinguished dentist, Charles E. Bentley, Dr. Charles E. Bentley had collected and in his will he had his widow donate it to this collection. So rather than being--black history rather than being lost, stolen or strayed, it's been ignored by too many. It's now being viewed in its proper light, valuable information, valuable knowledge on living based on how others lived in the past. Story_ID: 615422 Speaker 1: I probably should ask this question later, I probably will, I was gonna try to save it, but--well I'm gonna ask it here, I might forget it later. But how do you think or do you see--how do you see the relationship between the availability of black history information and the institutionalization of it. For instance, you said these things were available, but where could you, you go and study and organize? You couldn't do it at school, you could do it at church, you know, no--nobody was doing it at church, where, where do you-- Speaker 2: Right. Well things have improved to such an extent that now you can go to The HistoryMakers, hundreds upon hundreds of interviews available on, what, the Internet and indexed to find out information on African Americans and how they what--were involved in the American saga. A new group was formed in 2005 I believe, the Black Metropolis Resource Consortium [sic.]--Black Metropolis Research Consortium headed initially by Dr. Danielle Allen of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] who was dean of humanities. The Black Metropolis Research Consortium, which is still active, has as its main aim the discovery and cataloging of documents, pieces of evidence from film to books to whatever, to musical scores on the black experience in Chicago [Illinois]. Soon young people will be able to go to the internet, go to this website and find out everything they need to know about the existence of a document on black music during this period, where is there black sheet music of composers, it's down at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. It'll be--you won't have to go to the Columbia College site, you can just go to the one site. My papers will be donated to the Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] archives. I happen to have in my possession a replica of a paper from 1936 of the 49th State movement [National Movement for the Establishment of a 49th State], which was given to me by Oscar Brown, Sr. when I interviewed him for my book on the NAACP ['The Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership, 1910 - 1966,' Christopher Robert Reed]. I have--I kept the first copy of Lu Palmer's [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] paper, the Black X-Press when he broke with the Daily News [Chicago Daily News] and started his own paper, Volume 1 Number 1. I'm donating them. I have a constitution of the Moorish American Science Temple [sic. Moorish Science Temple of America] given to me by one of the prophets secretary, Prophet Noble Drew Ali's secretary, William Beck [ph.] when I was doing master's level re- which that will be donated. So it will be assessable to anybody who wants to see it. And they'll know about it from as far away as Accra, Ghana to Beijing, China to London, England. They'll just go to the computer and they'll say what's in Chicago about so and so, oh it's at that repository at that school. So that's the first thing of the Black Mes- Metropolis Research Consortium. You know, put together that website, to locate and let it--let it be known that these documents are available. And I think if you just look at the BMRC, Black Metropolis Research Consortium, The HistoryMakers, the holdings at the Horace collection [Horace R. Cayton Papers], you're talking about quite a combined repository of information on black America just in this city. Story_ID: 615423 Speaker 1: I wanted to take you back to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. So in--at Roosevelt, you bas- did, did you basically major in American history at Roosevelt (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I--I was am--by my sophomore year I knew I wanted to major in history. They had an excellent core of teachers, Diane Kirschner [ph.], J.J. Roth [ph.], Paul Johnson, Elizabeth Balanoff, Dave--David Miller [David B. Miller] in Russian history. Top flight people. And there were no African American teachers in history at that time. Top flight faculty and very competitive and a intellectually charged environment. A lot of thinking people. Speaker 1: I'm thinking of a doctor, Dr. Howard--'A People's History of the United States.' Speaker 2: Oh Howard Zinn. Speaker 1: Howard Zinn. Speaker 2: I think he was there part time at one time, as was Stau- no Staughton Lynd was supposed to teach there and he--there was a controversy. But white, black, whatever, Roosevelt has had luminaries pass through its doors and luminaries passing out as graduates to do great things. Speaker 1: All right. So you worked on a bachelor's [degree] and a master's [degree] at Roosevelt (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At--at Roosevelt yeah. Story_ID: 615424 Speaker 1: And you then moved on to get the Ph.D. at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yes, I was encouraged by John Bracey [John H. Bracey, Jr.] in 1968 to--'69 [1969] to pursue my studies beyond the master's [degree]. And I was reluctant, but he convinced me give it a shot. And so I engaged in my studies at Kent State. Now since I had relatives un- because Bracey had recommended it and Meier was there, and my relatives lived in the state from Cincinnati [Ohio] all the way up to Cleveland [Ohio], that's it, and I liked Ohio, I we- I went to Kent. Looked it over in '68 [1968], early '69 [1969] rather went out there in August, July of sixty--'69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Kent's like between Akron [Ohio] and Cleveland, sort of? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's really--see it's southeast of Cleveland, south, southeast of Cleveland. And then when you get to Kent you are something like--then you have to travel south, southwest over to Akron or southwest to Akron, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now--now John Bracey was there already, right? Speaker 2: No, John Bracey--John Bracey attended Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] where he got his doctorate, as did Robert Harris [HistoryMaker Robert Lee Harris, Jr.], Robert L. Harris who was out of Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] who has just retired, and some others were at Northwestern. Speaker 1: Okay, so who, who was at Kent when you got there besides, I mean Meier, Rudwick (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who, oh yeah August Meier and his collaborator in several studies Elliott Rudwick [Elliott M. Rudwick]. The names of people there aren't too well known, but very respectful department among the middle-ranged universities. And you do go to universities at the doctorate level following certain mentors. Speaker 1: Okay. So what, what were your, what did your studies focus on at--at Kent? Speaker 2: Oh Kent, it was the--the full range of American history 'cause you, you did not major in African American history, you majored in American history. So you had to master and were tested on constitutional, economic, political, social history, the whole gamut of American history and that included African American history. Then in addition we studied either the world of antiquity or the period of the middle ages into the medieval period. Story_ID: 615425 Speaker 1: Now you were working on a Ph.D. so what was your dissertation? Speaker 2: Well I decided to follow up on Chicago [Illinois]. This is interesting. I--well I know why I st- I'd done a master's thesis in '68 [1968] on Chicago in the '20s [1920s]. Now remember I'd been inspired in a class in 1965 at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] at the master's level to do a paper on 1920 Chicago. And at Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] I decided I would work on Chicago during the Great--the period of the Great Depression and New Deal period. So my dissertation was entitled 'Black Politics and Protests in Depression Decade Chicago, 1930 - 1939' so I studied the interrelationship between political organizations, Democratic, Republican Party, Communist Party and various community and activists groups, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], National Negro Labor Cou- [National Negro Labor Council] and those groups, small and odd groups. Very interesting enough, people are still reading my dissertation and are citing it in their works, which made me excited because their ci- of their citing of my work, it made me more appreciative of what I did. Now I remember when I was being examined during my oral exams, this follows the acceptance of your written dissertation. There was a question about the value of what I'd been doing. But then I remember walking over to the exam site when a professor of po- political science was part of my examining committee, I remember him asking, "Why did you do so much?" Because my dissertation was four hundred pages. He said, "This is like two hundred--two dissertations." I said, "I, I did what I was told to do, that was the assignment, I had a task before me. I completed the task." Now I wish I had been encouraged to do more with the dissertation after I finished it, that wasn't until 1982. But it was such a overwhelming project, I was worn out. And at the time I did not understand the valuable contribution I had made. I've only grown to understand that in the last twenty years with others citing work I had done, the result of this new appreciation of what I had produced convinced me after I submitted three books for publication this year to do one last article, that's it because I'm in retirement supposedly. So I star- I was gonna do a twenty page article and it happened to relate to the dissertation. I finally figured out what the dissertation was about, it was something very important. So that's--I wanted to follow up, so--no I got that wrong, no. When I figured out what I had do--that was a book I submitted for publication to Indiana University Press [Bloomington, Indiana], that's right, they published two of my other books. All right, but, but part of my dissertation work dealt with a subject that I'm now working on now for the seventh book, a very small book, a hundred pages of less dealing with Dr. Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] indor- embracing and endorsing segregation as a way of life during tough economic times. And this his embracing of, of segregation was to mesh with a new economic game plan for black America, cooperatives, labor unions, you know, activities that made the best of resources available in a segregated America. So that's a hundred page less short book entitled 'The Chicago Revolt' [ph.]. Because when Du Bois embraced segregation it was to the consternation of the leadership and the membership of the NAACP. That was the ideology that Booker T. Washington embraced. The NAACP and its supporters embraced what, integration into am- egalitarianism, equality of opportunity, full citizenship rights to be enjoyed. So that's what I'm working on. A very small study. Story_ID: 615426 Speaker 1: You finished Kent, Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] in what year was it? Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to work in nineteen seve- I broke into my studies to go to work full time because I had a family. And so I was at the--joined the faculty at Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois] in history. John Bracey [John H. Bracey, Jr.] had left, he said, "Hey, come on over." Said, "I haven't finished my doctorate." He said, "No it's an opportunity of a lifetime." It did turn out to be that, but it slowed down my doctoral studies. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were there about nine years right at Northern? Speaker 2: Yeah and so Northern became a stepping stone which finally led me back, you know, through University of Illinois Chicago [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 615427 Speaker 1: You come back to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] at what year? Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 1: Eighty--1987. Speaker 2: As a associate professor of history. Speaker 1: So you were around the Chicago [Illinois] area when Harold Washington campaign-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was in its swing. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact I was, as I mentioned I was part of a group that helped garner votes for the Washington campaign in '82 [1982], '83 [1983], part of the Westside Coalition for Unity and Political Action. And those were exciting days. I remember passing out buttons on buses and pamphlets on street corners and, and buying four copies of Crain's Chicago Business which featured Harold Washington on page one. Used that, took it door to door convincing my neighborhoods that a colored man or a black man could be the mayor of Chicago. Course many of my neighbors didn't believe that there was a black man around, these are black neighbors. A black man could in fact govern the city like this. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What history proved was that he was a good steward over the city. Speaker 1: Have, have you considered writing anything about the Washington years? Speaker 2: No, no, unh-uh. I--I did do a piece that was published in Illinois Issues about maybe twenty years ago looking at Harold Washington's impact on community organizing and community rebuilding. And it was something about Harold Washington's bedrock democracy. He believed that you had to start, you know, from the people in the communities and neighborhoods. Support that and build up. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one 'After Alinksy' ['After Alinsky: Community Organizing in Illinois,' Peg Knoepfle] right, it's published? Speaker 2: Right, your right, yeah that was republished in the anthology 'After Alinsky.' Story_ID: 615428 Speaker 1: Interesting and of course you make reference to that, that particular anthology that Peg Knoepfle put together. That's where I--when we met as contributors to that anthology I met then, community organizer Barack H. Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], who I debated at our, our meeting about the best way to get a community going. I thought you needed a--some help from the top, as well as awareness at the bottom. I had been influenced by something that Federal Judge George Leighton [HistoryMaker George N. Leighton] had said in federal court when I went with the Midwest Community Council into his courtroom fighting to get the Chicago Parks [Chicago Park District] to spread resources around the city equitably. But Leighton said there are, you know, channels to achieve certain ends. If you wanna change the park district, it really should be done politically. That is put somebody in office who can put somebody in place at the park district to affect change. And that's eventually what happened with Harold Washington's election, that was the way to do it. But that influenced me and Harold Washington's getting in office showed that the right person up top working with people at the bottom could bring at the midway point some good results. Obama's position was that the people had the power within their grasp to make major changes, which I believe only partially. Because when you look at major changes in revolutions, it's usually the insider from the group that goes away and comes back as an outsider presenting himself or herself as an insider, who really is the spark plug. And or many times, more often than not, it's the outsider who was, like Castro [Fidel Castro] he was what, from a professional family or Toussaint [Toussaint L'Ouverture] down in Haiti was a carriage driver, wasn't no ordinary person. Nat Turner wasn't working in the fields and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came from a privileged background. In fact many times if the person is working twelve hours a day in the fields that person doesn't have the energy to think, plan for some major change that would improve society. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In any event, yeah Obama and I were the, the--our debate of sorts on a couple of pages, as well as a photograph of the two of us together is seen in the anthology 'After Alinsky: Community Organizing' ['After Alinsky: Community Organizing in Illinois,' Peg Knoepfle] Story_ID: 615429 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite work of all your works? Speaker 2: No and I'm gonna say something that's rather odd for anybody watching this interview. It's only been recently that I've been able to appreciate my own work. As I go back and look at some of my own work in terms of references, I can appreciate what I've done. But I've been so busy in the last twenty years researching and writing I haven't had time to stop and smell the roses. This last thing, this very short piece on segregation and Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and economic reform, bills on work I've done, I've learned from myself. If you were to ask me, "What about so and so and your book on so and so," I might, I might not recognize it. I might say, "Would you read that to me? Oh I wrote that?" So I've been inspired to do this work, but I haven't had time to really absorb the full value of it. And I know its value based on who's citing the work, who's recognizing, and all three of my works in print have been solidly recognized in addition to that dissertation, which pleases me, that's what it's about making a contribution. Story_ID: 615430 Speaker 1: Who in your judgment or as they have impressed you is the most important in your mind figure in, in Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] history, black person in Chicago's history, and do you have one that you think of? Speaker 2: No. I noticed in my works I usually look at first the group en mass and then some significant people coming out of the group or attached to the group. If you wanna talk about some of the most important personalities politically, I'd have to start with Edward H. Mor- Edward H. Wright from New York City [New York, New York], the Iron Master. And I'm trying to revive interest in him in this book, 'The Historical Black Metropolis,' [sic. 'The Rise of Chicago's Black Metropolis, 1920 - 1929,' Christopher Robert Reed] which is down at the University of Illinois Press [Champaign, Illinois]. It's important that we realize that the Iron Master who was the Republican leader of the 2nd Ward during the late teens [1910s] and through the 1920s to 1927. Set a role, set- setup a, a reputation and a legacy as a role model for black politicians. He was independent. He was only broken by the Republican machine of Bill Thompson [William Hale Thompson] because he tried to be independent and serve his community. So what comes next, there're are things that you might admire in Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson], a lot of things that you didn't like about his operations. By the time you get to Harold Washington you got somebody who resembles Edward H. Wright. Harold Washington was an outstanding public servant, governmental leader, stiff (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, I--go ahead I don't wanna stop you. Speaker 2: So if you're talking about prominent people, politically those two. Socially, Ida B. Wells is very important, Dr. Charles E. Bentley, Irene McCoy Gaines. You've had a lot of people who have contributed. Movers and shakers in the arts, many, but I have a tendency not to look at independent--individuals, excuse me. Speaker 1: You see them in the context of a--of a movement? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: A group. Speaker 2: Yeah. A general can't win a war. It's that soldier, the grunt on the ground. If he--if he doesn't respond to orders, nothing gets done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If he doesn't show steel in his spine, nothing gets done. I don't care how brilliant the general is-- Speaker 1: Why is--oh okay. Speaker 2: --it's the people. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I wanted to ask you about a figure that doesn't seem to be as popular, but what is your opinion of former Alderman Claude Holman? Since I've been in Chicago I keep hearing things about him? Speaker 2: I have to think about who he is, you know, so many things in my mind, that--Holman of the 4th Ward. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't--I mean I became acquainted with him when I was working in the Arthur W. Mitchell Papers, the congressman, congressman's papers over at the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois]. Since he was in the 4th Ward, see I lived over west in the 27th [27th Ward], I don't know a lot about him. I don't--I don't think he was an outstanding political figure. But I don't wanna completely discredit him, but compared to Ed Wright, before Holman, Harold Washington after the days of Holman, you know, he doesn't compare favorably, but nobody does to those two. And I think we need to look at the standard bearers, the models Wright and Washington. Story_ID: 615431 Speaker 1: We used to often sit around the kitchen table and, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --could see that a lot of the aldermanic support and the political support that Harold Washington had from other black leaders were--was because he was leading the way and a lot of them were on board because they didn't have a choice. Speaker 2: They didn't have a choice, the people forced them and over, over our way I was warned by the political leaders, "Hey don't get too active in this Washington thing, we can hurt you." I wasn't listening to them and the people weren't listening. And finally they were forced to say when the general--when the primary came around, well a, a vote for everybody except, you know, don't vote for Washington. And then finally he won and they jumped on board, everybody was for Wa- Harold, Harold Washington. And then they rewrote history and made it appear as those they were always, you know, in favor of this reformer's candidacy which became a big victory for the city. Remember Harold Washington opened up the budget process. That was a heresy letting the little people know about money, about federal block grants, about how the budget is put together, about all the fat, the waste in the budget, that wasn't supposed to come about. And then fairness in hiring that wasn't supposed to come about. Speaker 1: That's right I think a lot of people thought in the black community, some people complained that he did not flip the script completely and become like Daley [Richard J. Daley], only black. But he made things fair. Speaker 2: That's right, he was committed. And let's face it partially because he's like Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], an intellectual in politics, very smart man. Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] graduate. Too smart to act dumb and petty, like the average politician. He saw the need for the people of the city where it really existed and that was in having good leadership, fair leadership, ecable- equitable distribution of resources. I remember we got our first sweeper in the ward because Harold Washington was mayor. Every ward had a sweeper, street sweeper. Things as simple as that, important as that. Speaker 1: That you would never have got it otherwise? Speaker 2: No, no. Service was di- diminished the blacker the ward became. Story_ID: 615432 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the fair book. I think we discussed off camera some aspects of that, but we never got it really on tape. But the, the book about the World's Fair of 1893, the Columbian Exposition [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois], the black participation, tell us a little a bit about that? Speaker 2: Now that is very interesting. That is well, along with my other two books major accomplishments, as well as the three I've got circulating. I had been misled for decades in teaching about the World's Fair of 1893. I had thought like most other people did that the title of the pamphlet 'Why that Colored American-'--'The Reason Why the Colored American is Not in the World's Columbian Exposition' [Ida B. Wells]. I thought that described what had happened, which was nothing. Blacks were excluded. I happen to be out in Kansas on a National Endowment for the Humanities fellowship summer work in 1990--1994 I think. And the project at hand was to investigate urban problems, urban situations and I took the topic of the World's Fair. Now in teaching American history, I tended to ignore it somewhat, I shouldn't have, and in teaching African American I had also ignored it. But the research that I did exposed me to a high level of sophistication in the African American approach to the fair years before the fair was opened and it exposed me to knowledge that there was a greater extent to the participation than everybody had ever known. So the result was this book. The evidence was in written form and evidence interesting enough was in photographic form. When I saw photographs of blacks at the fair and doing things in helping create the fair, it made me wonder what's going on. And--and so the title of the book, 'All the World is Here' ['All the World Is Here!: The Black Presence at White City,' Christopher Robert Reed] ref- relates to a refrain that was heard on the fairgrounds. 'Cause all the world was there, represented, but then the people of the world were there too and that included African Americans from Arkansas, Mississippi, Texas, Georgia, New York, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and the South and West Sides of Chicago [Illinois]. The Zulu were there from Africa. The North African blacks were there, West African blacks, Dahomey were there. Blacks participated. George Cleveland--Geor- George Washington Carver had a painting on display. The famous painter Henry O. Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner] came back from France, had a painting on display. 'First Lesson on the Bagpipe,' [sic. 'The Bagpipe Lesson'] something he had witnessed on the Atlantic coast of France. Black spoke at the various conferences, conventions, and parliaments. And all in all they enjoyed the fairgrounds like other people. One of the biggest events that's written up is the Colored American Day, August 28th, 19--1893. I think that day gets too much attention. It's important though because Frederick Douglass did speak and his speech was recorded. And a lot of blacks wanted to impress the rest of the nation that blacks could be cultured in terms of their lecture that was Douglass, and in terms of their musical performance were successful. So I, I was glad to contribute that book to scholarship and more and more people are reading it. It's in paperback edition now. It's influenced a scholar who's doing a virtual tour of the fairgrounds. So I'm glad it's out there. And in re-reading it, I said oh I forgot about that or, I had to know about it, I wrote it, but fascinating. And I, I know I contributed to a new perspective on examining Africans, how Africans saw themselves in 1893, how they see themselves today, how African Americans saw them, and how African Americans saw themselves, and it's usually in the positive manner in all categories I just mentioned. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People may have been laughing at the Africans, but the Africans weren't laughing at themselves. And some people stopped laughing and said, "Oh," as I showed them photographs I put in the book, "I'm more interested in these people then I thought I would be. These are indeed people I would like to know more about." It was a positive step forward for humanity. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any cases of egregious insult at the fair to the black community that--that you came across or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well I mean the most egregious insult is the one that was recorded in 'The Reason Why the Colored American is Not in the World's Columbian Exposition,' and that is in the area of employment. There were blacks that had employment before the fair was actually opened. That was in removing debris, dredging the area so the dunes and canals could be built. There was a limited amount of work available to blacks with carpentry skills. In fact, James Weldon Johnson got work so that the fair could open on May 1st, of 1893. But blacks totally throughout the country were relegated into the domestic, the service, agricultural areas and blacks couldn't break through at the time of the fair. So that--that to me that was the bigger insult that a man or woman couldn't work and earn a full day's pay based on their talent. That was a bigger insult then not being able to go into the Kentucky building to eat. Story_ID: 615433 Speaker 1: As a historian, I've heard, I heard community organizers say once history is a soft science, you know, why do we need, you know? Speaker 2: I don't know what that means. Speaker 1: Yeah I don't, I don't know what they could be talking about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea what that means because I always tell students, the rich people have their children study history, isn't that interesting. And from their lessons learned in examining the past, the processes and the interaction between personalities, the children of those rich people continue to be rich and run the lives of others. It's a powerful person's field of study. Story_ID: 615434 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the philosophy of history on some level, you know, so why is it important? You were talking about why it's important and I told you that some people say it's a soft science and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what difference does it make in the lives of black folks and, and if history does make a difference, then shouldn't we have more of it somewhere? Speaker 2: Yeah, this--this--this is how I see the value of history and the way I teach it. We study, for example, processes. How do things work, what are the dynamics of creating a situation, solving or continuing a problem or whatever? In looking at past conditions, past circumstances, past personalities, past precipitating factors in causing something to happen you can apply that knowledge to your present and, and the future, that's the key. Now history does not repeat itself, that's nonsense. But there are lessons to be learned in learning about how others thought and why they did things, what motivated people to do things. That's, that's the real value of history. Excuse me. For African Americans, I hope that my scholarship, properly understood, will encourage people to go out and do things because I write about people who do things. I write about people who overcome obstacles, not because they're kings or philosophers, but because they're just people who realize that they can make changes in society and in how this world is shaped. I am amazed myself with the resilience and the dynamism of African Americans in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 615435 Speaker 1: For example, I mention I had a total lack of knowledge on black business and banking, especially of the '20s [1920s], that's why I'm contributing this volume, 'The Historical Black Metropolis' ['The Rise of Chicago's Black Metropolis 1920 - 1929,' Christopher Robert Reed]. I just can't believe that blacks did what they did and in fact had recognition because, for example, when re- when the competition between banker Anthony Overton and banker Jesse Big- Binga [Jesse Binga] reached a certain point you had Overton starting his National Bank, which was chartered as the National Bank, the Douglass National Bank [Chicago, Illinois]. Then you had Binga--then you had--I'm sorry--then you had Overton building from the ground up which was supposed to be a six story facility which is still over at 36th Place and State [Street]. He did it four stories with an elevator. Several years later, Jesse Binga (laughter) built on the corner of 35th [Street] and State, you know, half a block away from--block and a half away from Overton's building, and this was the impressive Binga Arcade [Arcade Building] on the northwest corner of 35th and State [Chicago, Illinois]. It's been gone, been torn down since the late '50s [1950s]. But people, Tim Black [HistoryMaker Timuel Black] and others, when you're interviewing them, they talk about going into the Binga Arcade. A beautiful structure which was--the rendering of it, the architectural rendering made the pages of the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] when the Tribune was talking about growth in the communities and the neighborhoods. They showed the Binga Arcade, you know, with its modern windows and the wood inside and the spaciousness. And so reading about that encouraged me and I'm not even in business, boy I'd like to build a building and have modern conveniences like elevators when they were new on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and throughout the city, this kind of thing. I also learned that you have to be up on business techniques, operations and changes because late in the 1920s, a, a new economic force came into the South Side to shift the epicenter of black business activities from 35th and State southward to 47th [Street] and South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. And that started when Walgreens [Walgreens Company] built at 47th and South Park. The building of the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago Illinois] and Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois] built at 47th, and when the people who owned South Center department store [Chicago, Illinois] put that over there on the southeast corner of 47th and South Park, that drew people away, it was supposed to draw them away from 35th Street. Before you knew it, the depression hit and the 35th State epicenter was devastated, never to really fully recover. And over at 47th, things weren't as bad. And 47th Street had been propped up by non-black business operations for years when the area was, was not black. So here you learn that you have to keep up with everything and always be competitive, and that was a story to be learned. The people at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] are learning it. You know they had a private company, I heard someone in economics said he needed to go public with their stock so they could build up more resources so they could be more competitive. They're hanging on, but times have changed. People what, don't wanna read magazines, they wanna go online and read. So it's a different world. The message from the--my book will be, stay abreast of the times and be creative enough to see what you need to do innovatively, you know, to get ahead of the times. Story_ID: 615436 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I wish I could've been a little bit more disciplined in my study, which would've helped in my research. I wish this could've gone back to my high school days [at Marshall High School; John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. So I think I'm still playing catch up. I should've been farther along. The books that I published now should've been published twenty, thirty years before they were published. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or at least twenty years before. Story_ID: 615437 Speaker 1: I know a friend of mine once said that black historians are like riding a tricycle compared to some of the white ones because of the hookups they have and the associations and organizations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's part of it, yeah, let me--yeah. Robert L. Harris [HistoryMaker Robert Lee Harris, Jr.] who just retired at the--at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], a Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] graduate, a West Sider, wrote about, you know, his slow progress because of exposure, as you just mentioned. You have to be exposed early, you have to be challenged early. You have to be pushed. You have to be around resources early. I do this with my grandchildren. I ask them questions that I ask in college and they are in grammar school. Yeah, you don't start learning when you, you don't learn about high school level work when you're in high school, you're exposed to it before you get there. And I remember one of--one of the great benefits of my life, one of the nurturing factors was all the older people in my life were always asking me, "Are you learning?" "What did you learn today in school?" "What do you think about this?" I was always encouraged to think and think independently, never, nevels- never stifle. That was great. But then I didn't have, I wasn't in a resource rich environment. And so my--I had my granddaughter who is now nine reading the book on the World's Fair ['All the World Is Here!: The Black Presence at White City,' Christopher Robert Reed] when she was about six. She can read most of the words. She's forgotten she read it. I sat next to her when she was reading through it. And her older sister [Ashley Reed] who is now in college at Roosevelt University read through it and was using it in her high school. The middle sister [Dominique Reed] is at the same high school and they have a copy of that book that I donated on their shelves. I expect to hear from them to do something with them. But you, you need to be in a resource rich invigorating, encouraging, nurturing environment at the earliest age. Speaker 1: Are we creating such environments now, in the-- Speaker 2: It--we're working that way. If you go over to DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] you'll notice they encourage young people to come in. Unfortunately, the young people go there, as they do to the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois], and they lack discipline, not only of their bodies, but of their minds. They don't realize you are entering into a place that is special. And entry into this place, which is restricted around the world, most places don't have museums and libraries, they just don't have them. You can go in here and enter a new world and prepare for the world you're gonna mold when you get to be older in life. Story_ID: 615438 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That I tried to contribute to humankind in such a fashion that it led to an elevation of the human condition. I'm doing my part through history, recognizing everyone and everything that's done as having value. Some things more, of course, then others, but you don't diminish the contribution of anybody at any time under any circumstance. Therefore, you'll notice in the book I wrote on early Chicago ['Black Chicago's First Century, 1833 - 1900,' Christopher Robert Reed], I pay attention to washerwomen. I had no appreciation of them until I started to think about what Earl B. Dickerson, the late Earl B. Dickerson, the distinguished lawyer, used to emphasize every time you talked to him about how he got to where he was, and that was at the top. Dickerson always talked about his widowed mother, a washerwoman, and how he accompanied her on her rounds in Canton, Mississippi. And because of that I said, yeah let me show this feature. A lot of black women after the Civil War in Chicago [Illinois] make their living washing laundry, either in the homes of their employers or in their own homes, and this is important. So that's an important segment of black Chicago's first century. Story_ID: 615439 Speaker 1: We always ask this question too, what is some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well I was at a forum sponsored by radio station--black radio station, WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] Saturday and I listened to some very articulate spokesman on the issue of politics in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration. And I would hope that our people would become more and more aware of the potential they have to make change and become aware of the fact they have to set their priorities in such a manner that they struggle, fight and get jobs first, establish businesses first, you know, so that they can sustain themselves economically, you know, before they concern themselves with more of, more of the earthly pleasures. We gotta focus more on being able to take care of ourselves economic, and that means to eat, have shelter, have clothes that are warm in this cold Chicago [Illinois] weather, et cetera. We, we've always been vulnerable in this country economically. We've worked hard enough to have a lot of wealth, but the obstacles we face, the impediments have been placed before us have successfully stopped us from becoming successful and enjoying the fruits of our labor. That's where we have to struggle. Story_ID: 615440 Speaker 1: Would you like to tell us some--something about your family? Speaker 2: I have a wife [Marva Coleman Reed] of forty-five years who I met at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. I have three sons [Robert Reed, Malcolm Reed and William Reed] who attended and graduated from Roosevelt University. I have two daughters-in-law, one is a young woman who met one of my sons at Roosevelt University, she has a master's [degree] at Roosevelt University. Her mother is a graduate of Roosevelt University (laughter). I have a granddaughter at Roosevelt University now (laughter). And my mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] actually sat in on a business seminar in 1965 at Roosevelt University (laughter). So I'm part of--I'm partial to Roosevelt University and to education. And I have beyond my family in Chicago [Illinois] wonderful relatives in Ohio, Arkansas and scattered around. It's good to be part of a family. The family is the nation in microcosm, and I feel ble- blessed for that. Story_ID: 615441 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you or you think we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, this has been a wonderful opportunity and I hope the information benefits whoever might view this tape in the future. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's interesting because my historical research informs me that people are quickly forgotten. Michael Jordan will quickly be forgotten, as will Harold Washington, as will be [President] George Washington, [President] Abraham Lincoln, and Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. I think you're gonna be remembered best by family and hopefully somebody years from now will say, "Oh yeah, we had a relative who, you know, wrote history and it was a history that helped contribute to people realizing that they had potential and should exploit it to its fullest." And it shouldn't be selfishly done. I wanna be known as a good guy. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much. Speaker 2: All right, thank you to The HistoryMakers. Story_ID: 615442 Speaker 1: Yeah this was taken around 1990 as you can see. From left to right is [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, a scholar on community organizing, Professor Paul Johnson--I'm sorry, Professor Paul Green at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], and myself. At that time I had no idea that the young man on the left would become president. Speaker 2: Barack Obama. Speaker 1: Barack O- Barack Obama, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah I was at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], here's a Kent State ID from 1970. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Yeah here I am at the--in the front--the living room of my house at 3004 West Warren Boulevard circa 1952, '53 [1953], a Boy Scout in full Boy Scout regalia. So proud to be a member of Troop 282, and that troop marched twice in the Bud Billiken Parade. Speaker 2: This is an employee snapshot when I was a professor over at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. You can see by the beard I had a rugged militant look. This is 1985. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Here I am a youngster, about age one and a half at 3159 South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] on the stairway. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is me about age thirteen, fourteen at--a student at Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Here I am at age--approximately age seven, a school photo, Beidler, Jacob Beidler Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. People remark I look about the same throughout my life, yeah, the same, same guy, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 2: Here I am about age four in a photography studio which I believe was on 31st Street next to the Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] at 31st and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], and all dressed up, sharp as a tack. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is a very interesting photo taken this year on July 15th, on the occasion of the lec- lecture on the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] by the gentleman in blue, third from the left, Professor Clovis Semmes [Clovis E. Semmes], now of the University of Missouri at Kansas City [Kansas City, Missouri]. From the left is Darlene Clark Hine of Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], president of the Black Chicago History Forum. Next is chairman emeritus [HistoryMaker] Timuel Black, Black Chicago History Forum, Professor Semmes, then Robert Howard, treasurer of the Black Chicago History Forum. Next Professor Robert Starks [HistoryMaker Robert T. Starks] of the Black Chicago History Forum and then last Christopher Reed [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Reed], general secretary of the Black Chicago History Forum. This is at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] following a lecture on the Regal Theater by Semmes. Speaker 1: This is the latest photograph I had made for, for publicity shots. I'm really camera shy and this was taken in October at the Hyatt Regency [Hyatt Regency Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the Black--the Chatham Business Association luncheon. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: Nie- that's 2009. Speaker 2: Here I am in 2005 with my oldest son Robert [Robert Reed] on the far left, my wife Marva [Marva Coleman Reed], and two supporters. I'm on the far right. This is on the occasion of the dedication of the first Staples [Staples, Inc.] stationery store in Chicago [Illinois]. The store was dedicated in my name because of community service. A plaque was put up, taken down sometime later, never returned, even though I asked what happened. I thought this was my store. But I had a cousin from Ohio, Harsha [ph.], she came through and saw it and she spread the word. The dedication January 2005, Staples, Wabash [Avenue] and Washington [Street]. Speaker 1: This is June 2009, graduation for my granddaughter Ashley Camille Reed [Ashley Reed]. I'm on the far left, my wife's on the right, and Ca- Ashley who now attends Roosevelt University is in the middle. She graduated from Lindblom High School [Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Here I am as a youngster about age one, one and a half with my mother [Josephine Slaughter Rhodes] at a photo studio. Speaker 2: This is one of my prized possessions. It's a restored photograph of my oldest family members. The young child in the front is my mother at about age seven, eight. From the far left, my great-grandfather, her grandfather, Henry Slaughter, remember the 116th Colored Infantry [116th Regiment] Civil War veteran. His daughter Mamie [Mamie Slaughter] next to him, his daughter Melinda Slaughter Green, next to her in white is Russie Slaughter Berry, her husband David D. Berry, to the far right Mr. Walter J. Green, Pullman porter. Mr. Berry was a barber. All were instrumental in helping in the rearing of me. Speaker 1: Here's a ph- professional photograph taken at Roosevelt University. This was to be used in the book jacket of my 2005 book 'Black Chicago's First Century' ['Black Chicago's First Century, 1833 - 1900,' Christopher Robert Reed]. That's a 2005 photo. Speaker 2: This photograph was taken December 17th, 2004, on the occasion of me delivering one of two commencement addresses in the Auditorium Theatre at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. I spoke before two graduating classes, the A.M. and the P.M. classes. Great moment in my life to speak before thousands, even though they really wanted to he- hear their children's name called and not hear a professor speak. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, this--this is my--well the one on the top, the lady there is my [maternal] grandmother, Beryl Trimble Slaughter, to her right are two of her sons, to the immediate right is Highland Slaughter [ph.], and then the little fellow in white is my mother's twin brother Charles [Charles Slaughter]. The bottom photo shows my mother, the little girl in white, with the aunt who was responsible for rearing her, Melinda D. Slaughter Green. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is an early photo of my grandmother-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have to tell us which one. Speaker 2: Oh the top photograph, yeah that's Beryl Trimble Slaughter, early photograph of young Beryl, B-E-R-Y-L, native Ohioan who eventually was to live in Ohi- Kentucky. At the bottom, that's her husband, my grandfather, Charlton Slaughter a barber who was a veteran of World War I [WWI]. Speaker 1: The age difference is because of the time the photos were taken. Yeah, she mature and he--I mean he is mature and she is young woman, yeah. Story_ID: 615443 Speaker 1: This is a photograph from the early '50s [1950s] from Jacob Beidler Elementary School. I'm the youngster in this integrated class setting in Chicago [Illinois]. Bottom row far right--I'm sorry far left. That's me at approximate age maybe nine, nine years of age maybe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of a original document, my [maternal] great-grandfather's [Henry Slaughter] discharge from the Civil War. He was mustered in in 1864, mustered out two years after the war after service on the Mexican border running the French out of Mexico. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One second, Larry [Larry Crowe], hold on one minute. Speaker 1: Yeah, this document has been in my family's possession since 1867. Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken around 2002, 2003, there was a meeting of historians who were gonna write a new publication coming out later on this year, 'Black Chicago Literary Renaissance' [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh yeah, thi- this is a photograph of Reed's Barbershop [Chicago, Illinois] from the inside. You can see the man in the front. Working on that head of hair is Robert Albert Reed, my father. This was taken in the early '50s [1950s] and this is under the "L" [elevated train] at 35th Street near State [Street]. Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken that graced the cover of the Roosevelt University alumni review. This was a high point in my life to be so honored by Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] with a featured story. Speaker 2: Composite shot of the Reed family about 2003 or '02 [2002]. You can see up an insert at the top left, that's Malcolm Reed, my middle son and his wife Audrey [Audrey Reed]. Bottom row left, that's little young Faith Christine Reed [ph.], my granddaughter, yours truly next, then Dominique Simone Reed [Dominique Reed], then my father Robert Reed, then Ashley Camille Reed [Ashley Reed], another granddaughter. Next to her going back to the left is Ma- is William Reed and his fiancee at the time, but now his wife Monica Clark Reed, Dr. Monica Clark Reed, and then my wife Marva [Marva Coleman Reed]. Speaker 1: This is a wedding photo, August 30th, 1964. I'm in the center and I have eight groomsmen, one little ring bearer. The fellow immediately to my--my left is my brother Walter [ph.], he's deceased. All the other gentlemen are alive and still friends. Speaker 2: It's the same picture. Speaker 1: Yeah. The same photograph, double shots. My wife and I dressed up preparing to participate in the Illinois Humanities festival in 1992 down at the Palmer House [Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois]. We're at 3004 West Warren Boulevard in our old home. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken on a riverboat in the Ohio River August of this year. Family reunion, I'm on the far right, next is my wife Marva, and then two family members who unfortunately I can't identify there. Family members through marriage through other relatives. But that's Ohio on the riverboat. Speaker 2: Here we have from the left to the right my son Robert [Robert Reed], my wife Marva, I'm standing next to the fellow on the far right, my son William. This is on the occasion of my in-laws' sixtieth wedding anniversary celebration out in Dolton, Illinois. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my first book, this is 'Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership' ['The Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership, 1910 - 1966,' Christopher Robert Reed] published by Indiana University Press [Bloomington, Indiana], 1997. This was really the culmination of a lot of years of research, writing, thinking out. Good feeling to publish my first book. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: This is my last book published in 2005. Six hundred pages. 'Black Chicago's First Century' ['Black Chicago's First Century, 1833 - 1900,' Christopher Robert Reed] The first proposed volume of two volumes on Chicago life during the first century of black Chicago settlement, full settlement 1833 to 1933. Unfortunately, there will be no volume two. Volume two has been separated into three separate books which hopefully will be all out by the end of the year 2010. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my work on the World's Fair, 2002--2000 publication, published by Indiana University Press. 'All the World is Here!: The Black Presence at White City' [Christopher Robert Reed]. I had a sense of accomplishment in doing this because I learning myself that the story of black exclusion at the World's Fair of 1893 [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois] was an incorrect impression. So this new thesis as advanced in this book is being accepted and should help people understand more about the dynamics of American life that African Americans exhibit an indomitable spirit and that there were enough fair minded whites around for participation to be wholesome and welcomed at the fair of 1893...