 Story_ID: 643490 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Walter Royal: W-A-L-T-E-R, R-O-Y-A-L. Speaker 1: Okay, no middle name? Speaker 2: Walter J. Speaker 1: J, okay does J stand for anything? Speaker 2: Jerry, J-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: All right, and is there a story behind the name Royal that you know of? Speaker 2: Well I know we can--I spoke with my Aunt Shirley [Shirley Royal] a few days ago and we can go back about seven to eight generations but the story or history behind it I'm not really sure what. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Five, eighteen, nineteen fifty-seven [May 18, 1957], Coosa County, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, and is that near Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: We're--that's about two and a half, to forty-five minutes out of Atlanta, about forty-five minutes out of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a chef, I'm the executive chef of the Angus Barn in Raleigh, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay and sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 19, 2012 (laughter). Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Angus Barn in one of our mini dining rooms called the little barn in Raleigh. Story_ID: 643491 Speaker 1: Now before I go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask that only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a believer of keeping things simple and if I'm at home preparing a meal, it would probably be a roast chicken with a simple potatoes and some type of vegetable. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, I love the spring going into summer, such a wonderful growing season, all the plants are just lush and. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, anywhere there's water. Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yep, you can be whatever you wanna be. If you put it in your mind there's no obstacles that can stop you. Story_ID: 643492 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll ask about 'em separately so we can keep 'em, you know in order. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Ida [Ida Royal Reynolds], I-D-A, R-A, R, no, I'm getting confused here. Ida, Royal, R-O-Y-A-L, Reynolds, R-E-L-N-O-D-S [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Mae, Ida Mae. Speaker 1: Okay--no, what was her maiden name, was that her name? Speaker 2: Royal. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: My father was, it's Columbus Ransaw. Speaker 1: Okay, all right okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Coosa County [Alabama] as well and I wanna say 1930 something, which in your facts--I, I sent that to you and April 25th. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace that side and what did they do? Speaker 2: Well, starting with my mother working backwards. Mother was a social worker, my grandmother [Willie Royal] was a housewife, grandfather [Washington Royal] was a farmer, and my grandfather's father was a farmer as well and after he passed my grandfather took the farm over and my great-grandmother [Phyllis Royal], I--she was more like a midwife, a wife of a farmer. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, are there any stories about the family that go all the way back to slavery or any? Speaker 2: Well, I think it--but pre-slavery, but they owned one of the largest tracts of land in Coosa County, and they struggled to keep it and the land stayed together as a single farm up until maybe twenty years ago and then my mother decided, she was, in fact, it was eight of her siblings and at that time she decided that she would break it into sections and even until this day it's still under the Royal bond, none of the land has been sold off to anybody because when, my mother was a very smart woman, she put a stipulation in there, if anyone should fall on hard times that they had to make an offer to the family, and if not a single family member could buy it, we would buy it as a group, and until this day like I said, it's still a unit but under several different families. Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your family, the Royal family acquired this land? Speaker 2: Well, Coosa County is one of the largest black, well the second largest black population in Alabama, Tuskegee, Macon County being number one, but it was just a large family, they settled there, they farmed, they struggled, they stayed together, they kept their taxes and everything paid up you know, and as one died off, it would go to the brother or sister and it was just a collection of land over probably a hundred years. Speaker 1: Okay, what I'm asking if there's really a story about how land was acquired in the first place because-- Speaker 2: That, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: --that would be you know a probably a dramatic story, you know having come out of slavery and then you are able to acquire this large tract of land at a time when there's a lot of conflict you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In terms of over land so. Speaker 2: That I, I would have to speak to my Aunt Shirley [Shirley Royal] to make sure I'm--because I'm not really sure what had happened--well, in my life. We moved away from the farm and then branched out and so I was away for years and years. Speaker 1: Yeah, so there's a story there in an era when-- Speaker 2: I'm sure. Speaker 1: --a lot of people were landless that you--that you that all this landless, so at any rate so this huge tract of land, I mean so--now, what, was your mother the first person in the family to go to school or did she--? Speaker 2: Well, like I said it was nine of them and mother was the third oldest and one of her brothers, my Uncle James [James Royal] he had gone off and went to college, my Aunt Sara [Sara Royal] and then mother was there at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and Talladega women's college [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], so it was an evolution of years that she you know finally got her degree and did stuff. Story_ID: 643493 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] have any stories or even your grand- did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather [Washington Royal] passed when I was very young. Speaker 1: Now, did they have any stories about growing up in Coosa County [Alabama] and what life was like there for them and? Speaker 2: Well they, my--everybody looked up to my grandmother. My grandmother was a matriarch at Peace and Goodwill Baptist Church [Rockford, Alabama], which is one of the oldest churches in the state. It's on the historical register there, and like I said this pocket of where they grew up was a dense, black population. Now, how they ended up there I'm really not sure but I can see coming from Tuskegee [Alabama], coming from Birmingham [Alabama], it's very rural there and you know just ending up there and they had to fend for themselves and share and just take care of each other. One family needed butter and one family had it, they shared it. One family needed eggs (laughter), the other had it, it was a sharing but my grandmother's doors were open to everyone. I mean everyone in the neighborhood respected my grandmother Willie Mae [Willie Royal], I mean she was loved and her house was just a little beehive of activities. Speaker 1: Okay so not only was this large tract of land--you know it was a benefit to other people too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 643494 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] have any specific thing to say about growing up that, that's, that she remembered, what it was like? Speaker 2: Well, I know she was very protective of us, I mean like a mother hen, and I remember one phrase and I'm, I'm pretty sure it came from my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal], but I remember mother say, "Night has no eyes." And it took me years to understand and that activities happen at night whether they're good, bad and indifferent, if you're where you need to be and you're surrounded by family and stuff, there's no harm that could come to you, and doing that (unclear) was time, all facets whether it was racial or liquor houses (laughter) or whatever in that day, if you were in a proper environment no harm could come to you. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you said your mother went to school at Talladega? Speaker 2: Talladega women's college [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Women's college, okay. So I didn't know they had two different--I mean a different college for women you know. Speaker 2: Well, back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They did [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And mostly women going there were either teachers, nurses, now not Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Talladega, or community workers as they called them back then because mother worked her way from the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when everything was segregated into modern times (laughter). You know when she passed away she was seventy-eight so. Speaker 1: Okay, and. Speaker 2: But you know--I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm just--so what did she study at Talladega initially? Speaker 2: Well, community work--I mean she, helping people to get medical services and whatever government stipends that was given to minorities back then. She really did a lot with pregnant women with the WIC [Women, Infants, and Children] program and stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as a matter we, we--she adopted a child from one of her clients. You know this woman had poor health and she knew that her time was near and she insisted that my mother adopt her son and we brought him into our household when he was two months old. Speaker 1: Okay, sounds like yeah so she was, she studied social work at Talladega and then became a social worker with such programs as WIC and other. So. Speaker 2: And community action and, oh lord I can remember her dragging me to community houses where people would come and it wasn't really food stamps back in those days, they would come like once a month. It was a government issued food and she oversaw that and making sure it was distributed. Speaker 1: Okay. Right. So it--like a food--government food pantry situation (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Story_ID: 643495 Speaker 1: Any more stor- anything about your mother's [Ida Royal Reynolds] side that's significant in terms of a story or scenario of how something became--? Speaker 2: Well, it's one thing that we have done for probably forty-five years. We have a Christmas Eve dinner every year and people come from as far as Germany to be at this Christmas function you know. I make the pilgrim- I will leave here on Christmas Eve morning so that I'm there for that dinner Christmas Eve. Speaker 1: So okay, so everybody goes to Coosa County [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Everybody goes to my Uncle Bobby's [Bobby Royal] house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at grandmother's and then when grandmother passed it went to my mother and then when my mother passed it went to her brother, my Uncle Bobby, and we do it and I tell you, if it's a hundred people there, up to as many, up to at least 175 and everybody brings their favorite food and it's just a fellowship and every year it happens you know and my mother made her mother a promise that we would do a family reunion. We do a family reunion every year. Speaker 1: Okay so that's in the--is that in the summer or? Speaker 2: Yeah, during the month of July. And it's usually here because they know that I'm going to cook and, and I've been very fortunate to have the means than more than some of 'em to put on a real function and to keep the costs down by you know me doing it, calling in favors from people that owe me, so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, oh, can you give us your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Willie Mae Royal [Willie Royal]. Story_ID: 643496 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Columbus Ransaw. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that last name? Speaker 2: R-A-N-S-A-W. Speaker 1: All right and what is his--now, do you have a, is there a story behind that name? I've never seen that before, Ransaw? Speaker 2: There was another Coosa County [Alabama] family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was sort of interesting my [maternal] grandmother, Willie Mae [Willie Royal], was a matriarch at church [Peace and Goodwill Baptist Church, Rockford, Alabama]. My grandmother Sadie Ransaw was a matriarch so it was sort of a clash there. My grandmother wouldn't let my mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] marry my father. It just didn't happen but my father was very instrumental in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know and it's something I found out years and years later--well, within the last couple of years, and my [maternal] grandfather [Washington Royal] just didn't feel as if the Ransaw family was quite good enough and you know you would be surprised thinking everybody back in that era were poor, some poorer than others, but it still was a black class structure and they just didn't think, and that amazed me and my father was one hell of a man. Speaker 1: Okay, so you think the land holdings had something to do with it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think the land holdings, I think the position in the community by my grandmother being such a helpful, hard, giving woman you know and I think that he wasn't--they wasn't really--she was, but her children and husband wasn't really church going folk (laughter) you know so. Speaker 1: Okay, so all right so what was your father's date of birth? Speaker 2: I'll have to look that up, I think I brought an obituary with me. I'm not sure because (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, was he born in the '30s [1930s] too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In the '30s [1930s] okay, and. Speaker 2: I do know his birthday was like November 18th [sic. February 21]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he probably was born about 1930 I think. He was a couple of years older than mother. He passed about two years ago so, maybe three. Speaker 1: Okay, now he was born in Coosa County as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he went away to the [U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay, so--okay he went to the service (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So that would be like the 50s [1950s] I guess or, early '50s [1950s], or late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s] 'cause I was born in '47 [1947] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) was it the Korean War? Speaker 2: Yeah--I was born in '57 [1957], not '47 [1947]. Good god almighty. Yeah so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then he moved back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And moved to a little town, Gadsden [Alabama], right outside of Birmingham [Alabama], and was there for years and years and years. Speaker 1: Now how long was he in the [U.S.] Army--was he in the Army (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanna say. Speaker 1: --before you were born or? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, right after I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, so. Speaker 2: No, it was before, before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643497 Speaker 1: So what, what do you know about your, your dad's [Columbus Ransaw] family, the Ransaws, going--how far back can trace the Ransaws? Speaker 2: I knew his parents and that's about as far back and obviously his sisters, some of his sisters and brothers but. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's name on? Speaker 2: Sadie Ransaw. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandfather was Felix [Felix Ransaw]. Speaker 1: Okay, F-E-L-I-X-? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did the Ransaws do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, as you know basically they were all farmers and housewives and I don't even know if my Grandmother Sadie even worked. I remember six, seven, eight years old going by their house and every once in a while, visiting them there but she was always at home. She never--and I definitely know that my Grandfather Felix, he definitely was a big time farmer. He had cattle and pigs and. Speaker 1: Okay so he owned his own land too and? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: But like I said the unique thing about Coosa County [Alabama], it is a dense black populated and it--people owned their own land, and now it's a very poor county to this day you know. I sort of laugh about it. I drive through and there's no Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] in that county and if it's not a Walmart (laughter) on every corner, you know. Speaker 1: So it's still primarily a black county? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 643498 Speaker 1: Is there an all-black town or any all-black towns in Coosa County [Alabama] that you know of? Speaker 2: A hundred percent black? No. Speaker 1: Or any founded by black people as such, like Mound Bayou, Mississippi or something like that? Speaker 2: I'm really (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Langston, Oklahoma? Speaker 2: I'm really not sure. I'm--that I'm really not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the county seat of Coosa County? Speaker 2: Rockford [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Rockford, okay. Now, are the primary political officials there black (unclear)? Speaker 2: Ninety percent of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The sheriff, the mayor, it's a white judge there, but it's predominantly. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the county seat, now has it--during segregation days would Rockford you know been controlled by white politicians or? Speaker 2: Well, yes because it was for their best interest you know. It was controlled but not handled. You know back in the--I'm sure the mayor was a white person back in that day and I know it was a white judge because one of my grandmother's cousins lived like half a mile--a half a mile or so away from Judge Thomas [ph.], and I just remember picking apricots on his property. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so the, but having a majority of black folks there I guess, did it make things easier for black people during those days of segregation? Speaker 2: I wanna say yes even during Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] days. I can personally say with me I, like I said my family left and we grew up in Elmore County [Alabama], which was just the opposite, it was predominately white. It was there on Lake Martin; it was closer to Montgomery [Alabama]. I never had any racial problems. I, you know it was one of the Meadows [ph.], the Robinsons [ph.], one of four black families in this little all-white community and living there on Lake Martin, which is the third largest man made lake in the county. It's owned by Alabama Power [Alabama Power Company, Birmingham, Alabama] and that's where I grew up in that pocket and we were definitely the minority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember going to high school [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama] there, well going to school there period. We were a minority, yeah a minority, yeah we were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we got along and there was no problems and you know my father, my stepfather never had any problems. My stepfather [Willie Reynolds] was a carpenter and we got along. Speaker 1: All right, well I'm gonna get to growing up in a minute but in terms of your father's story, now when your father came back from the war [Korean War], I mean what did he do? I mean (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, became a truck driver. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so did he do that for the rest of his life? Speaker 2: Yeah, he like I said he moved on the outskirts of Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Married, no children, other--from that marriage; and lived there and then he retired and moved back to Coosa County. Story_ID: 643499 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? I know they're in Coosa County [Alabama] together, but is there, is there a story about how they became interested in one another? Speaker 2: I'm sure he was a couple, three years older than mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] and it was probably at J.D. Thompson High School [Cottage Grove, Alabama] or either a basketball game or one of the little--they use to have, they called them tea dances every so often (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Okay, tea dances, like T-E-A dances? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Little socials that they would have and. Speaker 1: All right, okay so--now your--what you described earlier was almost like a Montague-Capulet, Romeo and Juliet-type situation where the Ransaws and Royals are rivals in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and it's so funny even to this day and my Aunt Bettye [Bettye Royal Brooks] would kill me--even to this day my Aunt Bettye don't get along with a lot of the descendants of the Ransaws. I have one aunt that still, and they still go to Peace and Goodwill Baptist Church [Rockford, Alabama] and when I visit I will go to Peace and Goodwill Baptist Church and my Aunt Betty's the only living sister left from my mother's side and I would say, "Aunt Bettye, I'm gonna go by my Aunt Tinley's [Tennie Ransaw Mitchell] and have lunch after church." "She's not your aunt. I'm the only aunt you have left." (Laughter). So. Speaker 1: Okay, so they're really--this is a, you know. Speaker 2: It's gone on for years and years and years. Speaker 1: And the venue, the venue for the--I guess most of the clashes are at church, Peace & Goodwill. Speaker 2: Um-hm, it all revolved around who--I mean even when [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal] was alive and like I had left and was gone, if I would come in with a sports coat, no tie and blue jeans on, I had to go home and change (laughter). You do not walk in looking like that. That was good for them but it wasn't good for her family and you just didn't do it. Speaker 1: Okay, so now I guess the pastor would have to mediate? Is that, you know any good pastor of that church is a good mediator, right? Speaker 2: You know and if the pastor didn't have after church dinner with you at least once a month, something was wrong and then they would have revival and he would have to--and it was a circuit of women that he had to eat one night at each of these women's houses or he was ousted (laughter) you know. It was hilarious. Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents get together but they're not allowed to get married. Now, this is, this is? Speaker 2: This was all the sneaking behind and you know my grandmother was certainly not gonna give up this prize to the Ransaw side you know, but after he settled and he--I mean he was there for birthdays, he was there for holidays. I mean he was an absentee father [Columbus Ransaw], but I knew and my stepfather [Willie Reynolds] who raised me knew, and he allowed me to interact and like I say I'm my dad's only child and my stepfather raised me from nine-ish until he died and that's the story I tell to people. I've been very fortunate to have two fathers, but my stepfather made me the man I am today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know my father stood behind me, and he never interfered with the way my step daddy--my step daddy laid the law down and that's the way it was. Story_ID: 643500 Speaker 1: Okay well in terms of your parents now did your, did your father [Columbus Ransaw] ever discuss what happened with you? Speaker 2: No, and, and that's a unique story within itself. Like I said he would visit, he would do and then my stepfather [Willie Reynolds] passed away some years ago, and then all of a sudden the contact was just broke off, and when his wife [Elizabeth Burney Ransaw] died it was a (laughter) reuniting of everything and I guess about maybe eight years ago I was at a family reunion and he sent me a message that he wanted to see me 'cause we--after church he said (unclear), said okay and I walked up and we--"Just really I need to sit down and talk to you." He said, "It's probably gonna upset your mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] so if you just come by the house." I said, "Oh, lord what's up?" Well I did and then we were having some people at my mother's house later and I invited him and him and my mother rekindled some type of romance, but he wanted me to come by the house. He had a 1952 Ford pickup that he wanted to give me the keys and the title to. So. Speaker 1: Now what year is this, uh when? Speaker 2: Probably about five years ago. Speaker 1: Okay so this is an antique car? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: This is a. Speaker 2: It--I'm slowly having it--I'm about 80 percent getting it restored. Speaker 1: The reason why I asked 'cause it depends on when he gave it to you, whether it's a piece of junk or antique (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, you know the thing of it is he had kept it in a garage all these years and it was in great--the seats were superb. The body was superb. I wanted the motor redone, but I wanted the motor redone with original parts so. Speaker 1: Well, I guess that's good. Speaker 2: And I put it on a truck and brought it here and one of my--not really a friend, he's one of our customers here. He redo antique cars and he looked it and said, "Do you wanna sell it?" I said, "I gotta at least drive it a year. I've gotta have it." He said, "I'll give you a check right now for twenty-five thousand dollars." I thought about it for a second said, "I can't do it, I can't do it." Speaker 1: Okay, so do you suspect that they would--they basically you know had these strong feelings for each other all these years and. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know so because like I said they reunited, and he would get mother to her doctor's appointments, and they went out to dinner at least three nights a week and I saw her come back. I saw the life in her come back. You know she'd become a very bitter, just sitting in the house, nobody--no interaction. Every Thursday she'd go get her hair done and you know and she just--and when my father came back into her life you just saw it and I, when I spoke at her funeral, I thanked him. I said, "You know what, you made her a happy woman. You made her last few years' worth living and I honestly (unclear)," said, "I--if you wouldn't of come back in her life, I don't she would have made it six more years." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he died two years after her. Story_ID: 643501 Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your stepfather 'cause he's a big influence. So-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --so, where was he from, was he from Coosa County [Alabama] as well? Speaker 2: Actually, he grew up in Clearwater, Florida. Willie Reynolds and he moved, moved to Alabama at some point and he was a carpenter, worked for Russell Corporation [Russell Mills, Inc.; Russell Corporation], which Russell Corporation was a huge textile mill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a predominately stockholder in Alabama Power [Alabama Power Company, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Now I've seen, is that the same Russell as Russell athletic wear [Russell Brands, LLC] and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the same company, and what had happened because they had a huge textile, I mean a mammoth textile company. They had homes for people and my father was just like a carpenter on the staff that did the work and my mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] met him, I was about nine years old and they married and we moved to Elmore County [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, Elmore County, is that very far from Coosa County? Speaker 2: An hour maybe, forty minutes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, in this day and time it's only about thirty-five but back when I was young it seemed forever because you know you're going forty miles an hour (laughter) so. Speaker 1: Now, did she get any flack as far as--well, you might know as a kid or even now, but did the--how did the family feel about her marrying your stepfather? Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal] loved him, and you know what I think it was? She loved him because she felt that he could provide. He was established at that time you know. You know in Elmore County he had a big house, right like I say in the collage of Lake Martin area and she adored him. Speaker 1: Now was he much older than your mother? Speaker 2: Yes, he was about maybe about twenty years older than mother and maybe that played a part in it to my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know she felt that he was, he wouldn't just abandon her and us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay all right so now when you--so he was a, you were saying he was a person that established the--I guess the pathway for your own development as a youth? Speaker 2: Yes, and I say that because everything he promised me he delivered on it. If he promised me a bicycle, I got it. If he promised me we were going away fishing, it came to pass. If he promised me he was gonna spank my butt, it happened. He never negated on anything that he promised and he taught us things. I played football, he was at my football games you know. I enjoyed working with him and I thought I was just playing and I laugh to this day the things that I picked up from him come in handy to me you know. Something go down here, if I can't get a hold of one my maintenance guys, I'm going I think I can fix that you know, it's just the little things that you store away that you never think that and they just surface when you need them. Story_ID: 643502 Speaker 1: Now, were you the only child in this scenario (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I have two brothers and they--well, I lied. My adopted brother is my brother, (laughter) I have three brothers and a sister [Maxine Royal Birmingham]. Speaker 1: Okay and. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, now these are--okay, these are children from your--now, did your stepfather [Willie Reynolds] have children already? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so. Speaker 2: And I'm the only one that I decided that I would be a Royal because of my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal]. I just, you know and he adopted me but I just kept the Royal name. Now I, I think probably my grandmother and my father [Columbus Ransaw] had been involved in my life and I just could only imagine myself being in that situation. Story_ID: 643503 Speaker 1: Now, I always ask this question: when you think about the temperament and disposition and talents and the character and even the looks, who of the three major parents did you have do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I would probably say my stepfather [Willie Reynolds]. He was a hard--and then it would be mother [Ida Royal Reynolds], and thirdly because my father [Columbus Ransaw] was such a--I, when she married I was taken away and then I went away to school and then I came (laughter)--I left you know so, but my stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I say that because he instilled work ethic in me. He made me want to educate myself and more important than that he made me want to see the world. Speaker 1: Now how so in terms of seeing the world? Speaker 2: Well, he would take us on summer vacations. He would say, "This is just a thimble full of water where we live son, it's so much more out there in the world. You can be, go, go don't be like these other kids around here. It's a great life out there for you," and it was hard leaving. It was really hard, but you know he stayed in contact with me and even to this day he hovers over me. I, I truly believe that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So many times I wanted to just go back and I'd get a little weak and we'd have a conversation, he'd say, "No, it's gonna get better," and he was right. I had a purpose, I have--had a dream and I could've just stayed there but he knew the aspirations that I had. There was no canvas for me to paint on (laughter) to get 'em out you know? Speaker 1: Now was he a World War II [WWII] vet? Speaker 2: No, my father, my stepfather was not in the [U.S. military] service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well he was in that generation, I thought he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --might have been, but okay. Story_ID: 643504 Speaker 1: On your f- well, I'll get to that later but; now, so you grew up in two places and basically, right on the farm in Coosa County [Alabama] and then you know in-- Speaker 2: Elmore. Speaker 1: --Elmore County [Alabama], yeah Elmore. So, what were some of the--can, well can you describe where you lived? I mean what were the houses were like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, fabulous smells, food. Food was always the center of large southern families. It's, it's the center. It's something I said in an interview I did a couple three weeks ago. If we could get families back around the table talking, communicating we'd be a better society. If we could just be the extended family; the aunts, the uncles, the grandparents looking over children, we would be better. We wouldn't have as many, and I am convinced of this. We wouldn't have as many drug addicts, we wouldn't have as many people in prison, we wouldn't have as many broken people. And we ate. I mean football practice, when I got done with football practice I came home and that's when we had dinner. We'd sit down as a family, Sundays we went to my [maternal] grandmother's [Willie Royal] as a family. Holidays we were together. Thanksgiving was always at my parent's [Ida Royal Reynolds and Royal's stepfather, Willie Reynolds] house. Christmas was at grandmother's and I mean--summers because we were at Lake Martin on a body of water. He had a big old country house. All of my cousins and friends, it was just the hub of activities. Speaker 1: Okay you know we've, and I've heard people say that today with fast food, kids bringing a bag of McDonald's in or Popeyes [Popeyes Louisiana Kitchen] or whatever, eating it and you know watching TV discarding the bag in the trash. You know I mean and the family never you know really sits down. Speaker 2: They, they don't and I mean I understand. I understand what happened especially from a black society. We decided that we wanted better, we wanted more. That meant mother had to go to work. Then we decided, well I'm looking at the Jones over there and their grandmother don't live in their house. We decided we wanted to blend in more and then we decided well, the Williams just bought their seventeen year old kid a car. We had to take on a second job, and that was the breakdown and deterioration. I often say I would give up all of those cars, all of that little fancy polo crap that they put me in to have had my stepfather around a few more years, you know? Story_ID: 643505 Speaker 1: Tell us about the houses that you lived in. Did you live with your [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal] in Coosa County [Alabama] (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, well my mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] had a house there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Across from my grandmother's it was just a modest little house as they called it back then in those days. The front room (laughter), kitchen, large porch. We all had our bedrooms, bathroom the size of that table, you know (laughter). Now, then when mother married and we moved to my stepfather's [Willie Reynolds] house. It was a huge house. I mean just--I could walk to the lake, a football field away you know and in--like I said being country he had a few pigs, some chickens, we had Shetland ponies, I mean it was just a good country life, just like everybody else around us. It went from a large black population to just a population. Like I said the four black families, maybe five. I forget the Browns [ph.], the Meadows [ph.], the Robinsons [ph.], the Browns, Milton [ph.]--I can't remember his last name and the Banks [ph.], those that's the only five black families that I can remember in that whole community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they all ended up at the house--my--you know because lots of food, and lots of just everything and mostly the summers and springs. We could go and we could hang out at the lake all day, we could fish. We could make little ventures and imagine. We could swim out to the middle of the lake to an island and just, just hang out and it went from like I said a black thing to when my stepfather remarried, remarried and moved in with my stepfather, it became an enriched thing. It was probably, if none of my cousins was there, four black kids to ten white kids; but we were all united, and it was the same. Story_ID: 643506 Speaker 1: Well tell me about, before we get away from the food, what would a typical cycle of food be on a given day and what would be the first meal, second meal and how many meals and what did they consist of? Speaker 2: Well, normally weekdays it was two meals because I was at school away, during the mid-day, okay? And it would be your grits, your eggs, your sausage, biscuits. That was pretty much breakfast (laughter) every single day. Then dinner, it could range anywhere from steaks to meatloaf to pork chops to chicken, I mean you know and it was always several, now when I say several, at least four vegetables every meal. Now even to this day one of my favorite things is meatloaf, (laughter) I mean to this single day my mother's [Ida Royal Reynolds] meatloaf, I still make it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did, so did they, did you all do the cycle of breakfast--I guess the middle meal, the mid-day meal is that, that's considered dinner right in the South usually (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and then supper. Speaker 1: Then supper's (unclear) right, yeah. Speaker 2: Let's see dinner would be when we were out of school. I, I tell friends of mine--I really don't eat peanut butter. Peanut butter and jelly sandwiches I'm done, I am just done with (laughter). I've had so much peanut butter I'm just done with it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, they grow a lot of peanuts up there in? Speaker 2: No, it was just something that you know when my parents would have to be away, or--that's what you know it was a quick mid-day thing in the summer months when we were home or we would have the leftovers for lunch you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all didn't have the big dinner at noon time? Speaker 2: No, we ate, we ate at supper. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, 'cause there's some places in the South where they (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you travel back to Coosa County [Alabama], Macon County [Alabama], it's still like that to the--to this day but you know but the culture thing changed us. Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that it had to do with the--well, anyway the place where your stepfather [Willie Reynolds] lived just had a different culture. Speaker 2: It was a different culture and even to this day, I will visit with some of the relatives that are still in that dense black populated area and the ideas (laughter) and the mentality of thinking, I just have to bite my tongue and just you know, but it is, it's a cultural thing, it's an educational thing, it's everything I told you before my stepfather instilled in me. It's the travel, it's the taking bits and pieces of this and making it your own so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that the three--I know that's one, really one of the things that shocked me going through the South, I mean, or going down to visit was the big noon day meal and them calling it dinner you know 'cause I thought that dinner was evening. Speaker 2: Evening. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Once again when you were farmers and, or you worked at the foundries, even textile mills you had a time to do it and then when you came home you were so worn and tired you wanted a light affair so you could get to bed and get your body healed to start the beastly day, because if you ate six different vegetables, two different meats, and then attempted to go to sleep--and the syrups, and the jams and the jellies it's, it's no way you could rest. I mean you just couldn't but if you ate it, noon to two in that time you went back to work. You moved, you digested it and you worked through it. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good description of why that's important. Story_ID: 643507 Speaker 1: Tell me about school, now what, what was your school, what was your first school? Speaker 2: It was a little elementary school in Eclectic, E-C-L-E-C-T-I-C. Speaker 1: Oh, I need to ask you about that, now what is the--is there a story behind the name of Eclectic, Alabama? When I saw that I said it's gotta be a story. Speaker 2: Native Americans, even to this day (laughter), and this is really gonna blow your mind, one of the largest casinos there is like--and with me moving around, are you okay with that? Speaker 1: As long as you don't come too far forward. Speaker 2: One of the casinos there is like ten, fifteen minutes from where I grew up, and obviously, it's owned by Native Americans. Native Americans had owned a bunch of the land there in Elmore County [Alabama] and its lots of little towns around 'em like Hissop [Alabama], Wetumpka [Alabama], just little Indian names but from Eclectic into Wetumpka is a huge casino. So, all of these are little Native American names. I mean I use to find airheads just roaming around on the lake there and the creek banks. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you start school in Coosa County [Alabama] or in Eclectic? Speaker 2: Yeah, I started school in Coosa County and then-- Speaker 1: What was the name of that school? Speaker 2: I think J. D. Thompson [J.D. Thompson High School, Cottage Grove, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which it was named after a black person there and then I moved to Elmore County and I started elementary school and then high school there, Elmore County High. Speaker 1: Okay, at Elmore County, what was the grade school called in Elmore County? Speaker 2: I just--it was just an elementary school under the high school. It was all one complex there. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's Elmore County High School [Eclectic, Alabama] but it had all the different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, now think about it. Let's see we're thinking this day and time on a grander scale. You're thinking Elmore County was only a couple of hundred, one hundred fifty students (laughter). If it was three hundred that was huge and it's from elementary up you know? Speaker 1: So did they have to bus 'em in from different areas of the county then to go to the school? Speaker 2: Well, Elmore County where I went it was just from the Wetumpka, not Wetumpka, the Eclectic, Kowaliga [Alabama] that district, then you went to Tallassee [Alabama] which is another Indian name. They had Tallassee High School [Tallassee, Alabama], and then you went in another zone of the county, they had Wetumpka and then Camp Hill [Alabama]. So, they were all just several, depends on where you live within the county. Story_ID: 643508 Speaker 1: All right now when you--as a student, I mean, did you like school growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I liked people, so I enjoyed school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a major subject area that you gravitated towards? Speaker 2: Not really; what do they call it, Mr. Porter [ph.] taught that class. It's equivalent to Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization], that's what it is but I, I can't remember the name of the class. Speaker 1: Agriculture or? Speaker 2: Yeah, something, yeah again I mean because. Speaker 1: Agricultural science? Speaker 2: I wanted to get back to the land even, and I think that's part of the reason I ended being a chef. I loved playing in the dirt. I loved seeing the animals grow. I mean you know, it's instilled in me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in Future Farmers (unclear), okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 4-H [4-H club] I mean that, that was a part of me, and then sports. Speaker 1: Okay where, where'd you--I know you played football? Speaker 2: Yeah, I played football, I--basketball, track and field. I'm just not good at baseball (laughter), and I lettered in all three but I was not a baseball player. I don't even like base- I don't watch baseball to this day now that I think about it. Speaker 1: Okay, football, basketball and track? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right did, okay so were there any special teachers in grade school [J.D. Thompson High School, Cottage Grove, Alabama], first of all, then we'll go to high school [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Grade school--Mrs. Townsend [ph.] took a great interest in me. Back in the day we didn't have the Little, Little League whatever, but Coach Brown [Abraham Brown] spent a lot of time with us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was a great man, he was very like, "Yes, you can play sports, yes you can do this, but yes you need to develop this (gesture) as well." Speaker 1: So he was a grade school--did he teach physical education in grade school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep he was a good man. Story_ID: 643509 Speaker 1: Now when did integration take place in--did it come along when you were growing up in (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well when I start--well, that's a good question. When I was in Coosa County [Alabama] and now you say this to me in all these years I never understood it until just now. When I was in Coosa County I was at an all-black school and I was at an all-black school [J.D. Thompson High School, Cottage Grove, Alabama] because it was predominately all black populated, but when we moved less than an hour away, I was in an integrated school [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that, that I was born in '57 [1957], that's about right. That's when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and everything was going through and maybe it had started to integrate while I was in Coosa County and I was just not aware of it because I was in a black populated area. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you--I'm thinking, so when you were in the what, fourth grade in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coosa. Speaker 1: Eclectic [Alabama] when you got to Eclectic? Speaker 2: Yeah, fourth to fifth, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's like? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, no it's further than that, it's (unclear) 'cause you were born in '57 [1957] so you're about nine years old (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966] well you know so, so, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: And that is about it 'cause I remember--I remember well, I don't remember I wasn't there but I remember my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal], my uncles getting ready for the March on Selma [Selma to Montgomery March]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, and I remember the whole thing with him going--them going to hear Dr. King at Dexter Baptist [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is 1965 when the March on Selma takes place and so there--these are the Royals or the? Speaker 2: Royals, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: And I remember sitting in the school cafeteria on the day that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot. I remember teachers just crying you know. I'm not aware but I just remember the moment yep. Speaker 1: So, your relatives actually went to Selma [Alabama] and made the march from Selma to Montgomery [Alabama]? Speaker 2: They were very involved in it, all civil rights, very. Grandmother was just, I mean she was--what is this, not a Mason. What is the female equivalent to Masons (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star]. Speaker 2: Eastern Star. Story_ID: 643510 Speaker 1: So we were just talking off camera about the difference in what the locale mean, you know, in terms of you kind of, you said you were isolated in your little pocket there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Eclectic [Alabama]. Speaker 2: And, and you know I think about that. Years later I thought about it, let me tell you. I played and I roamed and I slept in white houses and white kids slept in my houses, and you know it would be like I needed a shirt. I thought nothing about taking Jim Adams' [James Adams] shirt to wear you know. At, that's just the way it was with us, we were all the same and all of this mayhem around us--I think about it years later--it was a need, it was a respect. Like I say my father [stepfather] was a carpenter. My father had trucks--my father and if the Adams didn't have firewood he would think nothing about taking them a dump truck load of firewood and I think it was a need, a barter, a respect level and we all knew each other. I think a lot of the forces came in from the outside in the fear. Now when I got into high school [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama], I experienced a little turbulence, just you know but you know nothing just brutal and nasty. Speaker 1: Now had at that high school was there a date that, that high school was integrated or? Speaker 2: Well, I--it had to be in the '60s [1960s] and by the time I got there, I graduated from high school in '75 [1975] so by the time I got there things had leveled off you know. Speaker 1: So that's 1971 when you get there, but you said that you attended grade school [J.D. Thompson High School, Cottage Grove, Alabama] with white kids. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: As early as '66 [1966] so. Speaker 2: You know and it was like we knew and we played and on all the teams together, and if Jim needed a ride home after football or basketball practice, he jumped right in the car with us. If my parents [Ida Royal Reynolds and Willie Reynolds] hadn't got back and we would come in from a football game, it'd get in the car you know that's just the way it was. Speaker 1: So, okay, so you said you experienced a little problems? Well, what happened? Speaker 2: Well as the county [Elmore County, Alabama] grew a couple of schools closed down. We got people in from the Camp Hill [Alabama] area. We got people from a farther rural part of the county coming in and they really hadn't spent a lot of time around blacks and of course it was just like a getting to know, you know; or, you bump me I'm a rock, I'm not gonna move. You won't speak to me in that manner, you won't talk about them in that manner. That was just the way that I was raised, but never fisticuffs over anything. Not very many verbal altercations. Speaker 1: Now was there a--was the white population in Eclectic more well to do? Speaker 2: Yeah, and better educated and it's like I say--well you, "That's Willie Reynolds' son," you know and that came along because once again it's a status quo thing back (laughter) into it, you know it's like oh, okay where if it was--I just want to oh, one of the Brown [ph.] kids, you know their father had died at a very early age and it was like nine or ten of 'em and their poor mother was robbing Peter to feed them you know (laughter). They were sort of snubbed a little by some; and it--my stepfather would've thumped me on the head if I looked down my nose at anybody. Story_ID: 643511 Speaker 1: Now is the Russell mill [Russell Mills, Inc.; Russell Corporation]--now, see I'm putting this together as I'm interviewing you, I hadn't thought about that but the--is the Russell mill associated with Richard Russell [Richard B. Russell, Jr.], the senator or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Nah. Speaker 1: --any of the--okay. Speaker 2: Nah--well, how old is he? Speaker 1: He would've been back in the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] days. Speaker 2: Could've been, could have been, very well could've. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew. Speaker 1: Did the Russell family live there in Eclectic [Alabama]? Speaker 2: In Elmore County [Alabama], yes. Speaker 1: In Elmore County, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right in Kowaliga [Alabama], when I say Eclectic--I grew up in Kowaliga which is just a little town, Eclectic is ten miles from where I grew up, but I grew up there in Kowaliga. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: K-O-W-L-I-G-A. Delia Russell [sic. Elisabeth Russell Alison] was the matriarch at that time. Delia Russell was one of the richest women in the South, and then her oldest son [sic. nephew] Ben, Benjamin [Benjamin Russell]--Ms. Delia had a sister-in-law. Julia [Julia Walker Russell] was the sister-in-law, she married Delia's brother [Thomas D. Russell]. Delia was just an old spinster and Julia came in and then the brother died and they had to split the Russell fortune. Well, Julia was an Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] person, Delia was an Alabama person. So, Delia's fortune, a lot of it went to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and Julia's by the time she died she'd gone through her fortune like a whale spouting water, and what was left she donated to Auburn, and which is not a bad thing. Julia improved upon hospital services. Julia built a museum in Alexander City [Alabama] you know. She was a northerner marrying a rich southerner and she wanted cultural things, you know that they just didn't have. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. Speaker 2: You know she was very instrumental in the first world class country club in that area, a fabulous golf course, Willow Point [Willow Point Golf and Country Club, Alexander City, Alabama]. Story_ID: 643512 Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up did you know, and I, it's--did you know any of the chefs, or--growing up, or cooks you know who worked for these rich, white landowners and. Speaker 2: Yeah, Nancy Brown [ph.], Effie [ph.] and I don't remember Effie's name, and what is her name? This woman used to scare me to death. Now, her name will never come to me. She lived--I mean they lived on the lake [Lake Martin] a in huge lake house. She--they built her a nice little cottage you know probably a little two, three bedroom cottage where she lived in, and she was another old spinster woman. She cooked, she raised their children, she drove 'em around, I mean she would--then I'd--these are stories that I hear that she would drive into Montgomery [Alabama] and she would go in the best department stores with the children and she was treated equally as a white person would have been treated simply because she worked for the Blount family, and Blount [Blount, Inc.; Blount International, Inc.] is a huge construction conglomerate. I mean they don't build malls, they build--rebuild cities after war. I mean just a huge construction company. I've got to remember--was it Susie [ph.]? But she scared me, I mean she had--now I'm thinking ten, eleven years old you're looking at these big German Shepherds which today would mean nothing. She had about five big, black German Shepherds and I swore they were six feet tall you know (laughter) in a child's mind and they were vicious, but she would come out and she'd just talk 'em and they'd just lay down and she'd spent time with you and--next break I'm gonna call my Aunt Shirley [Shirley Royal] and ask her that lady's name. She passed away a few years ago but you know after I got to know her, she was a wonderful, wonderful woman. Speaker 1: Okay, so is it true that even during the segregation a lot black folks were cooking for white people? Speaker 2: Yeah, cooking, caretaking for their children, housekeeping for a private home. Now the thing of it is the wife didn't work you know. She'd sit around and if they played whatever card games or whatever; or in our case she could lay out on the pier all day and tan herself. Story_ID: 643513 Speaker 1: In light of that can you imagine, I mean can you--do you think that southern cooking is basically an outgrowth of the creativity of black cooks over the years? Speaker 2: Good question. Yes, let me tell you, and I say to people, especially my northern friends, "Oh, you have to come to New York [New York] and you have to eat here, you have to eat here and you have to do this." Or, "Come to Chicago [Illinois]. You have to eat at Trotters [Charlie Trotter's] and you have to do this." Let me tell you about Mr. Trotter [Charles Trotter], Mr. Trotter's cooking those pig feet that I grew up eating. Mr. Trotter's learning about collard greens and mustard greens and turnip greens. That has sustained African Americans for two hundred plus years. For a while there, everything and this is a speech I'm giving to people. For a while there everything that came through this country came through New Orleans [Louisiana], through Mississippi, through Alabama (laughter), through Georgia before it got to the North. So, don't you think that we, our southern aristocrats traveled to Europe and stuff a lot more than you northern aristocrats? Our southern aristocrats, in which they're white and it was black aristocrats, the cotton or the moonshine (laughter) that you're drinking. All of this stuff was manufactured in the South. We're getting it to you to the North. Do you understand 80 percent of the black population left the South and migrated north? So, don't give me this that New York's food is better than Mississippi or Louisiana food. Don't give me that your food is better than Alabama food. When we put the show on, our food was presented at great taste. We put our best apparel on and we pulled out our starched table cloths. Well, I have a lot of my [maternal] grandmother's [Willie Royal] china and crystal to this day. So please don't tell me, now yes it was lots of poor people in the South, but there was lots of educated people, and if a black family saw something that they wanted, they would maybe save a year, but they would get it, (laughter) you know? Story_ID: 643514 Speaker 1: I've read that at about age fourteen you knew you wanted to be a chef, and? Speaker 2: I wanted to be a cook (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know why? I hung out with my Aunt Verta [Verta Royal], Aunt Sister is what we called her. I watched her you know, ate with her, I played at the farm. We would go fishing, I would hang out with Mr. Loomis Pastor [ph.] and Gad Ingraham [ph.] and watch them kill hogs and do stuff and just, they would take something with just a little of nothing and saute it up in pan over an open flame (laughter) on a cold November day and it was good. I'm going, "I wanna do that." "Boy, you don't want this hard life." "No, I want to cook good food." "You don't want that hard life boy, get yourself an education and become somebody." And this was black and white men telling me this. "No, I want to cook." And you know and it took me forever, but it was a passion that was just burning and burning and burning and it stayed there, and even to this day I'm going to become a farmer again. I want to farm. I have gardens here. I have gardens at the house. You know we have a great bit of acreage here so I grow tomatoes, I grow herbs, I grow figs. I, I mean you know I have all of this stuff at home. I have a year 'round herb garden. It's just, I want the fresh stuff. I have a relationship with farmers. I love getting in the pick-up truck driving out to the sand hills, rural North Carolina and getting stuff, stuff from. Speaker 1: Do you think that there has to be a strong connection between the origin of the food and a chef or a cook? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it has to be you have to bond with it, you have to feel it, you have to love it, and you can't be a paper chef. You have to get in there and get your hands--you had to get on your knees and crawl around and pick those tomatoes, pull those carrots out you know. I had a group in the other day from Central University [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and they're in the school of tourism and hospitality and I said to 'em all right, "What do you guys wanna do?" And one young lady said, "Well, I just want to get some stamps on my passport." I sort of looked at her. She says, "Well a friend of mine told me the best way to do it is get into the hospitality industry because if I work in the hospitality in a hotel, I could work a year here. I could work a year, I could work a year here." I said, "Young lady, this is something I say to everybody I speak to, if it's not something you love, not you like, not you enjoy, you love it. You love it as much as waking up in the morning. You have to because if you don't you'll never be successful. You'll never be at peace." I said, "Because you spend 80 percent of your waking time doing your job so make sure you love it because if you don't, you're gonna become miserable and everyone around you will become miserable (laughter), hint it leads to divorces, it leads to children not wanting anything. It leads to fights with your parents, fights with your friends if you and when you become miserable and bitter because of your work it just makes you decay." Speaker 1: Okay, now another question though, when you were, when you discovered you wanted to cook, you really knew you wanted to do that could you imagine, did you imagine a chef, what a chef was? Did you have any idea that someone could actually make a good living as a? Speaker 2: No, and my stepfather [Willie Reynolds] told me no and he said they smoke, they drink and they do dope. That was his definition and finally he took me to a restaurant called the Sahara [Sahara Restaurant], West Indian restaurant in Montgomery [Alabama], and I saw this chef and I made him a promise. If I ever, I would not become that person, just grossly (unclear) I'll, I take that back I could not--huge, just a massive person, and just sitting there nasty, swearing at people just, just bitter and it, that almost turned me and I said no, it's up to me to show the world and I wished my father would have been alive long enough to see the success. My mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] saw it, though I wish my stepfather--my father saw it. I wish the man that molded (laughter) me into the person I am would have been able to see it. And he would've been so proud. All the accomplishments and accolades and life that had come down the river, he would've been so proud of it. Story_ID: 643515 Speaker 1: Let's get through high school [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama] here. Now in, in high school you played sports, you played-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --now, now did you--what did you play in football? Speaker 2: Defensive end. Speaker 1: Okay, now basketball? Speaker 2: Basketball, I tried to play center and then I got up--got, 'cause I could shoot. So, but then and I could do center quite nicely but I wasn't heavy enough at that time to get in and muscle as a center. Speaker 1: So what are you about 6'3"? Speaker 2: About 6'2" and a half. Speaker 1: Six two and a half. Speaker 2: And shrinking. Speaker 1: Okay, yes sir, but in those days that--you know in a small area that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tall. Speaker 2: But if I would've--like I was a skinny--until my junior year and I bloomed. I put on mass, I put on muscle and became a force to reckon with. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, now when you were in high school did, did you know you were going to college at that point? Speaker 2: I knew if my dad had a--stepfather [Willie Reynolds] had a say (laughter) in it that I would. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I--you know. Did I wanna go? No, but I knew, I did everything that man told me to do because everything he told me was right and it was good for me. Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] was a college graduate [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And was a social worker (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted just run off and become a police offer and then that way I felt I could farm, I could live off the land, but he was determined that we're breaking this cycle. "We're gonna keep the land, we're gonna pay the taxes on it. We're gonna keep--but you're not gonna make--it's too hard," and even said to me, "you won't become a carpenter, it's too hard, it's too volatile," and he was right. He--I said I'm not going. He put me to work my junior year summer doing carpentry work, hanging sheet rock. I said, "You're right, I'll never do this for a living," (laughter) not me, because they didn't have the lifting gadgets and stuff. They would have to take four by fours or whatever, two by fours--they called it a dead man they would put two downward and a board up top and then they'd wedge it under the sheet rock to lift it into the ceilings and stuff. It was hard work. Speaker 1: Now did your stepfather get injured you know often doing that kind of work (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah, no, and we laughed about it. One of my friends had bought a house and was doing a fix upper and he got the cabinets. He said, "I don't know how we gonna hang these cabinets," and everybody called me Chef. "I don't know how we gonna hang these cabinets, Chef [HistoryMaker Walter Royal]?" I said, "That's an easy one." He looked at it, I said, "Well put the base cabinet in." He said, "We can't lift." I mean it must've been twelve feet long. "We can't lift this cabinet." I said, "Son, step outside of yourself." I said, "Do you have an hydraulic jack." He said, "Yes." I said, "I have one too." I said, "You get yours, I'll get mine. We'll put a two by eight board beneath it and a two by eight fourteen board on top of it. You will turn, I'll turn. You'll turn--," and he looked at me, and when it popped in place he went, "I'll be dammed, where did you learn that?" I said, "My stepfather, it was something that stored in my head I thought I'd never use, but it was in the gray matter," and he looked. He said, "That's how they had to do things back in those days." I said, "Yep," said, "I learned it from my stepfather." Story_ID: 643516 Speaker 1: Now did you--were you a part of any clubs or--in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I was student body vice president, the 4-H [4-H club], Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization]. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Oh, lord didn't have--can't sing, can't dance. Could've debated back then if I would've put my mind to it but I didn't 'cause I was shy. Oh, lord what else? That's to the top of my head. We didn't have swim clubs, we didn't have--in those days it was limited things in a rural environment that you could be a part of? Speaker 1: Now did the rich people attend that same high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, well the ones that didn't go to the private school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the majority of the people attended public high school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They started a private school in Eclectic [Alabama], it lasted two years. Speaker 1: Okay but everybody goes to the (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, because it wasn't--they didn't have any sports to offer and kids wanted to be in that public school, and I don't even know if it's a private school in Alexander City [Alabama]. I'm sure it is because it was under the city as a relatively large town. Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you graduate with any special honors or anything? Speaker 2: Let's see, well I went to Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] on a football scholarship and was injured down the road--not really. Speaker 1: So you had a football scholarship at Auburn, now that's a pretty big deal, Auburn's a big time football school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know where I wanted to go? Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]! They wouldn't accept me (laughter). Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], they wouldn't accept me, I, I you know it's just amazing. Speaker 1: Tuskegee's right down the road from Auburn. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: I mean Macon County [Alabama]--you leave Lee County [Alabama] right in Macon County. You leave Macon County right into Montgomery County [Alabama]. You leave Elmore County [Alabama] into Montgomery County. Elmore County butts into Macon County. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: And on the backside of Elmore County is Lee County [sic. Tallapoosa County, Alabama] now that I think about it. Speaker 1: So were you--did they give you a reason why they rejected you or? Speaker 2: They didn't have any need for a defensive end was Tuskegee. Alabama State were at--they were at their quota and I say--well my father [Royal's stepfather father, Willie Reynolds] knew lots of people at Auburn and I think Professor Sumner [ph.] was one of the reasons I got a scholarship at Auburn and a little talent. Shug Jordan [Ralph Jordan] who was a football coach, right before Pat Dye, he had a summer home on Lake Martin, so just and he would come to Elmore County High [Elmore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama] football games. Speaker 1: Okay so he saw you play (unclear)? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then influence from some of the people that my father, stepfather had dealings with. Just call 'em daddy wanted to (laughter) had (unclear) with I think all of that together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, the old saying: not what you know, it's who you know. (Laughter) It applies, it applies, and it applies. Story_ID: 643517 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So well, Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] had been--now this is 1975 when you go to Auburn-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and did you declare a major right away? Speaker 2: No, not right away. Like say Coach Dye was there when I got there [sic.]. Speaker 1: Is this--this is Guy? Speaker 2: Dye, Pat Dye. Speaker 1: Pat Dye, okay. Speaker 2: One of the meanest men on this planet, (makes sounds)! He would get us up and he would make us run and run and he would drive behind us in a pickup truck and if you veered away, if you got a little slow he'd slide up there and honk that horn (laugher), I mean and, and that I was injured my freshman year, sophomore, second year and that's when I went to LaGrange College in LaGrange, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in-? Speaker 2: A private Methodist school. Speaker 1: Okay so you were injured your freshman year? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Paying football (unclear)? Speaker 2: I had a car accident. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It was storming and I was headed home and just sort of skidded and they said, "Well you know you had a concussion, you injured your back, we're not willing to gamble," so and my dad said--stepfather [Willie Reynolds], "Don't worry about it, we can afford to send him to school." I said, "Well, Dad this is a perfect chance, I, I don't have to go back to college, ha, ha, ha." He said, "You're going." So, he packed me up and took me to LaGrange, Georgia which is an hour, an hour and a half away from where I grew up. All my life revolves around the 80 [U.S. Route 80], 95 [Alabama State Route 95] corridor now that I think about it. You leave LaGrange, you come into Alabama then you go from Fay- Lafayette County [sic. Chambers County, Alabama] into Lee County [Alabama], Lee County into Macon County [Alabama], Macon County back to Elmore [Elmore County, Alabama] and it's all on the 85 [Interstate 85]. So, went to LaGrange and went to work in mental health and then-- Story_ID: 643518 Speaker 1: Now was LaGrange College [LaGrange, Georgia], now is this an integrated college at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right but it's not a big time sports school or anything like that so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they had a good little basketball team but it wasn't great. Football team was the local yokels that couldn't get into major universities. Speaker 1: Did you know anybody at LaGrange? Speaker 2: Nope, my dad [Royal's stepfather, Willie Reynolds] talked to someone that he knew and said they could get me in and I said, "I wasn't going," he said, "You were going," and I said, "Well I'm gonna go hang out." When I came back he had my bags packed, put me in the car and drove me there (laughter), and said--dropped me off. Speaker 1: All right so how did you choose to major in psychology? Speaker 2: Mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] having been a social worker, seeing the need of people or just having a foundation and seeing a of people that didn't have a foundation, and a way of trying to help out and like I said with mother I'd seen so many, so many broken people. Speaker 1: Psychologically broken? Speaker 2: Um-hm and you know you can--whether it's abuse or poverty or just whatever, they were broken. Speaker 1: Did you have a sense in those days of the number one--what would you think would be the biggest psychological problem that people had where you were growing up that you paid attention to? Speaker 2: Being poor and the desire to have, to have and whatever means to get--and whether--I look back at young women, just throwing their bodies at men to get, to do you know and then it was just like it's not right, it's just wrong and my grandparents would say, oomph, oomph, oomph. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that passion was put in me and to this day it's still there. Speaker 1: Okay now were there any special teachers or students at LaGrange that you remember of the years that made a profound influence or any influence on you? Speaker 2: Well, we called her Mrs. McKay but she was Professor McKay [Marilyn McKay]. Randall Cobb [ph.]. Speaker 1: Randall Cobb the boxer? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Buddy Sumners [ph.]. Speaker 1: Now what was Randall Cobb? Speaker 2: Randall Cobb was a psychology professor there and he was young, unlike the old, all the old Methodist professors (laughter) there. He was young, he was hip and he hung out with us but he motivated us. Speaker 1: And Buddy Sumners? Speaker 2: Buddy Sumners, he was a friend of my dad's that was a professor there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that looked over my shoulders and reported, snitched on me is what he did (laughter). Story_ID: 643519 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, LaGrange College [LaGrange, Georgia] and so, so you graduated from LaGrange in '78 [1978]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And--didn't, now was there any particular aspect of psychology that you focused on? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, when I wanted to work with the mentally retarded, and I did that for years at the J.S. Tar Walter Center [sic. J.S. Tarwater Development Center, Wetumpka, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Now, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And at that point I had accumulated enough--what do you call them? We call them PTO [personal time off] hours these days but they were--and it was a state ran facility. Comp days that I had accumulated, probably two years' worth. Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't want to get you out of school just yet, but you just--on the chronology you go on and pursue a master's at Auburn? Speaker 2: Auburn Montgomery [Auburn University at Montgomery, Montgomery, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, now were there any--what were the influences at Auburn? Speaker 2: Well, because I had worked at the Tar Walter Center and then I wanted more, I needed more in order to advance. So, while I was working there I was going to school at night. Speaker 1: Now what's the name of that place again, the Tar Walter (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Tar, T-A-R, Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, I thought so but I didn't want to assume. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a facility, I think we had about 360 patients, and nothing, no severe retardation, so my role was to get them workable skills so if they were able to get out of the system they would be able to go to work at a plant and to train and teach, and then when I was working on my master's, I was elevated a little more. I went from getting the motor skills to teaching them how to manage money, how to pay bills, how to live in the environment. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started working there before you went on to finish your master's degree? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you--how long had you worked before you went back to get your master's? Speaker 2: Probably three years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I came right of school and dad had gotten cancer, my stepfather [Willie Reynolds] and I came out of school, also graduated and took the job in Tar Walter because I was gonna go into Atlanta [Georgia] and take a position to teach and then work in Milledgeville, Georgia at the state sanitariums there [Central State Hospital], but because dad got sick I took something closer to home and I could have my house and check on him and work and go to school at the same time because it was then within a thirty minute loop. Speaker 1: Okay, so your dad passed away not long afterwards, I guess (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, dad passed away--I'd just started cooking school [Rich's Cooking School, Atlanta, Georgia] when dad passed away. Speaker 1: Okay so that's a little bit, he lived a little bit (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he lived like another-- Speaker 1: He had cancer. Speaker 2: --four years, five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was bedridden for a good eighteen months. Story_ID: 643520 Speaker 1: When you went to--you went back to Auburn [Auburn University at Montgomery, Montgomery, Alabama] to get your master's [degree] and, so you got your master's in psychology in 1980? Was that it? Is that too soon? That's too soon isn't it? Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your plan with to--what were you going to do with a master's in psychology? Speaker 2: Well, I had really planned to--well, stick in the mental health field mode. I wanted to, you know I saw growth because it was very few African Americans in that profession and then I was being pushed or should I say groomed to become a department head, but once I found out how much comp time I had, I said I'm going to cooking school. That was the hardest step to walk away, but I had educated myself like my dad [Royal's stepfather, Willie Reynolds] wanted. Dad had passed, it was my time (laughter), it was my time and I met a lady by the name of Nathalie Dupree. Nathalie said--she was doing a seminar and I was just like every other question [gestures], every other question. Speaker 1: Now and is this in cooking school or before? Speaker 2: This was before. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now this is--well, what seminar is this and what do you--? Speaker 2: Southern Living did a seminar in Montgomery [Alabama] and I went and I'm trying to remember the young--she was young back then but she was out of Birmingham [Alabama], and she was African American and she was very big into Southern Living and so I had so many questions and then she--what was Lisa's [ph.] last name? Said, "But we're having this reception, would you like to go?" Said, "We need a few students." I said, "I'd love to go," and Nathalie said, "There's some fire in your eyes. Have you thought about going to cooking school?" She said, "Well I have one in Atlanta [Georgia]." I packed up, I went. Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw Nathalie Dupree speak at this seminar? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And--now had you been--well, I guess you--had you envisioned cooking beyond the cook level at that point? I mean at this point? Did you see what a chef--did you-- Speaker 2: Well even at that point (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) have any aspiration to? Speaker 2: I didn't know what--well, I--what was his name? Street [ph.], Chef Street was the chef at the country club [Willow Point Golf and Country Club, Alexander City, Alabama] that I talked about earlier, and a place called Kowaliga Resort [sic. Kowaliga Restaurant, Alexander City, Alabama], and I worked there some early on, and I saw what Chef Street did with food, but that is the first chef that I knew one on one you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a--was that--did that kind of excite you about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It really did when he would let me come in and play in the kitchen as I called it (laughter) you know--no formal. And he said, "Your food is good," and then several people told me what I great cook I was. Speaker 1: So did you cook a lot at home? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I cooked for friends and when we were at LaGrange [LaGrange College, LaGrange, Georgia], it was four of us living in a house and we would just throw out money, what little monies we had in a pool and I would cook three to four nights a week. Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this. I feel--I'm angry at myself for not asking earlier, but who taught you how to cook when you were growing up? I mean who was your first teacher? Speaker 2: Probably [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal] and my Aunt Sister [Verta Royal], and then mom [Ida Royal Reynolds], mom you know, but probably my grandmother, 'cause I'll tell you, when school got out when I was a little snippet I loved to get back to the farm and I was under her feet, I was just underfoot, just watching, just watching. Speaker 1: Okay, so she let you help and. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I learned, and, and I loved it and when Nathalie gave me the opportunity and as she said to this day, "My best student ever." I see her in Savannah [Georgia] at least every couple of years. She has a stepdaughter that's a doctor here at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] so when her and her husband [Jake Bass] come up to visit they always come here and we'll have a glass of wine together and get caught up. Story_ID: 643521 Speaker 1: Okay, so you go to Nathalie Dupree's [Rich's Cooking School, Atlanta, Georgia]--this is about 1983, is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, '82 [1982], '83 [1983] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right so you go to--you get in the class and did you have--well--now, I have a note here that you know special guests would come in like Julia Child, Don Prudhomme. Speaker 2: Paul Prudhomme. Speaker 1: Paul Prudhomme rather. Speaker 2: James Beard and lord, what is his name? He was very big in New York [New York]--Gael Greene who was a huge food writer. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite style of cuisine that you? Speaker 2: Southern, everything was southern with me. Even to this day I'm proving to people that you can do a fabulous, elegant, less salt southern meal. Everything is not fried and cooked all day! It's not (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Is this, is this a principle of new southern cooking? Speaker 2: Well, I dare call mine new southern cooking because it's what I grew up with. Good, fresh--my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Royal] didn't go out and grow those baby little turnips and then cook 'em for five hours until they looked like mush. She didn't do that. You know it was great stuff. I remember going down on the creek and she would say to me, "Boy, we gotta go get the creasy." "Yes, ma'am." "Now you bring a stick, you gonna have to beat them snakes back, but the creasy's ready and we got to get some creasy for Effie [ph.]," and you know we'd go out and we'd pick this fabulous water cress. I'd go digging for bull frogs, we'd have fabulous frog legs. I mean just great food, and she would make--it's called pate now. French it's pate but it was nothing more than a spiced up elegant meat loaf, thinly sliced with homemade mustard on toasted biscuits. I mean you know it was just great food. Her lemon curd--oh, that lemon pie with the meringue on it. You know and people just don't under- and it wasn't fancy, it was great, good, fresh food. Eggs was in the barn, you'd go out and you'd get--collect eggs four days a week. Sometime you'd get ten or twelve dozen, sometimes you'd get three. It just depends if you got there before the snakes (laugher) and so. Speaker 1: Okay, so new southern cooking, is there a new southern cooking or is it just a? Speaker 2: It's what you northerners have made that phrase new southern cuisine. Well, you're making it lighter, you're taking the sodium out, you're cooking with turkey or vegetable stock in lieu of a meat protein stock. Speaker 1: Or pork or? Speaker 2: Yeah, you're not adding as much butter, you're using a little olive oil as another fat content, you know? Story_ID: 643522 Speaker 1: Is this is a style that--this is something that Nathalie Dupree was teaching? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nathalie's a southern chef at heart and she's very proud of the South and she was teaching you how to lighten it up, how to make it more applicable to the public. You know the, because at this point the South was not just made up of southerners any more. The migration had started, jobs had started to deteriorate up north. People were moving into the South with a more refined palate. Wine was its all time high peak during that period and people putting cellars in their house and if they wanted a bottle of wine, they didn't want a bottle of wine with fried chicken. They wanted a bottle of wine for the chicken that had been removed off the bone, pounded and lightly sauteed. It's fried chicken (laughter) I mean you know. So. Speaker 1: Okay, not how did--when you look back on it, how did attending Ms. Dupree's cooking school [Rich's Cooking School, Atlanta, Georgia] change your life? Speaker 2: Well it prepared me, like I say now you have--remember, I'm coming from no experience with chefs, just home cooks. No experience about wine, no knowledge of formally setting a table, you it's just things that opened my eyes up. It just made my brain erupt with what was out. Walking into a fine, fine dining restaurant and looking around. Ingredients--I'd never saw a whole salmon in my life, and I remember the first day I did and she asked me to fillet it, I was so embarrassed. I butchered that thing, I mangled it, but I went to the fish market in Fulton [Fulton County, Georgia]. Fulton County fish market that weekend, bought three salmon and a bottle of Jack Daniels. I came home and I practiced on those salmon and went back in to class on that Monday. She said, "Well we're gonna take up where we left off on Friday. Who would like to prepare this salmon dish?" I jumped out of the chair and saw that look and give me one of those one eyed jack looks, and got up and I nailed it. And she looked--I said, "I practiced." I said, "I want to know everything you know. I need to know this." She said, "You practiced?" "I bought three salmon." She said, "What did you do with them?" I said, "I gave them to the lady--," 'cause we were in a hotel not a dorm but a hotel. I gave 'em to the lady at the front desk. She said, "You didn't eat any of it?" I didn't want that stuff, I just wanted (laughter), and then when I tasted it I was like holy God. Learning to break down a half a cow and trim it and not just--shad roe, making fabulous liver mousses or pates or foie gras, you know it was just things that were alien to a little southern boy. Learning mushrooms, seeing a golden raspberry (laughter) for the first time and you know I could just go on forever--the knowledge she installed in me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's--gee, so this is--how long were you in school? Speaker 2: Two, well, it was a two and a half year--but I was out a little under two years because she'd give me tasks, I would nail it. I would master it. She said, "We're gonna graduate you with the class that's graduating now." (Laughter) You know I nailed it-- Story_ID: 643523 Speaker 1: And then she [Nathalie Dupree] took it a step farther for me. She said, "Well, group of the graduating people are going to Majorca [Spain]. I'm taking a group to Majorca. So we have been given a scholarship and Rich's Department Store is paying for it--." Said yeah, yeah, yeah. Went, we were there for three weeks. Came back, had a wait-over at RDU [Raleigh-Durham International Airport, Wake County, North Carolina] and I was reading a Julia Childs' cookbook sitting in the airport waiting for my flight to get back to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Now is this your first trip abroad? Speaker 1: Yeah, to get back to Atlanta and this lady, Jenny Fitch walked up and she said, "Hi, I'm Jenny Fitch. Are you a chef?" I went, "Well, I just graduated from Nathalie Dupree's cooking school [Rich's Cooking School, Atlanta, Georgia]. We just got back from Spain." She said, "You know Nathalie Dupree?" "Yes ma'am." She said, "You know Nathalie Dupree?" I said, "Yes ma'am, I do." So, I said, "I'm headed back to Atlanta to pack up and go home." She said, "You're not leaving for Atlanta yet." She said, "I own the village of the Fearrington [Fearrington Village, Pittsboro, North Carolina]. I own the Fearrington House Restaurant [Pittsboro, North Carolina], my husband [R.B. Fitch] and we have Edna Lewis working for us out there," and I went holy god. I mean Edna was my icon (laughter) at that point, and she said, "We'll get you on a flight, another flight." I went out, met Edna--hung out with Edna for two days. Meanwhile Jenny had called Nathalie and Nathalie had just told her what a prodigy she felt I would be. Edna loved me, they offered me a job, and of course I took it. Flew back to Alabama, packed up everything, came back, went to work at Fearrington, picked Edna's brain. I mean Edna was an angel amongst us. Speaker 2: Now tell us about Edna Lewis, now who is she and how did you first find out about her? Speaker 1: Oh, Edna has six publications, six cookbooks. Her first cookbook, 'The Edna Lewis Cookbook' [Edna Lewis], I've cooked everything in it more (laughter) than once. And she's this striking black--oh, was a striking older black woman that just--elegant! And I would read her books and read her recipes and go--whoa! And there was nobody else like her. There was no black southern chefs that I knew of at that time except Edna and God, God smiled on me when he gave me the opportunity to work with her and there was no way in the world I was turning it down. I had met Edna, then I met Jenny. I had two great women and Jenny Fitch, she was a wealthy Chapel Hill [North Carolina] woman. You know they owned Fitch Lumber Company [Chapel Hill, North Carolina], Fitch stockyard in Siler City [Carolina Stockyards Company, Siler City, North Carolina], just say and her passion, once again with all of her fortune was to bring something to Chapel Hill and she wanted an English inn and it is a true five, Michelin [Michelin Guide] five star destination. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But working with Edna--Edna and I would sit up sometimes--two o'clock in the morning, just going talking about things. Her crab cakes, the best recipe on this planet. Her wild asparagus salad, her Vidalia onion soup (laughter), you know just things once again. Nathalie had given me the canvas with the first coat of paint on it. Jenny put the next coat; Edna refined the painting. Story_ID: 643524 Speaker 1: Once again the difference between a cook--they're a lot of black cooks in the South-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but not that many black chefs I take it? Speaker 2: Well, a few more now but yeah, the difference between a cook and a chef basically the cook does all the work, I mean you know they bust their hump. They've just not been fortunate enough to educate, to learn the finances of it. To go out and network their way around or to integrate themselves into main society, and integrating yourself into main society you get the funds to do what you need to do to open your restaurant, to keep it afloat, to continue to educate, and any cook can become a chef if they desire. I did. Speaker 1: Okay, so part of a chef school is learning the business aspect of it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Like I say to youngsters that are starting out, "Oh, those classes of accounting, those classes are just boring. All I wanna do is cook." "Boy, you can be the best cook on this planet, you can cook better than anybody but if you're not able to maintain, to get your bills paid on time, to pay your taxes, to get your checks written. To understand finances, to cost food out, it's all gonna slip right through your fingers." Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of the cookery part of it, I mean cooking, how does a chef differ from a cook, a good cook? Speaker 2: Well, I, I look at myself, I have great cooks here. I haven't become jaded. I still get in the trenches with them. I read books and magazines, I've become a little more discrete when I dine out. I don't have my journal writing everything down anymore. I set it to memory. Sometimes I may go sit in the parking lot twenty minutes writing down the good, the bad, the ugly. But most of all the good, the things that I can take away and incorporate into what I do every day, you know, and I tell that to my cooks. You all can have my job, you all can do my job. It's just governing yourself. You can't do it if you're hanging out 'til one or two o'clock in the morning. You can't. You burn yourself out and I'm not saying you don't need to go out and enjoy life, but you have to have a clear mind in order to absorb. Story_ID: 643525 Speaker 1: Here you are at the Fearrington House Restaurant [Pittsboro, North Carolina] here right outside Chapel Hill [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now how long did you work there? Speaker 2: Five, six years. Speaker 1: And did you, was--now how did you know when it was time to go or what? Speaker 2: Well, it was a transitional period. Edna [Edna Lewis] had left to go do some stuff, then Barker [Ben Barker] came in and I was the sous chef there and he asked me to join him in a venture. Fearrington House was growing and at such a clip and when Ben asked me to join his venture [Magnolia Grill, Durham, North Carolina] I did. I became his executive sous chef and he was another source of information and I watched and learned to set up a business, to go to the bank to get the financing to do, and I was with him about six years. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a ground-floor operation? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: So this is the first time you'd ever participated in a-- Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --something from the. Speaker 2: Ground up--yeah, took--helped build it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The sweat equity into it. Speaker 1: Now, at that time now I know chefs are like musicians in terms of having signature things that they do and I mean what was your signature contribution to culinary--the culinary arts at that? Speaker 2: Probably my braised rabbit. Back then I could grill and if I had a steak returned in three months because it wasn't cooked perfectly it was an off day. I'm not a cheap person, but I manage other people's money a heck of a lot tighter than I manage my own, because no one will ever come back to me and say, "Well you sort of wasted a little of fat over there didn't you?" Even to this day I hover over labor, I watch food costs because I know I can control the bottom line and controlling that bottom line it took three hundred plus employees here. That controls their livelihood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's rewarding to me, that's bonuses if you know you control. It affords me to do things, to move a wall in my house three times. Story_ID: 643526 Speaker 1: So you were with Ben, this is Ben Barker, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the, at the Magnolia Grill (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Durham [North Carolina] and this is the one that you were able to help shape from the ground up-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: --and so what do--tell us how do you put together a team in the kitchen. I mean what--how does it--whose on the team and how does it work? Speaker 2: Well, there's always a leader and I'm the executive chef, then I surround myself--well let me back up. There's always an owner, whether it's the executive chef or someone else, and then if it's an outsider that's not the executive chef then that ultimately is the leader. Then I, standing from the kitchen point of view, I, the executive chef, I surround myself with talented, knowledgeable people. Now, I may interview a hundred people before I find the right person, and with us--and it's a philosophy that I live, I learned here and I believe in it. With us it's finding the right person. When you get that right person, if you have the right attitude I can teach you everything to go along with it. If you have the right attitude--there's not an I, I, I that don't exist in my vocabulary. It's a we, we built this, we did this together. You all are the reason that I can go and do 'Iron Chef America.' You all are the reason that we are a successful establishment [Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina]. We are the reason that I can go to Bermuda and teach a class. We are the reason I can walk way and teach at Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], not I, because if it was I, I would never be able to leave the kitchen. You know, it's a we thing, and supporting that staff once you get them, and teaching them. Everybody wants a little knowledge. Everybody wants to be able to contribute and if you're not one of those that want to contribute, want a little knowledge, you don't make it through that interview process. You're gonna stumble somewhere you know? And I'm not always right. I'm willing to listen. My concepts are always not the best. I'm willing to listen to my guys. I listen to the owner. I listen to the owner's husband [Steve Thanhauser]. I listen to the general manager, but as the owner say, as Van [Van Eure] would say "Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Royal], ultimately it's your decision." But I take all of that into consideration. Speaker 1: Okay, so who do you--how many people do you have--ideal for a kitchen staff? And what are the roles in it? Speaker 2: Well, all of my people in the kitchen are cross trained, okay? Are they all managers? No. I have Betty [Betty Shugart], Jim [Jim McGovern], Jimmy [Jimmy Alfano], Brian [ph.], Brian [ph.], Adam [ph.], Deia [ph.]--I have about ten managers back there and sous chefs. Speaker 1: Now that's today right in this? Speaker 2: No, no that's my manager's, that's my management team. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In order to open this beast today that's about twenty-nine people that would be back there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but my managers are my support staff. Story_ID: 643527 Speaker 1: --And the roles they play in the kitchen and I guess--the question was informed on, in some way by the 'Iron Chef' ['Iron Chef America'] with the four people on the team and all that sort of thing, but how many--the--you were saying that the people that you need has to do with the amount of people you're cooking for? Speaker 2: Right, it has to do with the number of seats in your restaurant, the number of reservations that you're doing that evening and the style of cuisine that you're doing. I mean it's a ballet. Sundays is the slowest day here at the Angus Barn [Raleigh, North Carolina] which is not a slow day, it's like a five hundred person night but you know in the grand scheme of what we do here, that's the slowest day. What I would need is a captain, a lieutenant and then soldiers, and this captain is going, "All right lieutenant, this is the manifest for the day. We need to get soup made, we need to do this, (unclear) get two cases of broccoli chopped, you need to make sure that we have ten cases of potatoes ready to go in the oven." It's just a fine ballet and then the lieutenant go to the soldiers and divide 'em into (unclear) and then when the doors open they go to either the grill, the saute, or collator, deserts and salads, now the potato guy and then the dish staff. So, it just you know, it just depends on where you are, the type of cuisine. Then we also have a wine cellar here which is world class and it's a lot more involved. It's two people--has to be there at all times 'cause it's five to seven courses, and every detail is done on the moment. So, I couldn't have cilantro or tarragon chopped last night, it has to be chopped within a finite time. I can't make the mash potatoes too soon and stuff them with truffles and goat cheese. It has to be done in--it's a ballet to get it to the table in a timely, good manner. Speaker 1: Now will this be the difference, and I'm not casting aspersions upon them but between say the Olive Garden and say the local Italian restaurant that fixes the stuff right on the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean 99 percent of everything we do here is fresh. Now, because of where we are I have to get frozen lobster in. I do get giant frozen shrimp in. All of my deserts are baked in house and fresh. I buy no packaged vegetables or what have you. It's all done fresh. All the beef here is done, cut on a daily manner. We have a part that we look back from year to year and we cut X amount for that day. Every other week we get approximately eleven thousand pounds of beef from the Midwest. God knows there use to be a--ten to twelve cases of Idaho fifty count potatoes a day. So, that's--in answering the question and talking about it, it depends. With us my labor's a lot more than most Italian or Cheesecake Factories [The Cheesecake Factory] or whatever because it's all done under this umbrella, you know like my Haagen-Dazs ice cream obviously is not (laughter), but all of my deserts, every single desert except my ice creams are done under this umbrella. All pastries under this umbrella. All vegetables under this umbrella. All beef--you know I get pork in I have to break it down and cut it. I get chicken breasts in, I have to trim 'em, get 'em ready. All of my stocks are made under this umbrella and you know I love that because it gives me a sense of control. I know if you come in with an allergy I can say to you, "Yes unequivocally you can have that," and you're going, "This is life threatening my allergy." "Well, it has no garlic, it has no MSG it--," I can look you in the eye and tell you it has no tree nuts in it because it's done under this umbrella. I'm not buying it from another source, bringing it in. Speaker 1: Is this part of being a chef too that's different from being a cook that you would actually know what all your ingredients might--? Speaker 2: Yep, you have to know all your ingredients, you have to be able to protect the public you know? And even in with my sous chefs and chef de cuisine and other managers back there they know; and we have, we have booklets in case I'm away that says yes this is a list of the ingredients. Story_ID: 643528 Speaker 1: Okay so you just mentioned two names there, the chef de cuisine. Now what is he, what is the difference between him and a sous chef? Speaker 2: The chef de cuisine runs the kitchen even if the executive chef is there, chef de cuisine runs the kitchen. Chef de cuisine is just like you've seen this commercial where the neck is popping out of someone--another head is popping out of someone's neck? That's that person. He has the same mindset that the chef will have, except he's just not as seasoned or quite as much experience, and I dare say knowledge, because Jim's [Jim McGovern] knowledge is probably better than mine. You know he's very well-traveled, but he's my chef de cuisine. Brian [ph.], Brian [ph.], Adam [ph.]--I hope I get 'em all in there, Deia [ph.], they're my sous chefs. Ms. Betty [Betty Shugart] is a god sent person. She's daytime operation. Jimmy [Jimmy Alfano], he's my cellar chef. Speaker 1: Okay now that's here at Angus [Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 643529 Speaker 1: Let me back track back to Magnolia. So, how long did you stay at Magnolia Grill in Durham [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: About six years, in the six year bracket. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, so now you were at the Magnolia Grill for six years you said, and then in '90 [1990] you just, you opened the Crescent Cafe [Durham, North Carolina]. Now tell us how that idea (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well Crescent Cafe, the Crescent train line was from New Orleans [Louisiana] to New York [New York], and it was a fabulous train with great food. That's where the concept of the name came from but it came about to Maceo Sloan [Maceo K. Sloan] of Mechanics and Farmers and North Carolina Mutual, which is two large--well I do it injustice when I say two large companies. Mechanics and Farmers Bank [Durham, North Carolina] as a major player, North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] was the first penny policy started for African Americans and Mechanics and Farmers Bank was the first bank, black owned, startup bank in the Southeast. So, he--they had decided that they had a property and they approached me and we did the Crescent Cafe. Once again going back to my roots, southern cuisine with a Creole Cajun flair and it was a small seventy seat restaurant in downtown Durham, and you know people say we were ahead of our time, and I think they were probably right at that time. Durham was in a reconstruction phase, lots of transit problems and stuff. Lots of theft and break in, and with, with all that said we provided good food and we did a great business. And then mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] fell ill, she had a stroke. At that point I had to step away a while and do what any son would do and sold my interests and shares, went back to Alabama for a while so she could get out through all her rehab and stuff; and then I moved back here, back on the scene. Story_ID: 643530 Speaker 1: Did anyone--did your mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] or anyone ever say like, "Why aren't you using psychology instead of you know being a chef?" I mean had the, had the idea of what a chef is really capable of doing you know in terms of income you know. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: Finally, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah mother, once mother saw the stage and she knew that it was something I could always fall back on, but I use the psychology every single day in this profession (laughter). Whether it's with the staff, whether it's with food purveyors, I mean it is a tool that is used every day. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us an example of--? Speaker 2: Well, one thing people wanna be heard. I can sit and engage and listen and listen, and not interrupt you. Not having preconceived answers, just sit and listen. Formulate what you're saying to me and then give you a response. With purveyors, the mind games. "Well you know meat is gonna go up by 20 percent, dairy is going up, butter is going up. Sugar is going up." Okay, I understand that. Rather than using you, I'll go to the other one and they'll start me up. They're gonna give me the best rate that they can because they want this business, and you stop and you think. "I guess you're right. Okay, chef, I think we can lock you in for six months. Okay, chef I think we can get this at that price." You know and it's, it's little mind games. You listen and you reflect back. I often say to people a foundation--no house will stand a windstorm without a great foundation. No person will get through turbulent times without a foundation. You build a great foundation around yourself, a great support system. You throw things in the back of your brain that will surface when they are needed. That's a part of that foundation. My education is a part of my foundation. Story_ID: 643531 Speaker 1: Tell us about like--now do you--how do you feel about the Crescent Cafe [Durham, North Carolina]? Did, do you, do you think about how it could've you know worked out or was it just one of those things where it just, at the time it just--there's nothing that could've been done to? Speaker 2: It's nothing that could've been done. I mean people wanna feel safe and when you're going out to dinner and your car's being burgled and burgled and burgled and over the years I have watched many things go in that building. Now, if we jump ahead to 2011, 2012 it would have been a mega hit. Speaker 1: Now just to paint a picture, there's an article that's quoted in our research that said, from The Baltimore Sun that said Crescent Cafe was on a block surrounded by vacant buildings, or a lot of the buildings were vacant. Speaker 2: A lot of the buildings were. Speaker 1: On both sides? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and you think about that. You're in downtown, any downtown anywhere in this country. You have parking decks, vacant buildings and night clubs. It's transient and mishaps and wrong things are gonna happen. You drive in, in your shiny new Cadillac, once again, it's an opportunity for the have nots to take from what they think the haves are. You come in with your nice raincoat on. You hang it in a hallway on a coat rack, you get up to leave it's gone. You can only sustain so many of those incidents. You have women coming out before they go to a play or the theater or something to have a quick bite and a glass of wine, and they have to feel uncomfortable walking back to their cars? It makes a difference. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay so just--yeah, so you said nowadays the area is more developed through (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's developed, downtown Durham [North Carolina] is fabulous. It's lots of condos down there now. It's people but times were different and I know we're just, we're coming out of a--I call it a turndown. I dare use the word recession. People are out and about; people are feeling good. The city got a new mayor [Bill Bell]. They cleaned up everything. It makes a difference. They track down on drugs and prostitution and what have you. Speaker 1: So how long were you at the Crescent Cafe? Speaker 2: I think we were there for about two and a half years. Story_ID: 643532 Speaker 1: So what did you do when you left? Did you go--you didn't come here, did you come here directly (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I went and once mother [Ida Royal Reynolds] got through rehab and all of that when I came back home, I went to work for a place called the inn at Bonnie Brae [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] owned property. Speaker 1: About what year is this, this is what ninety--? Speaker 2: I would be like '93 [1993], '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah about '93 [1993], it was an old tobacco plantation that had been donated and developed. It was turned into a seventeen room guest cottages, multi-bedrooms, three to four bedroom guest cottages, a condominium and the inn itself had eight suites, and a banquet facility, but the old mansion itself was the first indoor swimming pool in the State of North Carolina, first ballroom in the State of North Carolina. It was a tobacco magnet. Speaker 1: What tobacco magnet owned it? Did you remember? Speaker 2: I wanna say that he was a Mangum [sic. Richard Wright], but I'm not sure. But he left if for the university and it was developed and da, da, da. So, I was there and then the university decided they wanted to turn it into something different and then that's when I came here. I worked in Atlanta [Georgia] for a while for Phoenix Communications. I did the Olympics for them and then after the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] was over in '96 [1996], I started this wonderful venture. Speaker 1: Now this is something that people wouldn't think about, but a lot of major public events have to hire a chef, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's as you know we were there at a mansion on the Chattahoochee [Chattahoochee River], and the particular company builds oil tankers, and he was--the company was bringing in their better customers. It may be a sheik from Iran or Iraq rather, or a mogul from New York [New York], you know, but they would bring 'em in the--and they would put 'em up in the mansion and see a few venues and then fly 'em back out and bring more in and fly 'em back out. Speaker 1: Okay, I know I've--on movie sets they always--they seem to have a chef on movie sets to cook for the cast and crew, have you ever done that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No, and in this day and time with the mega stars they have three or--each star have their chef (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are full times and people are making some good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah make great money, not good, great money, and if you're young you get to travel. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you were with the Olympics in '96 [1996] as a chef for the--what was the name of the company? Speaker 2: Tenco. Speaker 1: Teneca? How do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-O-N-C-O, T-E-N-C-O. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Based out of Houston [Texas]. Story_ID: 643533 Speaker 1: All right, now so, so when did you start with Angus house, I mean Angus Barn [Raleigh, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Right after the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] in '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us, give us some history of Angus Barn, and what they were trying to do when they brought you in? Speaker 2: Well, what had happened was the chef had left to do another venture and had been gone for a while and they were searching for a chef. Well, some friends of mine had--knew the owner, owners it was two owners at that time. Alice Eure and Van Eure and had mentioned me to the Eures and they interviewed me and reinterviewed me and interviewed me again, and came in and the number one objective was to maintain the level of quality, to educate and work with the staff. They didn't want a personality that's just go back to the I, it's the we. You know it's the perfect fit. Twenty miles from my home, I love being here in the triangle [Research Triangle Park, Durham, North Carolina]. I didn't have to uproot and you know one thing about it, it's been sixteen years and it feels as if it was yesterday. Speaker 1: Okay, now did they--did the Angus house already have a specialty in southern cuisine? Speaker 2: The--we are a huge steak house with good, fresh ingredients. We have a wine cellar with about twenty-seven bottles in our collection and we are as American as you come, and they hired me with my knowledge of American and southern cuisine you know, and we have grown and grown and come together and we do fabulous stuff. It's just like I say, it's like putting on an old glove, working with the owners, working with the staff, working with Ms. Betty [Betty Shugart] who's been here going into her forty-eighth year. Imagine, a place that you only had one job here, forty-eight years. We've got a lot of staff like that. Speaker 1: What does she do? Speaker 2: She's head of daytime operations. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, think about it, even thirty-five years you're here. You're doing something right. You're taking care of your staff. You're giving them benefits and things that most people, most restaurants, don't even dream of. But most of all you're taking care of them. You're here for your staff through the good, the bad, the indifference. Story_ID: 643534 Speaker 1: Now I read that Angus house, I mean Angus Barn [Raleigh, North Carolina] burnt down in? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Shortly after it was opened. Speaker 2: About a year and a half after they opened and the original owners, Alice [Alice Eure] and Mr. Eure, I forget his first name. Speaker 1: Is it Thad, Tad? Speaker 2: Thad, Thad, Alice and Thad Eure [Thad Eure, Jr.] and Mr. [Charles Winston] and Mrs. Winston [Florence Barclay Winston] were partners. It burnt down. These were young men that had just came back from the war [Vietnam War], knew nothing about opening a restaurant, but they brought this large tract of land out here, and think back in the early '60s [1960] it was nothing out here. A tiny little airport [Raleigh-Durham International Airport, Wake County, North Carolina], I mean a two lane highway (laughter), nothing. Speaker 1: That's--the airport is huge now. Speaker 2: And people said it would never last. Well after about two years of being opened, it burned. A truck driver happened to be driving down the road in the wee hours of the morning to see the building on fire. Well, he had to drive all the way into Raleigh [North Carolina] to a pay phone to call the fire department (laughter). So obviously, it was a total loss, well he decided that he was going to rebuild. They didn't lay off a single person. If you could do anything you came and you helped and they took care of you 'til they rebuilt. Out of their original staff, as I remember, they lost two people (laughter). This is a philosophy that this company is built on. Two people reopen, well I'll go back a half of second. When they first opened the restaurant, no banks would lend them money. They had to take mortgages out on their houses. Their parents had to help 'em out and stuff. Well after two years of operation, every banker in the state wanted to lend them money, but they had amassed enough money that they could rebuild from their own bank (laughter) accounts, because it was nothing when people came. Lines were out the door. We pride ourselves in supersized portions, you know. We pride our self on service, quality and most of all attentiveness to the person that's in that chair. When you sit in that chair, you're the most important person on this planet during that duration. We are memory makers and that's what we try to do is make memories. We have people that have been coming for generations. Speaker 1: So this is something that they do, like it a rou- it's in their routine and it's part of their family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean. This is an institution. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 643535 Speaker 1: Now when the, the current owner, Van [Van Eure], took it over, she took it to a new level. I mean we're more than steak and potatoes. We are vegetarian, we're seafood, we're poultry, we have a world class wine list. We have a wedding and banquet facility owned property now. A twenty-seven thousand dollar square foot wedding and banquet facility that sits on a large lake in back of us. The main building itself is fifty-seven thousand square feet. Some hotels are not that large. So, we have over 340 staff members. We give to the community. We have charities, we have boards that all managers sit on. It's giving back you know. I will retire here in about thirty years. I mean I--it's just. It is a great place to be. Speaker 2: You said you will retire here in thirty years (laughter). Speaker 1: In thirty years, yep. I'll be here until I'm like eighty-three or eighty-four. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're not looking towards, "Well I'll start my own restaurant?" Speaker 1: Oh, no, never. If I decided I wanted to do something on the sideline, it would be a little jazz and blues club with a simple fare, but I wouldn't do that day to day operation. I'd find me a young chef, an up and coming and put him in so they could get their fit, you know. Somebody that wants to learn the ropes and do something but that's not financial capable right now. Speaker 2: Okay, well tell us how, how--now this a huge place and a real impressive facility. You walk in the door there's a collection of antique revolvers on one side and guns and there's a, there's a bowl of apples as big as our heads you know sitting there. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Probably fake but it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they're real apples. Speaker 2: They're (laughter) real, artistic apples (laughter), but there's--so how, what's your day like? When do you get here? When does the restaurant open and what do you--what's a typical day in your life? Speaker 1: Well, for me it could be anywhere from 5:30 in the morning to 10:00, 11:00 at night. It just depends on what's going on, but typically it's about 1:00 to 10:30, 11:00 and if I have--like I said we have a banquet facility that we call the Pavilion at the Angus Barn [Raleigh, North Carolina]. If I have weddings or big (unclear) parties or what have you then that means it's a little later, a little earlier, but I'll wake up lots of mornings and do the farmer's market. I wake up some mornings and run by the Chef's Academy [Morrisville, North Carolina] to hang out and talk to students there. Summer, spring and fall in my gardens at home, working on them, doing things, coming here working in the gardens. Speaker 2: There are gardens on the facility here? Speaker 1: Yeah, we have herb gardens and fruit gardens here on the property. Then it's going into the kitchen. We open at five o'clock. So, the staff start coming in about three. The management staff is here about two and then we figure our day out. We have, obviously, a restaurant this size, you have several department heads, and under the department heads you have other ones. So, you have weekly meetings every Wednesday to get our game plan for the week. We have banquet meetings where sometimes it could be forty banquets in the course of a week. Sometime there's four weddings going on in the course of that week. Sometime it's board meetings that we have to run off and deal with, but it's, it's long hours, rewarding. As I say to my managers, it's not the physical anymore that I'm doing. It's the brain trust these days which is very much a real part of it, and then I have things that I love to do and I have to take care of those things. I have a son [Walter Royal, Jr.] in Mobile, Alabama and a grandson [Walter Royal, III (ph.)] there. I love to visit with them, they love to visit with me, so. Story_ID: 643536 Speaker 1: All right so we were talking about a typical day here [Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina] and you said it--so you have so many functions as a chef is what I've gathered as that you could be--so many things that you could be involved in from weddings and banquets and not just the day to day food operations. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: And I, it's not, if it's--and I wouldn't have it any other way. It's doing this beast, it's doing the wine cellar and when I say beast, 650 seats can be a beast. It's a great beast, but it can be challenging. We have two wine cellar dining rooms. One that will accommodate about twenty-eight and the other one thirty-four, and then I've done parties at the Pavilion as large as nine hundred, and when you get all of that going on and in motion at once it's juggling balls but it works. Speaker 1: So when you started--typically then you can anticipate what proportions of ingredients to buy or for food to buy based on what your best selling items are or that sort of thing or what you feature? Is that what it is? Speaker 2: Well what--when I came here it was things that was foreign to me. They had a POS [point of sale] system, the restaurants I worked in they didn't even have. Speaker 1: Now what's that? Speaker 2: It's a storage where everything is ranged in, nothing is written. It's all rung in, and we have a memory bank. Well they've had one here before, I mean for twenty plus years. Only hotels (laughter) and huge chains had that technology, but Mr. Eure [Thad Eure, Jr.] was so savvy he had the--he--we have a memory, a databank, I can tell you how many steaks I served on this Sunday back twenty years. So, that's a knowledge. Every entree, the amount of wine, that's knowledge that we can go back year after year and project what we need to keep in house, how much, da, da, da, ta da. Track your food costs, track your labor costs, track what you purchased. Without that knowledge, it would be a bear. We would probably have to have six accountants (laughter) you know. So that's one thing you know, that's knowledge if it's--done like well, "Tell me how did a rack of lamb sell?" "How long ago?" "Why don't you go back and look chef?" They go back. Knowledge is instant. How many avocados did we sell? A little fact the comptroller threw on me a couple of weeks ago. He said, "Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Royal], do you realize we spent fifty thousand dollars last year on pecans?" We were up, "Yes Bob [ph.], I know. Bob we're putting pecans on all salads now." "Oh, okay." But he just noticed, you know? It works. We can see if it's anything we need to pull off the menu that's a dead horse. Track it back. Story_ID: 643537 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, what is the most popular item--now this is a steakhouse I realize. Speaker 2: Um-hm, it is a steakhouse. Speaker 1: Is it, is that what it is? Speaker 2: Beef, but the most popular item would be the small filet. It's a seven ounce filet and with your choice of five different salads. There's the Caesar salad, there's the garden salad, there's the spinach salad, there's the wedge salad. You could get asparagus, or steamed vegetables or what you have you--so with the filet and your choice of potato, all of that's included in the meal. So. Speaker 1: That's the number one? Speaker 2: That's the number one and then prime rib would probably be number two and then it would just sort of be scattering to the wind to do the breakdown, but Bob [ph.] could give me a preference report and I would know instantly. Speaker 1: Do you all fry chicken here? Speaker 2: I (unclear) fry chicken as a feature, but on a day to day basis, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have lots of seafood, fabulous seafood. I have pasta dishes. I have vegetarian dishes, and when vegetarians come to me I can even do vegan. I have the accessibility to do kosher meals. I'm not kosher, but I--if you tell me you're kosher, I can get it taken care of and have it served to you in a kosher manner. Speaker 1: Okay, what about pork? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, you know that what we're in, we're down, we're in the Bible Belt you have to have pork. Spareribs are my single best appetizer and they are delicious. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about desert, what's the specialty? Speaker 2: Well, the chocolate chess pie is our signature dessert with Haagen-Dazs ice cream, warm--out of this world, but the Grand Marnier parfait is probably the best dessert and that's Grand Marnier, raspberry sorbet, fresh strawberries and a raspberry sauce on top. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so did it take a while to adjust to the size and the activity here or? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm still adjusting sixteen years later. I go through this building and I will still stop. "I've never noticed that in here before. How long has that been here?" "Oh, it's been here twenty years?" Okay (laughter), you know okay. But yeah, we are growing, changing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know? With the Pavilion [at the Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina], we've had to literally add another half the amount of staff. We're basically a twenty-four hour operation. Story_ID: 643538 Speaker 1: I think I was mentioning to you briefly this British comedy called 'Chef!' where the chef has this big chateau, this huge res- similar to this, he's operating. And he's--I was amazed at how much movement there was on the job. I mean he was going from place to you know. He's in the kitchen, then he's going to purchase things. He's like, he's moving around and he's checking on what people--you know asking people how the food is and you know--do you move around a lot? Speaker 2: A lot, luckily I don't have to worry about going out and purchasing. That's one of the best gifts the owner [Van Eure] ever did to me was to get us a purchasing agent. I don't you know, like I love going to the farmer's market because I wanna purchase some specialty, specialty items and that's a good time for me and it's also a good community thing to be seen in the farmer's market. Let people know that we are buying local, we are supporting our farmers, but I'm in the dining room. I am at the Pavilion [at the Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina] mingling, you know. I'm in the lounge walking around. I'm in the cellar walking around. People love you being in the dining room. They love to see you, they love to talk to you. They love to give you little cooking tips. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You ever follow their advice? Speaker 2: Yeah, I really do because I, I don't know everything, I don't and then I listen. Just a week or so ago a lady said, "You know your macaroni and cheese is superb, it's delicious." And she must've been seventy years old. "It's delicious but mine's better." I said, "Okay." She said, "Just try putting a little dried mustard in yours and it will just--," and it made it pop. It really made it pop. Speaker 1: Dried mustard? Speaker 2: Dried mustard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the cheese sauce. Speaker 1: Now is there an ingredient, now we're talking about like cooking using local ingredients, this is southern cuisine in the South where you have this long growing season, is there any particular herb or ingredient that comes here that you, that kind of resonates throughout the food? Speaker 2: Well, probably basil, fresh herbs, basil, a little thyme, lemon thyme. We love tarragon. Tarragon is the forgotten herb, so we love using it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I don't want to get all the secrets out, but I just wanted to ask about that, you know ask that question (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Story_ID: 643539 Speaker 1: Do you have--now this will, they'll love this in the office. Do you have a philosophy, a culinary philosophy? Speaker 2: Yes, you know I, I--me, personally I love it, I live it, I breathe it, I cook and I eat it. If you're not willing to just eat, and I don't mean gluttony, but you have to eat and me my person, personally I can enjoy a great hamburger, or I can enjoy a filet mignon. The rave these days is a thick fried baloney and egg sandwich in diners. You have to live all aspects of it. Don't become so closed in, "Well, I'm just only going to deal with beef and eat beef and make beef the very best." No, open your mind, open your horizon. Let it all absorb. As a chef and up and coming chef, read, cook, experiment and I know you can't go out and buy the greatest ingredients but buy the best that you can. Eat the best that you can. I encourage all people if you can eat all natural or organic food, please do. And we are a large world and we have to feed the world, I understand that too, but the more chemicals, fertilizers and stuff that we can keep out of our bodies, the healthier we're gonna be. Story_ID: 643540 Speaker 1: Okay, now let me ask you about the 'Iron Chef.' Now this is and I think--now, what year was, were you on the 'Iron Chef?' Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006], I always say '96 [1996] (laughter), 2006. Speaker 1: Okay and tell us about the ostrich team and what happened. You had like--well, just tell us. Speaker 2: Well, they called me on Thanks- the day before Thanksgiving. Speaker 1: This is a TV show the 'Iron Chef.' Speaker 2: Right, the 'Iron Chef America' as a takeoff of 'Iron Chef' Japanese and it is a little phenomenon show. I mean it took off when people said it never would work, but they have super chefs there. Batali [Mario Batali], Bobby Flay, Cat Cora, Alton Brown is the narrator, and they called me the day before Thanksgiving and asked me if I'd like to participate in an episode. And I'm going like, "This is somebody playing a joke on me. Yes, when pigs fly." Turned around and getting ready for Thanksgiving. Well, it nagged at me, nagged at me, nagged at me. So, I went back to my office and star sixty-nine and dialed the number that came up on the star sixty-nine, and this same voice went, "Chef Royal [HistoryMaker Walter Royal] I owe you an apology." "Brian [ph.], you don't owe me an apology. I owe you an apology." He said, "No I should've realized you were getting ready for Thanksgiving." Twenty-two hundred reservations the next day (laughter), thirty-two hundred pounds of turkey. I was getting ready when he called, and he said, "Well are you interested?" I said, "Are you kidding me, of course I'm interested. Get me the information." Well he did and we through it and we went up January 22nd to shoot it, and it's an hour competition and it is a true hour of cooking. They start the clock, sixty minutes later the clock is stopped. If you're done you're done, if you're not, tough. And I--the most intimidating thing with me was it was cameras everywhere. Equipment I've only seen in magazines. Stuff I didn't even know how to turn it on, but it worked and we did battle ostrich. I went up against Cat Cora, the only female chef on the show and by the grace of God, we won. I said I'm gonna be simple and southern and do what I do on a day to day basis. Well, she's a southern girl from Mississippi and me being from Alabama, I thought it was gonna be this southern battle thing, but needless to say she went back to her Greek roots and when they started the judging her first dish must've had nineteen ingredients in it. I did a very simple ostrich hamburger with homemade potato chips, a little jalapeno salsa, cracked mustard, black pepper mayonnaise and horseradish ketchup and that was it. And they started listing her ingredients, listing her ingredients. I said you must've--I said, "Have you lost your mind? What are you doing? You've lost your mind," and then they started to attack her, to attack her. I'm going she's an Iron Chef and they're just shredding her apart. What are they gonna do to you? I've never smoked a day in my life. At that particular moment, I went you've lost your mind, you need a cigarette, and then the next dish they attacked her more and then they sort of lightened up on the third dish. Story_ID: 643541 Speaker 1: And then when it got to the dessert it was like holy tobacco. Well then I came up and then I was nervous and I'm just--was just like this big old Alabama loblolly just swaying in the wind. I had one person patting me here, and the next person patting me and I'm thinking to myself, and meanwhile I had an ear piece, but I had sort of taken the ear piece out of my ear, but it was still active and I didn't know it (laughter). What the hell are those people touching me for? Are they crazy? What's going on? And then I had a little person that would run across the studio (laughter) and go (gestures) go, "You're still live, we can hear every word you're saying." I said, "Well I didn't swear now did I?" So, we just went on and we won, we won by a substantial margin. Speaker 2: Okay, so all right so this is a big deal, it's national TV. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, so what was the aftermath of the show? Speaker 1: Well, we had to keep the secret for a year. We filmed in January, they aired it the 10th of December. Speaker 2: Could you keep a secret for a year (laughter)? Speaker 1: We didn't have a choice, I had to sign a million dollar gag order (laughter). Kept it a secret. I told the attorney because I needed to know what was going on and could they really get a million dollars if it leaked somehow. And when he said, "Yep, they can sue you." I said, "All right, it's gone forever," but we were very busy, we were in all type of tabloids. We did 'The Today Show' ['Today'] I mean it's just, it just, it's advertisement that you couldn't've bought, and you know I felt being invited, I was already a winner but to actually win it (nods head)! Speaker 2: Now there've been other honors too, just give us, tell us about some of the other honors. I know that you were honored by the--I'll read the--go on just tell us (unclear). Speaker 1: Restaurant Guild International, first African American five star chef [Five Star Chef of the Year], Rising Star [Rising Star Chef of the Year] at the James Beard House [James Beard Foundation], named one of the top five southern chefs, best chef in the Triangle [Research Triangle Park, North Carolina], honorary doctorate degree, did a tour for years and years with Bacardi and B&B Liquor, the black history tour, February--several cities, international trip to France. Life has been great. Speaker 2: Now, being in the first African American five star chef, now how big is that in relationship to the rest of the honors? Speaker 1: Well, on a personal note for my peers to tell me, you know now everything has been great. 'Iron Chef' ['Iron Chef America'] was huge, but for your peers to say that your quality and your mindset and your level of skills are five star worthy, that's huge. Anytime a bunch of food cooks, chefs, writers whatever name you that and say to you, that's huge. Story_ID: 643542 Speaker 1: And your, your goal is to retire here [Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina], you were saying, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, this will be my home for retirement and it's not coming anytime soon. I'm just getting better, I'm getting my sea legs, I'm getting better. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now when you look back at everything you've done at this point is there anything that you'd do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd probably take a little more time off. I would've been there for my son a little more, not that I wasn't, but I could have attended some of his football games at Troy State [Troy State University; Troy University, Troy, Alabama] more. Maybe spend a little more time for myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in the grand scheme of things, to have start, started earlier finding young people that was really interested in doing this and cultivating them and giving them a canvas to paint on. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did--now you have a son as you said, do you have a--is that your only child? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and when did you get married, did you--or, when did you? Speaker 2: Faye [ph.] and I--I think it was about, well about twenty-four. He's, he's turning thirty-two this November. Speaker 1: So that's like right after graduate school (unclear)? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Graduate school. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: At Auburn [Auburn University at Montgomery, Auburn, Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and you're divorced now, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Many years. Speaker 1: Yeah, and your--what is your son doing? Speaker 2: He's in law enforcement. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have any grandchildren yet? Speaker 2: One, I have a six year old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's so funny, we refer to ourselves as "Walter, Walter [Walter Royal, Jr.] and Walter [Walter Royal III (ph.)]" (laughter), and I go one, two and three, so. Story_ID: 643543 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question too: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, in life what would you consider today to be your legacy? I know you still have thirty years to go? Speaker 2: Well, I would like for people to think that I cared, I, I gave it my all and I, I've been very supportive to people as people have been to me and that he was a person that loved what he did. Speaker 1: I know it's been other articles out that I've been exposed to, at least indicate that a chef is consumed in terms of his work, and that there's very little time for anything else? Speaker 2: That's very true. Speaker 1: Is that? Speaker 2: It's true, 80 percent of my waking time is involved with what I do here [Angus Barn, Raleigh, North Carolina], but you know what? That 20 percent you need to stop and smell the roses, because if you allow yourself to become a hundred percent consumed that's why you get into the problems. You get into a little too much alcohol, you know. You get into things that are not conducive to being a good person. Speaker 1: Okay, do you kind of keep the image of that first chef that you met in your mind when you think about? Speaker 2: Yes, you can't be nasty and mean to people, you And you have to stop and I say--and I say eat and love food, everything is in moderation. Find a time to do a little exercise, and exercise your body as well as your mind. Story_ID: 643544 Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question too: today what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: Good question. I would love to see more African American women rising to the top in this profession you know. If you can feed a family--if you can take a pound of hamburger and feed a family of eight, you can come in and run any size kitchen you want and make great food, and now that's one thing. I want young African American males to stop and just take thirty seconds and take this seriously. This is not just something that could be a part time thing, we are the second, the hospitality industry, the second largest employer in this country or probably the world. Between hotels and cruise ships and restaurants and what have you, we are huge and there's a great life to be made out of doing this. Being a chef and working in this industry is no longer a transient thing. We are super professionals, doing great products and going places. And I wanna see kids get involved in it younger, and making sure the younger you get started, make sure this is something you wanna do. Because when you get at a certain age, you feel trapped, but if you start out at a younger age, you have time to jump off a ship if it's not (laughter) what you want, or if it's not working for you. But you know when you're in your mid to late forties and you find yourself--that's horrifying to think about a change in careers. Speaker 1: Now when--you mentioned women, African American women are really not represented like they should in this profession of being a chef and it's interesting when we reflect back, most of us we think of our family history, we think of our, you know, aunts and our grandmothers and mothers being the major cooks. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And being masters of what they were doing. Why do you think there aren't many more women in? Speaker 2: Well, the support system. They're either mothers or caretakers for somebody and they're not getting the support system from their husbands and what have you in the community. It's not flexible enough for them to be a mother first, and back in school to get their culinary degree or to work as a chef in catering or daytime so you're at home with your children later. Or restaurants being flexible enough to say, "Let's create a split shift for you, let's get you home by nine [o'clock]," rather than you walk in at eleven thirty. If you need to go to a school function or something, take those two hours and make it up on this end. A support system and giving it information to let young African American women know that we will work around you, because it's so much great talent out there. Story_ID: 643545 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think this has been a good interview. Well, after I slow down a little bit and get this set, what would I do with my spare time? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would continue on the course that I'm going, the Chef's Academy [Morrisville, North Carolina] here, teaching. JWU, Johnson Wales Charlotte [Johnson and Wales University Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina], going there teaching a class, the Chef's Academy. Teaching people about growing stuff and good ingredients and fresh ingredients, going into the inner city schools and letting kids know that--where that hamburger come--came from, live, walking, breathing animal. It's to continue to try to help educate. Letting people know that your body is a temple, watch what you put into it because all the antibiotics and growth hormones and stuff that's going into chickens and stuff. Once that life is over for that animal, those things don't just disappear, they come into our bodies and in saying that I don't want anyone to ever think that I'm so elitist that I don't understand that people have to feed and sustain themselves. I understand that, everybody's not gonna be able to buy free range chicken. I understand that. Everybody's not gonna be able to buy organic vegetables, but as a happy melody, a happy balance, you don't have always have to eat this pork, you can have a vegetable meal on occasion. You can take that chicken where you're smothering it with all of this stuff and roast it with simple herbs and good olive oil. You don't have to eat buckets of white rice. You can eat brown rice periodically and once again, it's just opening your mind up. Once the mind has been opened, it's so many bright colors out there, but because this is the way grandma did it, that's the way momma did it, this is the way I'm gonna do it. Open your mind you know. Teach the children very young that seafood is a lot better for you than pork. Seafood, and I'm a pasta person but in moderation. Eat whole grain pasta, it's ways of doing it. Now, if you want that big old bowl of spaghetti, rather than twice a week, do it every other month (laughter), you know. You don't have to block it all out. Cane sugar, use a little honey on occasion. Story_ID: 643546 Speaker 1: Okay, now I, one thing I've thought about I didn't ask about is that I know in the penal system now, I know a lot of young men are learning, at least how to be a cook. I don't know if they learn how to be a chef, but in prison you know to take advantage of some of the jobs that are available on the outside. I've noticed that over the last ten, fifteen years. Speaker 2: You know I laugh when you say that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ironically, Faye [ph.] that's what she does is continuing education for prisoners at one of the prisons in Alabama (laughter). So, you're right they are teaching them culinary skills. You know how to cost out a menu, how to shop, how to eat healthier. How to take of your body once you leave out, because believe it or not the food in prisons and stuff is good food. It's portioned properly. It's not this tons of calories, I mean you, I'm sure they have ways of getting the junk that they want, but that's a lifestyle that they're teaching 'em trying to break that habit so when you're back into the general, main population you bring those good habits with you. Story_ID: 643547 Speaker 1: You were explaining I think off camera how--about B qrade potatoes and I mean things that you grow being purchased by the prison system, I think? Speaker 2: Yes, it's like we as an American society, we don't want a potato with a blemish on it, we don't want a cucumber that's not a perfect shaped cucumber. Well the prison system has started to buy the B grade product. What they use to do with it is just turn it back into seed potatoes, leave the cucumbers out to rot, or some companies would buy some of the sweet potatoes and make animal dog food or whatever, but by doing that the penal system buying these things using them integrating, they're getting great fresh vegetables feeding to the inmates. Inmates are learning to bring this back so when they're back out with their families or--they've learned a lot of nutritional facts. Story_ID: 643548 Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As I told you before I'm sort of a humble, shy person. I'm not a flashy person at all. I'd like to be remembered as a person who gave a helping hand to those that needed it. A person that tried to help educate because I strongly believe in education. To educate people so that they can do better for themselves and to know their surroundings and just all around be a better human being. If you help one human being to be better, you've done a great job. Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you so much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: My pleasure, thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 643549 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're recording sir, go ahead and tell us who we're looking at? Speaker 2: This is my [maternal] grandmother, Willie Mae Royal [Willie Royal], who's the matriarch of the family, and I'm really not sure the year of this but she must've been in her early thirties. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I just popped that one off. Speaker 1: Well who's this? Speaker 2: That's my grandson. Speaker 1: Okay, you don't want his picture? Speaker 2: Yeah, you can use it, that's just. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, wait, let me, okay go ahead, next? Speaker 1: Go ahead? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: This is my grandson, Walter number three [Walter Royal III (ph.)] and he's six years, five years old there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay got it. Speaker 1: This is my mother, Ida Mae [Ida Royal Reynolds] and mother would've been in her early seventies here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My son, Walter [Walter Royal, Jr.], and that's his graduation from high school. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sorry, sometimes this camera doesn't like to focus. Speaker 1: Oh you've got your finger on a little light (unclear). Yeah, it's a little, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There we go. Speaker 1: This is my son, Walter, at a very young age. He must've been about two with his first Dallas Cowboy [Dallas Cowboys] jersey on. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Okay. One second, yeah, that looks good, okay. Speaker 1: Nope, it's not focusing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, it's good, go ahead, next. Speaker 1: Okay all right. I'm trying to do all the little ones that (unclear), they're in the basket. Speaker 2: This is my ex-wife, Faye [ph.], that's her wedding portrait. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is one of my oldest and dearest friend, Rick [ph.] and Carla [ph.] and their son Daniel [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, there you go. Okay. Speaker 2: This is my son, Walter, his freshman year at Troy State [Troy State University; Troy University, Troy, Alabama]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My mother Ida, Ida Mae and this would be her--well, four years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: You can stick some on the table behind you too. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you can lay me on the table behind. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: Okay, I was trying to get the smaller ones first so. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is me, [HistoryMaker] Walter Royal, one of my fishing outings at Ocean Isle [Ocean Isle Beach, North Carolina]. We like to fish (laughter). Speaker 2: Which one on here has (unclear)? Speaker 1: That's my partner at the Crescent Cafe [Durham, North Carolina], I was younger and that's my son, I just stuck that one in there. So, I start with Don and then Walter and myself. Don Wexel [ph.] who was my partner at Crescent Cafe, my son, Walter, when he was about five; and that would be me at a very young age, pre-gray, and me as Walter. Story_ID: 643550 Speaker 1: That's me, Walter, again, that's my high school [Emore County High School, Eclectic, Alabama] graduation picture. Look at that bow tie. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Man it's big. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: I dropped that one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is there way to take that out of the glass? Speaker 1: Let's not use that one, it will peel if we try to. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Need to go and get 'em free. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is Walter, Jonathan McLamb [ph.] and Lumbrazo [Joe Lumbrazo]. That was the first cystic fibrosis benefit dinner we did. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, I go all the way back and back across? What I do? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you could do the three standing and the two seated. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Like that from left to right. Speaker 2: We have Jim McGovern, who's the general manager of Angus Barn [Raleigh, North Carolina], Steve Thanhauser, one of the owners of the Angus Barn, [HistoryMaker] Walter Royal, Jill Highsmith--Jill is Miss Angus Barn, she takes care of all of us and get us to where we need to be and the Van Eure, the other owner of Angus Barn. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is an angel. Hanza Holy [ph.] worked for us for years. Hanza had never had a problem or miffed, never saw him crossed in his whole existence at the Angus Barn. He departed from us a year and a few months ago. Speaker 1: Where was he from? Speaker 2: Asheville [North Carolina], but he worked here with us all this time. Speaker 1: Walter Royal, Stephanie McSwain [ph.] and Alan McSwain. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is there an occasion or? Speaker 1: That was right after 'Iron Chef America.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is Walter Royal; this is when he was working at the inn of Bonnie Brae [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is the heaviest frame on earth. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I don't know what it's made out of (unclear). It's an iron thing for 'Iron Chef.' It's one heavy frame. Speaker 2: This is Walter Royal taking a break when we owned the Crescent Cafe [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, this thing is heavy you could fry (unclear). Speaker 1: Let me grab a little water here. Speaker 2: That's my son, Walter [Walter Royal, Jr.]. He was in the second grade. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's a picture of Walter at some party my mother gave right before Faye [ph.] and I got married. What a big old knot on that tie. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah that is a big (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is my son, Walter, his first baby portrait. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right Speaker 2: This is myself, Walter when we were in Dallas [Texas] doing a competition for Southern Chefs. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is my daughter-in-law, Tammy [ph.], my son Walter at their wedding nine years ago. Speaker 1: This is my mother, Ida Mae [Ida Royal Reynolds], a portrait that she took right before she had her first stroke, probably ten, twelve years ago. Speaker 2: This is Walter and my father Columbus [Columbus Ransaw]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, and again was there an occasion for that? Speaker 2: No, just a family visit. Speaker 1: This is my son, Walter, when he was in the fifth grade. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's what you call (unclear). I didn't see the expression (unclear). Speaker 2: This is Alice Eure, she was the owner of the Angus Barn, a true angel amongst us and myself Walter. We were at a dinner party at her house...