 Story_ID: 21680 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Jesse Eugene Russell, J-E-S-S-E, middle initial E, last name Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 4/26/48 [April 26, 1948], and I was born in Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: All right, and so what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a, I'm the CEO of INC Communications Technology. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: It's 5/16/2012 [May 16, 2012]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at our headquarters' location which is 25 James Way, Eatontown, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21681 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up and they only, they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay sure, go ahead. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, turnip greens. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, probably May. Speaker 1: Okay and do, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, Columbia, South America. Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Yes: "Never let anyone else define success for you." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21682 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we're going to ask about your mother's side first and then put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Mary Louise Glenn Russell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mary Louise Glenn Russell. Speaker 1: Okay can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, M-A-R-Y, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, Glenn, G-L-E-N-N, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I want to say May, it was May 23rd, and I'm struggling with the year, she's passed away so I'm struggling with the year. Sorry about that. Speaker 1: Now how old was she-- Speaker 2: Sixty. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: How old was she when she passed or-- Speaker 1: No, when you were born. Speaker 2: I think she was in her twenties. Speaker 1: Twenties, okay. Let me see about 1924 or '25 [1925]? Speaker 2: Yeah somewhere around there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Yeah, probably only to my grandmother. Right we, we lived in Nolensville, Tennessee. We're, we're from--it's a small town outside of Nashville, Tennessee and-- Speaker 1: Nolings? Speaker 2: No, yeah, like Nolens, N-O-L-E-N-S-V-I-L-L-E, Nolensville. Speaker 1: Okay Nolens-- Speaker 2: Nolensville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. All right and okay what did your grandmother do for a living? Speaker 2: She, she, she worked on the farm. Speaker 1: Both your grandparents. Speaker 2: Both my grandparents lived on a farm in Nolensville, Tennessee. That's where my mother grew up at as a young kid, on the farm, which was outside of Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay, now did they own their own land or were they-- Speaker 2: They owned their own land. They were able to--there, there was an award of land to African Americans and my grandfather received plots of land outside of Nashville in Nolensville, Tennessee, and that's where my mother grew up at. Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: That's sharecroppers right there, they, they were given land as sharecroppers. Speaker 1: So were they or their parents-- Speaker 2: Their parents, my mother's--my grandfather and grandmother were given sharecropper land, right. Speaker 1: Okay so this is, this is like--I'm thinking that they were born around the turn of the century. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah because my grandmother passed away, she was--I forget how many years ago, but she was almost ninety (years old), I think like ninety-two, ninety-three. My grandfather passed away earlier. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Now what, what were their names, your grandparents? Speaker 2: The, the--my grandfather was Henry Glenn, and my grandmother was Bertha Glenn. Story_ID: 21683 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] grow up in Nolensville? Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up as a kid in Nolensville, Tennessee. And then moved--my grandmother [Bertha Glenn] moved to Nashville [Tennessee] and my mother moved with my grandmother to Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay now did your grandfather [Henry Glenn] pass or something? Speaker 2: Yeah he passed, he was involved in an accident, in a fire that was actually on the farm and he passed away, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay so, so she moved to, to Nashville and, and brought your mother with her and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how old was your mother you think when she-- Speaker 2: I'm not sure of her exact age. I think she may have been in her teens or maybe a little older. Speaker 1: Did, did she go to high school in Nashville? Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to elementary school. She only went up to the eighth grade. Speaker 1: All right, okay so now what did your mother say about growing up? Did she, did she have any stories that she-- Speaker 2: Nothing other than she wanted to get off the farm and into the city where, where she could have a better life, right. Working on the farm and taking care of pigs and chickens and cows, were not what she wanted to do. So she wanted to get to the city where she could get--have a better life for her kids and to get a job, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 21684 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Charles Albert Russell, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Charles Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Also born in Nolensville, Tennessee. I'm not sure of the date, but I know he was older than, than my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell]. Speaker 1: Okay and what, what do you know about the Russell side of the family? Speaker 2: I only remember my father's sister, which was Christine. And she, she also had farmland. My whole family grew up in this Nolensville--my ancestry and that they were given land through the process many years ago where they gave African Americans or blacks land to farm as sharecroppers in that area. And I just remember her because we would go to another plot of land, which was separate than where my [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Glenn] and grandfather [Henry Glenn] lived, over to where my father's family was and they had land just like my grandmother and grandfather did. Speaker 1: Okay now sharecropper is different from owning land. So are you, are you saying that they were sharecropping and then they were given ownership of the land? Speaker 2: No, they were given ownership of the land. They actually owned the land, right. The, the land was only sold off probably maybe thirty, forty years ago, right. The people came in during the growth in Nashville [Tennessee] of country music. And they were able to--I guess developers bought the land from the African Americans and then they used it to build subdivisions and very expensive homes for many of the country music stars that moved to Nashville, Tennessee during the big boom of country music. Speaker 1: Okay, so Nolensville is sort of a suburb of-- Speaker 2: Is a suburb of Nashville, right. Speaker 1: A rural suburb-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a rural--it's more modern now but at the time it was a rural suburb of Nashville. And Nashville started to expand and then it grew out into that area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so it wasn't very long trip to go from Nolensville into Nashville. Speaker 2: No, I actually--when--because we didn't have cars when I was young, so I just remember with my older brother walking from Nashville because my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] separated from my father when she was very young. I was the baby at the time, so my older brother, we used to walk from Nashville all the way out to Nolensville. That's what I remember, so it's a---for a young kid it was quite a haul, right. So thinking of it today, it could have been ten miles that we had to walk, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's about the distance, maybe further. Speaker 1: Now do you know anything about the Russells? Do you know, did, did your father or anybody on that side of the family ever talk about his parents or what they-- Speaker 2: Not really. I, I--like I said, I was a very young kid when my mother left my father. I--my mother raised ten, ten kids by herself, right, you know and so I was number five, but I was the youngest when she left my father. And I knew very little about my father. Most of my learning and understanding came from my mother and not my father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you didn't really--did you-- Speaker 2: I never had a rela--I, I've met him, but, but I never had a relationship with him, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Not to talk about. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay do you know what he did for a living? Speaker 2: No, he was a, he was a farmer, right. He, he worked as a sharecropper. I remember when I traveled out with my older brother when I was very young, he farmed land for a white farmer out there and he had a house on the other side of the creek. It was a, it was like a waterway, a creek that ran through the land. So they had built him a house. This is what I remember. They had built him a house on the other side of the creek and that he took care of all of the animals and he also farmed the land (unclear), which was for the white farmer. That's what I remember, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 21685 Speaker 1: Okay so when you were growing up, your household consisted basically of your, your mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] and you and your brother and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah mostly my--I had two sisters and it was a total of eight boys and two girls. And what I remember growing up is those, those ten kids in the house together with my mother. That's what I remember. And most of the guidance and direction that shaped my life was done by my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was, she was just a very, very strong lady and she controlled the house almost as a military facility, right. Because she had eight boys that she was dealing with and that she was very religious and as a result, we were only allowed to do very limited things from what I recall and, and most of that involved going to church. We would go to church during the week and on the weekends we would go to church maybe two or three times a day is what I remember, but she was very religious and believed that it was very important for her children to grown up and to be leaders in the church and, and that was extremely important to her. And that many of my--right now I have three brothers that are ministers in Nashville [Tennessee], you know and that I was the only child that left the family and moved out of Nashville. Everyone else still remains in Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21686 Speaker 1: Now what denomination was your mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell]? Speaker 2: Primitive Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. I've heard of that before. Now can you describe what that-- Speaker 2: Well it, it's--I guess the best way to explain the, the church. It was filled with music, lots of teaching in terms of particularly the kids. So we had Sunday School and we studied the Bible and my mother ran the, the choir. She was a singer. So she sang in the choir and plus she administered and ran the choir. And the kids either were in the choir with her or we were in Sunday School. But it basically was I guess more Evangelical type of Christian if you know what's talked about today. A lot of music with the teaching of God from the Bible. My mother read the Bible a lot and studied the Bible and we talked. But there were--I don't ever remember during the time when I was growing up that--either my mother was a very strong leader in the church--but the, the preachers as we called them, right, were all male from what I can remember. But the women were very strong in the church. So the religion did not at the time endorse women as ministers or preachers in the church, right. You could only be a part of what's called the Mother Board. And you basically took care of the church and oversaw the children and so forth that were in the church, right. Speaker 1: Interesting. Mother Board sounds like a computer concept. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, right, that's more like the motherboards that we think about. You know that's what I live with today, right, I think of motherboards as the computers. But no their Mother Boards were very special. You could think about it almost like a fraternity. It was a very special arrangement and they garnered tremendous amount of respect. So to get from just a member of the church to be rise to, to be a member of the Mother Board was a very, very important contribution to--of your success and commitment to the church. And, and to the ministry of the church. Story_ID: 21687 Speaker 1: Now from what you know, I know you don't know much about your father [Charles Albert Russell], but I, I can see you've been influenced more by your mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell]. But who do you think you take after the most in terms of looks and talents? Speaker 2: No, I, I think most people view me that I'm almost exactly like my mother. You know my mother was lighter skinned, but I'm--in terms of mannerisms, in terms of thought processes, in terms of, of more control oriented, you know in terms of wanting things to be processed in a certain way or to be organized in a certain way, that was more my mother's teachings and, and how she--and the discipline, and the focus on excellence at whatever you do were things that she just preached and, and I just became a part of that, right. And that sort of shaped my life to a large measure. But my, my, my father on the other hand, the, the only things I remember is when my brother took me out to see him. He, he was loving but distant in that he did not, he didn't instill in me the kind of discipline that I had saw from my mother. It was more freedom with him. So I guess while my older brother who had lived with him, which I never did, liked going to visit him because we had more freedom to do things with him and, and he allowed you to go here, go there. We would leave at times to travel from the farm where he worked all the way over to the land where his sister lived in, in--those are the, sort of the memories that I have of, of him. Not a lot of discipline, but very loving and very supportive, but just not a lot of discipline. Speaker 1: Now is he the father of all, all-- Speaker 2: No, he was the father of--there were ten kids. The original five were to the older five, I was the baby of that five, was his kids and then the other kids were by a different father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So can you name your brothers sisters and, and put yourself in order for us? Speaker 2: Yes, right. My oldest sister is Mildred Louise, my--after her was my brother, older brother, which was Frank Darrus [sp.] Russell, so it was Mildred Louise Russell, Frank Darrus Russell, and then after that was my next sister was Ann Russell, and then there was my brother which was Richard Russell, and then it was Jesse Russell, which is me. And then after me it was my next brother, which was Joe Russell, then after him is Bob Russell, then there's Larry Russell and then Randy Russell was my younger one. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21688 Speaker 1: Now can you describe the, the home you grew up in? I mean did, did you grow up in the same place or did you move around a lot? Speaker 2: Yeah when we were young because my--we were very poor. And so because my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] had so many children, we moved quite frequently, but it was all inside of Nashville [Tennessee]. But mostly they were--the term that became known later was like the projects. But we moved into poor neighborhoods at different places in Nashville. Mostly east Nashville or north Nashville were the places, and ultimately--my mother worked two jobs is what I remember. So she was able to make enough money to--she would, she was very committed and dedicated to her children as I was explaining earlier about church. So she--the--was just--she would not allow anyone else around her children, so she protected them very closely. And so she made all the money for us and she, she paid for everything by working two jobs. But she could only afford meager housing. I know most of what I remember was our diet was pretty, pretty simple, right. We ate mostly just rice, you know for breakfast is what I remember. Rice and oatmeal. And then for, for dinner most of the traditional soul foods of turnip greens, corn, vegetables, that was mostly for dinner. But that was pretty much what we ate, right. I mean it was not a lot of variety in the diet or anything like that, right. It was, it was pretty basic. But we all grew up healthy and that she wanted us to go to school and learn and she made sure we all went to school. Some did better than others, right of the ten. But that was--her motivation was to make sure the kids got educated and learned more than she did, right you know and that was the way, the way it happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Well did your [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Glenn] ever live with you? Speaker 2: Yes we lived with my grandmother when--I remember living with my grandmother when we first came to Nashville, when my mother left my father [Charles Albert Russell] and her kids. Then we lived with my grandmother for a short while. And then as my mother got a job, she then got her own place and then all the kids went with my mother, right. But we did stay with my grandmother. My grandmother was, was a very disciplined person. She--I never viewed her as loving as my mother in terms of the protection of, of, of the kids because she had so many kids. You know my grandmother had, I think it was close to seventeen kids and her, her other daughter had a very large number of kids. So when--it was just hard for her to view the grandkids as, as very nurturing because it was so many of us, right? So but my, my, mother was different than my other aunts with her kids, right. Her kids were sort of special to her in that she kept them very, very close to her. That's what I recall from how I saw my cousins compared to how I saw my brothers and sisters and, and my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Now your mother seemed like she had a, she had a really--a job to do and she, she had two jobs. Now what, what, what jobs did she have? What did she do? Speaker 2: Yeah she, she--during the day time she worked at a dry cleaning place, right, where she pressed clothes. They had these machines where she pressed clothes. And then when she got off from that job at night, she went to a--she was a dispatcher at a cab company. So she would work pressing clothes during the day and then in the evening--we rarely saw her, right, because she would come, make sure the kids got food, then she would go to, to the cab company. And then she would handle dispatching of cabs, right. Speaker 1: So what would her day typically be like? Would she be there in the morning when you were getting ready? Speaker 2: Yeah, she would be there in the morning and she would prepare--she had sort of this special rice that she would fix in the morning, right, which was incredibly filling. I guess she wanted to make sure we were full to go to school. So she, she had this rice that she would fix which was a lot of butter and sugar and raisins that she would fix. And she would do the same thing with oatmeal. And so we would eat that in the morning and I guess her view was that would keep you full most of the day, right, you know and then she would leave and go to, to the cleaners, which is the place where she pressed clothes. And then when she left from there, she would leave and go--I think she came home briefly, but then she would leave again and she would go to the cab company. Speaker 1: So did you see her after school? Was she around at that time? Speaker 2: Not, not, not that much. Mostly she had a process where the oldest one took care of the kids. So all of us as we grew up to a certain age, then you became responsible for the kids underneath you. And so everybody knew and everyone had jobs and responsibilities in the house of what to do in terms of cleaning and washing dishes and things like that. So it was, it was almost military like in terms of what everyone had to do, but it was very organized, right, in terms of what we do, what each person's responsibility was. But it was always clear that the oldest one took her place when she was not there and everyone understood that the requirements from my mother, or the direction from my mother is that you listen to your sister [Mildred Louise Russell]. In this case it was my older sister and, and it went down the line that way, right. So as the older ones left the house, the next one in line would take charge of it and that they would direct all of the other kids that were in the house, right. Story_ID: 21689 Speaker 1: Okay now you say now you were in church like several times a week. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That, that on the days that she [Russell's mother, Mary Louise Glenn Russell] was not working, and sometimes during the weekdays, right. I don't think, know at this time she had two jobs or not, but we would have to go to choir practice which is for the choir, singing. And then we would go for Bible studies in the, in the evenings during the week. Typically it's like maybe two times a week. And then on Sundays we would then go to Sunday School in the morning, then we would go to eleven o'clock church service, then they'd normally have something in the afternoon, then we'd go back for 7:30 service at night. Speaker 1: So that's like a full day. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was always a full day. That's what I remember during most of my upbringing, is that on Sunday it was a complete, full day of church, right. You were not allowed to do anything but be at church, right. And I guess that was her way of keeping control and making sure that her kids didn't get into something, or get into, into the wrong group or the wrong crowd, so she kept them very close to the church. Speaker 1: So I take it there were some days during the week that she didn't work-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as a dispatcher or had the evening free to take you to church. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes that's the way it was, right. So during those special days that when she was with us, she thought the best place for us to be would be in church with her. So we would go with her to the church, right, when she was not working. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Cause I don't know if she--as a cab dispatcher, I suppose--did, did she ever work weekends, like Saturday? Speaker 2: No she, she, she, she worked the late shift with cabs, right. Cause I remember later on she would go out at maybe like ten o'clock or eleven o'clock at night and work through the night and then come home in the morning, right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it wasn't--so there was time in between getting out of the cleaners before she went to the, to the cab company. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so it seems like a busy schedule. Speaker 2: Well she, she was--yeah, she, she kept a lot of things for us to do even though it was all locked around the church, right. But she, she kept us pretty busy, right. So it was very difficult to, to get into other things that you might want to do, right. That was my early upbringing and that's what I remembered, right, from, from the way it was. It was very structured and very strict about what you could do. Speaker 1: So would you go to the church by yourself? I mean-- Speaker 2: Typically not, she would, she would always--she didn't like us going places without her. The way we go--my--we would all just sort of trailing behind my mother, right. As we got older, then she would allow us because we participated in different things in the church. Then she would allow us to go, right. But during the earlier years, we all just went with, with my mother, right, and we did exactly what she said. I mean she was--that was the way it was, right. Speaker 1: Okay, now you said there were lots of restrictions on what you could and couldn't do. Like for instance what would be--what about music and sports? I mean what, what kind of restrictions did you have? Speaker 2: Now we, we--the, the--in the neighborhood where I grew up at, the only place you could play sports, whether it be basketball or football, which is primarily what we played, was in a park up the street from the, the projects or the low income housing area where we lived, right. She would let us go up there and play. But, but it was not any--she let us play outside. It wasn't like we all had to stay inside or we just had to go to church, right. The church was her way of teaching us, you know, values and principles that she felt were important and what I remembered about it was that she felt that by going to church that you got a chance to hear the word of God and to understand what's important in life and things that you should or should not do in terms of how you carry on your life, right. So, so she felt that was the best place--the teachers--and those were principles that came out of the Bible and those are the principles that we learned, right, in terms of how you treat people--respect for other people, things like that were things that were critically important to her. And she felt the best place to teach those values and principles were in the church. So as--you can imagine with eight boys we were a group to handle as you can imagine. So we all didn't play it straight, you know, when some would run off and go here and go there and she'd have to corral them again. But I remember I was treated kind of different than a lot of my brothers and sisters. She, she spent a lot of time with me, a lot of nurturing time with me. I was one of the kids that seemed to--whatever she said, I would do it, right. I did not venture out into any other place that she didn't want me to go. Story_ID: 21690 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Let me deal with the sights first. All right. What I remember is that in my neighborhood there was really not good places to play, you know in terms of--because it was not like a lot of green grass and things like that because of just the sort of poor, urban environment in Nashville [Tennessee] where we had to grow up at because of affordability. And so what I remember is that every now and then on Saturdays we got a chance to go down to the Capitol, Nashville was the capital of Tennessee, and they always had pretty grass, perfectly groomed and that we would all run down there just to play football on the side of the Capitol. And that was the special times maybe, cause I, I was a very good runner. And that I, I loved football and so we would just wait till Saturdays where we could run down by the Capitol and play football on the Capitol grass until the police, the guards run us off, right. So--but that's the, the sight that I remember that was so vivid about me. The sights where I grew up at were not pleasant to see. You saw a lot of poverty. You saw a lot of people living in very sort of desperate circumstances. So it wasn't a pleasant view for me, so the ability to go down by the Capitol where all the rich people would go, was a special opportunity for us so we could just see something that was more pleasant to see. But my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] never--that was one thing you were talking earlier about her releasing the reins on us to a certain extent. But she didn't stop us from going down there and she was more concerned with us in the neighborhood where we were growing up at and trying to make sure that, that we didn't fall prey to some of the sort of negative things in life that existed in the environment in which I grew up in. So--but when we went down by the Capitol, nobody you know, nobody bothered us and she wasn't worried about us and, and that--you saw a brighter side of life than where I grew up every day. I would say when you talk about the smells, I mean the, the sounds were, were, were more just people fighting, complaining, loud, negative interactions among people was what I remember the most, right. And but because my mother was so protective, I, I never felt fear in the environment, right, even though I saw things that were very negative and probably young kids shouldn't see that were extremely negative experience of human behavior and human interaction. But never got connected into it because of the protection that my, my mother had over, over us and the way she'd control where we go and what we did and so forth, right. I would say the--we talked about the sights and the sounds. The smell was the smell of poverty and desperation if I were--you know it doesn't sound like a smell, but it was a smell to me and, and it was the, the kind of smell even though our house was kept neat, but I just could see the, the filth and, and, and sights of, of and smells of desperation of people who lived in the community. And the only thing I can remember saying, and I used to say it more to myself than I did to my mother, is that, that there had to be a better life for me than this. And, and that seemed to become a driving force throughout my life that I wanted to get out of that sort of smell and sight and environment that was--it just, it just seemed like that I should have a better life. But I had a good life if you explain it from love and nurturing. But when you talk about the sights and sounds and smell, it wasn't a good life, right you know, and, and that was a life that I just from a very, very small, small kid and I remember probably the most desperate time in my life. And it's amazing that I can remember back this far. Story_ID: 21691 Speaker 1: But my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] got involved in an accident at the cleaning, at the dry cleaners, that's what we used to call it, called it the dry cleaners, I don't know what they call it today, but we called it the dry cleaners. And what happened was the press that she was pressing with accidentally fell and fell on her arm and, and completely disabled her. And, and burned her arm and disabled her. And that we all thought that that was the end of our family because without her working, there was almost no food and, and we went to welfare and we tried to get food and she, she--they gave us some food to eat during that timeframe. And that it had gotten so desperate for us that my mother said well look we, we have to eat. And she had given us a cup for us to go to, to the street corners where we could actually hold the cup where people would, would give us money to, to come back where we could buy food. And the, the thing I remember from, from that experience which is why it is so vivid to me, is that I concluded at that point in time that I refused to do what my mother said. That I, I wouldn't go do it and she, she was saying that we needed to do that to eat and that I refused to do it. And that was the time that was probably most vivid to me of saying that, that I deserve a better life than this. And I just refused to do it. And I had never refused to do anything that my mother told me to do before, but I wouldn't do that. And from that point on was probably the changing point in my life because what happened was I got so focused on getting out of that environment that nothing was more important than trying to educate myself and trying to find a way to have a better life. And it, it became a passion with me to get out of that environment. Speaker 2: Okay Story_ID: 21692 Speaker 1: Now well I guess the natural thing to ask you is like where, where you started school I guess at this point cause I suppose you, you had a message from someone, and I suppose it was at school that school was the way out. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I guess that's true. Now I think the, the--it was my chemistry teacher, but that was much later. When I was in middle school, the, the teachers--I was probably--I was not a very good student because our life was not that great, right, during that timeframe. So I was not a great student. And as a result, I didn't do very well in school and, and that when I got into the early part of high school is that I was--it was a chemistry teacher that thought that I had just a tremendous amount of talent, but just didn't have opportunity. And that--what he--I never forget these words he told me, he says that what you need is an academic epidemic. And I didn't understand it at that timeframe, but what he was trying to say to me that I learned later on in life, is that I needed to personally focus on educating myself and not depend on people around me to educate me. And that as I began to understand what the words meant, cause I didn't understand them when he first said them, but as I began to understand what the words meant, right, I began to focus better and I went from like say a C and D student to like an A and B student. And I did it all on my own. And, and I used a lot of the church discipline that my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] taught me to focus my education and focus on my education. And that's--the, the rest of it is kind of history. I went on to become the first kid out of that group of ten to finish high school and to go on to college and the rest of it is kind of history. Story_ID: 21693 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit. Now in terms of your mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] was she--how old were you when, when your mother hurt her arm? Speaker 2: I, I remember being more like seven or eight years old. Speaker 1: Okay so that was early on. Speaker 2: Yeah that was--I was very young, yeah. Speaker 1: Very young, you just started school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I guess at that age. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said before the break you said your mother kind of treated you special. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: As you were different and you know one thing you cited was that you would follow her direction without much question and you would-- Speaker 2: Yes. I, I would--my other, my other brothers and sisters were a little bit more rambunctious, right, but I used to--and I got teased a lot by my other brothers and sisters because I would always set up under my mother and that I'd listen to everything that she said. And if she said do something, I always did what she said, and that she would spend lots of time talking to me because she would come home. What I remember, she had a chair that she used to sit in. So she would come home and that because we didn't get a chance because she was working a lot of time, so we didn't get a chance to see her that much. So when she came home, I would always go and sit by her near this big chair, she had this big chair she used to sit in. And I used to go and sit by her and she would just talk to me. And she talked about all kinds of things, right. But, but mostly about things about life, right, you know and, and what I learned from that relationship and she always pampered me and, and that's why I always (unclear)--when she came home I would just go and where the other brothers and sisters would be out going doing this or that, then I would sit around my mother and, and she taught me a lot of stuff about people, how to interact with people. And I--you know I didn't know I was learning it at the time because she was just talking. But because I listened to everything that she said and, and, and tried to, to do what she said, right, you know I absorbed probably a lot more than my brothers and sisters did about some of the principles that, that she taught. But I remember that probably the most important principle that she taught me is just respect people. You know that--and I, I remember one experience where we were talking about I think somebody had gotten hurt up the street. There, there were two people that were drunk and the lady hit the, the husband, I think it was a husband, where she hit him with an ax and, and, and cut him, and I saw that. And my mother tried to teach me that all people are not violent like that. And she, she, she, she thought that life was special and you should value it. And, and as a result, it, it shaped my life even to the way I manage today and the way I have done the work that I've done over my career, is that any time anyone ever worked for me, the most important thing that I have always focused on is, is that people are investments, they're not expense. And that everybody has a, an important life story; it's just that nobody asked them, right. And, and that my mother was telling me about these two people and, and because she knew them, and, and even though the, the man got killed, right, but she was trying to explain to me that these were not bad people, they just happened to be in a bad situation. And, and as a result of that, I, I learned a lot about life, right, is that you should not judge people by the circumstances that they find themselves in because as she said, God always will never give you more things than you can bear and that you--whatever it is that happens is because God defined that that's the way it's going to be. But she also had another view of life which is that you can change circumstances too, right, if you are willing to put the time, the effort and the hard work into changing them. And those are the, the sort of sensitive parts of my life when I was growing up, things that I learned from her that sort of reshaped my life and redirected my life in terms of what I later did in life and how I was motivated and focused in life of wanting to have a better life, right, than what I grew up having. Story_ID: 21694 Speaker 1: Now, now did you mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] ever recover from the accident? Speaker 2: Well no she was not able to go back to, to work because of--she still worked at the cab, she was able to work at the cab company but not at the cleaners. Speaker 1: What exactly happened to her, I mean you said the press-- Speaker 2: Yeah I think the way, the way you do it you have to stretch out the clothes on, on the thing and then you reach up with this hand, or whatever, I think it was this hand, you reach up and then you pull down the press and then you pop it back up. And so evidently when she popped it back up, it didn't lock and she had her hands down trying to, to stretch out the clothes on the, on the machine, on the board. And the, and the press fell down, right. Speaker 1: So, so it made it impossible--could she use her arm after that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she, she--but she had almost--she had very limited use of her arm as a result of that, right. So she was not able to, to work as she had worked before. Speaker 1: Okay I'm not a doctor, I don't know why I'm asking these kind--but, but you think it was nerve damage or something? Speaker 2: Yeah it must have been, yeah cause I--it had to be at least third degree burns or something. Cause it burned all the skin off of her arm, you know because you could see it was incredibly damaged, right, you know so it must have burned the ligaments and things like that in her arm because she lost mobility in the arm. Speaker 1: She couldn't raise it back up when it fell, it fell--it was that heavy. Speaker 2: Yeah it was that heavy, yeah. It was one--I guess it must have been one of these older ones in the old days, right, there were huge presses that they used for pressing the clothes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so she worked as a cab dispatcher but she couldn't get any other-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no. So, so then my older brothers and sisters got jobs and they worked and that's how we made it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we lived off of welfare. Speaker 1: Yeah, four siblings ahead of you, so nobody finished high school. Speaker 2: Not in front of me, no I was the first one. Then after me, my brothers, my brothers finished high school, yeah. Speaker 1: You think--did the older ones feel compelled to go get a job, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, they all had to go get jobs, right, that's the only way we were able to live. So they sacrificed for the younger ones, right, yeah. So they all got jobs and then my older sister got married and then they helped out. Her and her husband helped us, and then my younger sister got married and then they helped us, right, that was basically the way it worked. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21695 Speaker 1: Where did you start in grade school? Did you, did you go to more than one? Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were only in Nashville [Tennessee] where I was growing up at, we were only allowed to go schools for Blacks. So there were roughly four schools. Unfortunately I may have gone to all of them because we had to move around to find different places to live, right, you know, but I remember when I was very young we lived more out in the rural area which were called the rural area or the outer city limits of Nashville. So we went to a school called Haynes High School. Speaker 1: H-A-Y? Speaker 2: Yeah, H-A-Y-N-E-S, Haynes High School. That's what I remember when I was going to grad school, I mean grade school because we, we got on the bus, right, you know so we had to get ready in the morning and we got on a bus and the bus took us to school. Speaker 1: Now that was after kindergarten, or did you go to kindergarten? Speaker 2: No I never went to kindergarten. Speaker 1: That's just first grade through-- Speaker 2: Yeah this is just grade school. So in first grade, second grade, like that. Speaker 1: So Haynes you went there from first grade to-- Speaker 2: It must have been all the way up to the sixth [grade] I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, then after that we moved into East Nashville from what I can remember, and then I went to school at Meigs High School, which was the East Nashville school for Blacks. And that, that's where I went to school. Speaker 1: M-E-I? Speaker 2: Yeah, M-E-I, yeah G-S I think it is, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. It's interesting now a lot of people, it took me a while to figure this out, but a lot of schools in the South for Black kids were named high schools. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Even though they--because they actually did go. Speaker 2: They go all the way up, yeah that's right, and Haynes was that way, right. You went all the way up to the twelfth grade. But there were, there was like Pearl High School, Cameron High School, Meigs High School. I mean those were, were, were the schools and that's where you went, right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you were at Meigs for how long? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I went to Meigs, it might have been up to the eighth or ninth grade, something like that, right. Speaker 1: Okay and then-- Speaker 2: And then I left from there, I only spent a short time. We moved over to north--that was East Nashville. Then we moved over to North Nashville and then I got moved to a school called Pearl High School, which is actually turned out to be a very famous school out of Nashville, but Pearl High School. And I only went there for a short period of time. It was a very, very rough environment in that area where Pearl High School was, which is-- Speaker 1: Now is this area around Jefferson Street? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, matter of fact it's near Jefferson Street. It, it's like the, the area where we grew up was a, a development, housing, low income housing area which was on 16th and Herman Street. But it was like right down the street across the railroad tracks from Pearl High School. Speaker 1: Okay and so, so you were there for, for the tenth grade, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was only there for really the, the tenth grade at Pearl. My--there was a lot of--we didn't have--it wasn't guns at that time. But knives were very prevalent and it was very dangerous in the area in that I got involved in a brawl in high school that involved some knives and so forth. And it scared my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell]. So then she moved us out and we moved to South Nashville. And there I ended up going to Cameron High School. Speaker 1: Once again, an all Black high school. Speaker 2: All Black, yeah these--that's why we moved over there, right. She wanted to, to get us away from Pearl. So then we moved over to Cameron. Speaker 1: So you did eleventh and twelfth grade. Speaker 2: Yeah, and did eleventh and twelfth, and that's where I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay did you come out in '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: '67 [1967], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 21696 Speaker 1: So now you said early on you weren't that focused on school, right? Speaker 2: No, not when I was over at Meigs [High School, Nashville, Tennessee] and, and even at Haynes High School [Nashville] I was not that focused on, on school and that I didn't get focused on school until actually I went to Cameron [High School, Nashville]. I, I did a little better at Pearl [High School, Nashville], but not really great, you know so-- Speaker 1: Did you like school say, say at Haynes, did you like school? Speaker 2: When I started out as a young kid, I, I did, right but I just--my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] wasn't around and she--because of the work. So I didn't get a lot of guidance about school because my older brothers and sisters were not into education, right. So I didn't get a lot of direction about focusing and, and doing your homework and doing that kind of stuff. It just wasn't important because my mother wasn't around, so, so, the, the--my brothers and sisters only could control us to a certain degree, right you know. So I didn't, I didn't spend much time with school during that timeframe. Speaker 1: So there was no one there to say do your homework, have you done your homework? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do your homework? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Or help you with your homework? Speaker 2: Yeah, no I never had any of that, no. Like I said, I mean I, I just wasn't a very good student because I wasn't motivated to educate myself or wasn't disciplined enough even though my mother taught a lot of discipline. But when she left again as they say, when the cat's away the mouse will play, right. So when she left, we all did--we got out of the house, right. And then when she came back, we all came in the house, you know because we knew she was there, right. And, but no school was not really that important. Speaker 1: Now you said that you were the most disciplined one and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah well I can, I can imagine that you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, even so if you were taking guidance from them, nobody's saying go do your homework, right. So, so the minute your mother is gone then, then the older ones just let us hang out and do what we wanted to do, right. You know and that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay so mostly outside of the house. Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was mostly in the, in the yard or out--because we always lived in these development, you know underprivileged development environments. So the houses were stacked on top of each other. And so there was a lot of kids just like you. All of us were in very poor, desperate environments, right. So we just played outside among the various houses, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay now then you--when you--your mother had the accident when you were in about the second grade, second or third grade, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I--it--we were, I think we were in Meigs. I'm not sure of what part, cause we kept moving around to different parts of Nashville, wherever she could afford to get housing for us, right. So we moved a lot of places. So I'm not sure of exactly where we were living at the time she had the accident, right, you know. But, but, but I know I was very young. Yeah that's what I remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 21697 Speaker 1: What you're doing now as an electrical engineer, suggests you had a strong math background. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you manifest that early on, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I that was actually--math was natural to me. Even when I was in--even though I wasn't focused on education or anything like that, right. But in math classes or the math classes in early, in middle school and even in elementary school, it was never a problem for me. I, I could do all the work and I never had to study. So I always did very well. If you look at my grades, I always did very well in just one course, right, which was math, and then nothing else, right. But, but I never had to study for it, right. It just became--it was just very natural to me. And I, and I did it because it didn't require any work, right. So I didn't have to work to do it and to be good at it, so I became good at it without working. And so it was more natural for me. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about electronics? Did you have a TV at home, a radio, telephone? Speaker 2: No, no we did not have a TV, we had a radio but we didn't have a TV until my sister got married and she lived with the family. So my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] had got a room and her husband got a black and white TV at the time. And so-- Speaker 1: This is about what--how old are you? Speaker 2: I must have--I still was--it might have been in middle school or something like that, right. But I, I remember, you know cause they wanted to keep us out of their room, right, you know so we only--they let us come in on Saturday morning. That's where I learned to watch cartoons. So we all would just wait for--cause we didn't have a TV in our house, right, so in their room they had a TV. So always on Saturday we got a chance, she would let the other kids come into her room and watch the cartoons in the morning on Saturdays. That's sort of what I remember, and that was my first exposure to television, right. And so I would, would go in there to, to watch TV on Saturdays. And you can imagine once the TV broke, right, there was a problem, you know. Because we all depended on that, and that I remember that, that all my other brothers and sisters were, were at least more brothers, right, were not willing to touch the thing. But I went in and--which did not know until much later in my life, was a very dangerous thing to do. But I went in and I took the back off of the TV and at the time we had these vacuum tubes. And so I took all the tubes out and I--we used to have a, a television repair shop. So I would take the tubes out one at a time, right. Today I don't even know how I had the nerve to do that, but I, I did it, right. But I took all the tubes out. I would take them one at a time down to the TV shop, he would test them. And then I'd go back, I'd put it back until we found the tube that had blown out, right. And, and that was my first exposure to, to electronics, right, was I got the TV working, right and everybody was happy, right you know. But, but that was one of the more pleasant parts of my early life, right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21698 Speaker 1: You were describing your personal bravery of opening up the back of the television set. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. No I opened it up and saw all of these tubes that were lit up right, you know, but wasn't--obviously astute enough to, to turn it all off, right. But, but I didn't--(unclear) unplug it from the wall and that I started pulling out the tubes and taking them down to the TV repair shop and the gentleman that ran it, just thought that I was nice kid. So he, he actually taught me lots of things. But he would taught me how to test them cause he had a tester. So he would let me test the, the, the vacuum tubes in this tester. And that I was able to keep doing that and I got the TV back working and, and all my brothers and sisters were, were delighted, right. Because they teased me a lot because I, I was sort--I got special treatment from my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] all the time. So they, they picked on me a lot. But, but it was great that I was able to do that because they, they then start to say oh, you're okay, you know. Like almost like you're mama's boy, right but no, no actually this, this brother is pretty good, right. He got the TV working. So it, it improved the relationship between my brothers and myself because they, they didn't all the time view me as oh, this is sort of mama's pet kind of scenario, right. Because I showed that I could be aggressive and, and that if I needed to get something done I could go get it done, right, you know. And, and I did that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I imagine the TV was really special for them I guess cause your family had it kind of late, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, no, no, I think--sure TVs were out before then, right. But, but, but during that timeframe we got it late because we just were very poor so we didn't have funds. My mother couldn't afford anything like that so we never had the opportunity to, to have a TV. Speaker 1: So you said it was no radio at home. Speaker 2: Yeah we did have radio. Yeah we had radio but, but we didn't have a television. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. So what kind of music did, did--were you allowed to listen to on the radio? Speaker 2: Gospel, yeah gospel. We had an African American radio station. Story_ID: 21699 Speaker 1: I was asking you about the television and radio and you became the fixer of the television. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, not the radio, the television, right. But I, I think I do recall fixing the radio. I became the kid that when something didn't work that my brothers and sisters would, would come and get me, right and I would go fix it, right, yeah. If it was electronic, at least the television, radio, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Did you have telephone? Speaker 2: We had a telephone later on, right. But during the early part of life we didn't really have a telephone. But later on my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] was able to get us a telephone, right. But that was much later. Speaker 1: Okay so did you like to take things apart and put them back together again when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well the, the--I, even when I was very young I did that, right. I had sort of a natural, like a tinkerer. You know I don't know a good word for it, right, but, but I--whether it was the toys that the kids--because as you know the toys in the neighborhoods where I grew up, they were always broke. They actually started out broke, you know what I mean. So I, I could fix them, right, you know I sort of had the ability. And I wasn't afraid to try to put it back together again when, when the other kids broke it, right you know. But I did that when I was very young. I was, I would always go out and, and I would fix. When somebody got--they would give it to me and then I would figure out how to put it back together once they had torn it apart, right. Speaker 1: Okay so you were saying in school you, you were good in math. You didn't have to really study that hard for that, though you know math you have to learn the, the way to do these problems, you know solve these problems. But you--so I suppose I would say that you paid attention in class, at least to be able-- Speaker 2: Yeah not as--(unclear), not as much as you might have thought, right. But somehow or another I was able to figure it out on my own, right you know. So whether I paid a lot of attention--but when I got older, like in say the tenth or eleventh grade, you know because I was doing calculus like in the eleventh grade, right. Which was kind of unheard of for a black school, right. But I had a really good math teacher and she let us go, go ahead, right. So where some of the kids were doing trigonometry, I was doing calculus, right you know. Because I, I just liked it you know and I was inspired by it, I was just motivated by it. It was easy for me to do and, and plus it, it helped my self esteem because it--other kids saw me as oh, he's a really smart guy, right you know. Because math was hard for them and particularly a lot of the ladies, the young girls in the class, the math was hard for them and it was easy for me, right. So it got me a lot of attention because I could do it and I could teach other people how to, how to solve the problems and, and things like that. And so it, it became a self-esteem builder for me too because I was just naturally good at it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21700 Speaker 1: I know I read where you said there were more--you were interested in athletics a lot. Did, did you spend--did play on any of the school teams? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I played football at, at Meigs [High School, Nashville, Tennessee], right. I played on the football, but I, I didn't play long because I kept--I was very good as a running back, right, and that my idol was a guy named Lenny Moore [football halfback; played for Pennsylvania State University (Penn State), State College, Pennsylvania, and the Baltimore Colts]. I don't know if people even know who, who he was right. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, but he played for the Baltimore, cause we only saw the Baltimore Colts, Colts when we had the foot--the television. So he was my idol and I was a very good running back. But I kept getting hurt all the time, right you know so it, it wasn't a very successful career for me. So I, I didn't play nearly as long as I would love, but my dream was to become a professional football player and to be like Lenny More. And that's all I ever wanted to do, right and that--I just kept getting hurt. So it, it didn't work out for me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 21701 Speaker 1: You said Pearl High School [Nashville, Tennessee] was really rough. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: What--and got in a big fight with someone. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, right. Yeah we, we-- Speaker 1: Did you get hurt? Speaker 2: No I actually didn't get hurt. It was sort of by the stroke of luck I guess, right. But they, they had gangs at the school, and that I had gotten into a hassle with a guy inside of the regular school day. And then it carried on until after and we lived in a neighborhood where the projects was right across the street from Pearl High School. So a lot of the kids that went there came out of the projects, even though I was in--a little further away in the low income housing section. So there was always rivalry between the guys in the low income housing section and the guys in the projects. And so I got into a hassle with one of the guys in school, you know during the cafeteria period. And then when I left, cause my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] was picking me up from the school. And then they, they called in the guys from the projects and they had knives and I had nothing, right. But I was about to fight these guys with knives and then my mother just by stroke of luck, my mother drives up just before the fight started and then everybody came running out of the school to break up the, the gang fight that was happening on the front of the lawn. And then I got in the car with my mother, and then we left. And it was, that incident--she decided that she needed to get me out of the school cause she was concerned with my safety. And so she moved me to Cameron High School, which was across town in the south, South Nashville. And then I started to go to school there. Speaker 1: Okay, so the family didn't move, but you moved. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, they moved me to another school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, and then later on my mother ended up moving the family to South Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21702 Speaker 1: I know years ago we heard about one of the first black quarterbacks of the NFL [National Football League], Jefferson Street Joe Gilliam. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: They call him Jefferson Street and it was implied because how he fell from his earlier success that Jefferson, the Jefferson Street [Nashville, Tennessee] part had something to do with it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You got any reflections on that? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no Joe, his name was Joe Gilliam, right. We never called him Jefferson Street Joe. I think he got the name Jefferson Street Joe when he ended up going to Tennessee State University [Nashville]. But in Pearl, at Pearl High School [Nashville], he was just Joe Gilliam, right and that he played on, on the, the--he played on the football team. But I never thought he--I obviously thought I was very good, but I never thought he was very good. So I had tried out there as a running back because when I left Meigs and I was planning to play at Pearl, and that I ended up not being able to play because of the, the fight incident that, that took place. But Joe was, might have been two years behind me. So he was just, just coming into Pearl after I had already left. But I kind of knew him from that area over there because of the way the school was set, right, with the number of grades. So that's where I knew him from. But everybody knew him because his father was out at Tennessee State University, right you know, so--but, but, but he, he, he was, he was a very good quarterback in terms of his ability to throw, but we didn't think he was that good of a player, right on the field, right. But he had such a great arm, right that, that he got all the passes. I mean otherwise everybody's--Joe was okay no matter what, right. But yeah, yeah I remember Joe, Joe Gilliam, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And I, I guess I was alluding to the fact that Jefferson Street, I mean the whole, I mean that area around Pearl was a pretty rough area. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no we all used to hang out on, on the corner of 17th and Jefferson Street. And, and the, there--matter of fact that's actually how I got started to go to college. But, but if you go like I guess you would say north on, on, on Jefferson Street you'd head out toward Tennessee State University. And, but right on that corner, you had Meharry [Medical College, Nashville] on one side, which was the hospital where a lot of black doctors went, and then the other school was Fisk University [Nashville] where the more affluent, the blacks went. I, I never had a chance to, to go there. But later on I actually ended up going to a special program at Fisk University, right. But we always used to hang on that corner and that's just where everybody went and it was on the corner of 17th and Jefferson Street. But just where people congregated at, you know the kids and so forth that lived in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21703 Speaker 1: Now at Cameron High School [Nashville, Tennessee], this where you met the chemistry professor? Speaker 2: Yes, that was at Cameron High School. Yes the, the, the, there it was more of--I also liked science. Not only was I good in math, right, I was also good in science, right. And again I, I have no idea why those subjects were easy for me. You know and that I could learn the periodic table and it was like no problem, right you know. But I had trouble writing a, a, good sentence. But I, but I, I could do, I could do calculus and nobody understood that, right, you know. How I could do what I could do in chemistry or in physics but still couldn't write a sentence you know. And but, but no it was really I think he, he thought that I had such natural ability in science and mathematics, right that he just thought that I should be something or I should be somebody, right you know, or I could be somebody. And, and that was really what, what he would always communicate to me. Speaker 1: Okay now what was his name, do you remember? Speaker 2: No, I, I don't remember his name. I know he's passed away, but I don't remember his name. I only remember the, the principal cause I was always in his office for something, which was not Dr. Rogers, right. Principal Rogers is what I remember, right, O.R.--Jackson, no O.R. Jackson was his name. But, but I remembered him. Speaker 1: So, so, okay so you actually got in trouble in school. I didn't, I didn't realize that from what you were saying before. I thought you probably would have been more-- Speaker 2: No, no, the, the--when I first got there because I came from Pearl [High School, Nashville] and so you know it was, it was more--that was sort of the school where the kids were pretty good even though there was a project right across the street from Cameron as well. But it seemed to be a more calmed environment than the project areas that were near Pearl. So those schools were right where the projects were, which is where all your African American people would grow up in, right. You know and so, so yeah the end--but it wasn't really like getting in trouble the way you would think. I didn't cause a lot of problems because my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] would, would have a fit, right. So--but I was just distracted because I was just in a new environment, you know. I was out of place because I didn't know anybody in South Nashville and I was the new kid. And matter of fact, all of the, the kids in, in Cameron thought that oh man, this guy is really--they didn't know where I'd come from, they didn't know any of the background. But they said boy, this is really a smart--cause everybody gravitated to me. Even the more well-to-do African American kids liked me, right. Even though I was poor, they all liked me because I was--they thought I was just a really nice guy, right. Because they didn't have any of the previous history, right you know. So it was like a new beginning for me. And, and in that, but it took me a while to get settled in over there. That's how I knew O.R. Jackson, which was the principal because I would end up having to go down to his office, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you're taking like coll--the college track of courses. You say you had trouble with some of the other courses that most people breeze through, you, you're like hitting--you're excelling in the math. Speaker 2: Yeah like I was in a Spanish class, disaster, right. English class, all English, disaster, right. But if you take me into science and math classes, I was the star, right you know. Story_ID: 21704 Speaker 1: Now was it, was the TV repair guy like your first introduction to science and stuff? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. That was a--I had no idea about any of that. Those were not--math and science and even education was not something that was talked a lot about in, in my household, right with my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell]. It was more religious kinds of things that was talked about. So we, we never talked about any education because she had only gone to the eight grade so she, she just knew to--she wanted us to go to school, but she didn't have any background or reference to talk to us about the value of school or what would happen in school other than it's good to go to school, right, you know. Speaker 1: Did, did the heavy emphasis on, on belief ever contradict or get in the way of, of science for you? Speaker 2: No, not really, no. Well only when I went to a special--they had a special ed [education] program for underprivileged kids out of the, what we call the ghetto. And so they, they used kids that went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] because that was a very well-to-do, a very successful school at the time. And that--they would come to the projects and the housing development area and kids would be able to go up there for the summer. Speaker 1: To Fisk? Speaker 2: To Fisk, right and that they taught you literature and English. And they also taught us some science and math up there as well, right. Speaker 1: Is this Upward Bound? Speaker 2: Yeah it was like an Upward Bound program, right. And so they used the kids at Fisk to teach the other kids. And that was my first run into the dilemma of, of, of I guess you would say the, the Bible teaching of my mother, right, with the teachings of science, right, is where I first began to see that conflict because the, there were people in the class that, that had come from a similar background as me that believed in the origin of the universe versus Genesis and, and that they--I, I never will forget the experience because I was more on the science side and that I remember one of my friends who was a girl that was in the Upward Bound program with me. And that when I started to say I didn't believe in Genesis, I believed you know, in the more scientific perspective on it. And that she would just cry every time I talked about that. Because she just couldn't believe how I could think like that, how could I think that God didn't create everything, right. You know even though my mother taught me that God created everything, you know. But, but I remember it. But every time we got into that debate, she would just cry, you know and, and she liked me a lot. But she, she just felt like I was going in the wrong, I was going in the wrong direction, you know. But that's about the only time I ever remember an encounter about that, right you know, but--but no, I believed in the Darwin Theory and the, the origin of the universe that way. And it just motivated me because I could understand how it could come about and it--because I loved science so much, right, I would read and learn about it on my own, right. And that I could--and it made sense to me, you know. I could rationalize what was happening and I could see how, how it could happen. And as a result, that because a real driving force. And so I became more on the Darwin Theory side then. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21705 Speaker 1: Now did in high school or in college, did you learn about any other black scientists, any black scientists when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No, I learned about black scientists in high school. I was, I was told about black, black scientists. I mean they, they would--you know the, the shoemakers and the cotton gin. I mean I learned you know, I learned all of that in, in, in high school. It was taught in our high school. And so I, so I, I knew about black scientists. But it wasn't taught in a way that motivated me to be a scientist, right. It was yeah here's all these guys that invented these things that happen to be black and they're all dead, right, you know so it wasn't--you know it wasn't particularly motivating, you know to, to learn because it wasn't something that I could envision myself as being. So it didn't occur to me that, that, that I--but you know that I could be a scientist or an engineer. It was just not something that was even talked about or was even relevant to me. It didn't fit with me, right you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time. Speaker 1: All right so as, as you become a senior in high school, then what was, what kind of counseling did you have about college? Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any counseling in high school relative to college. What happened was the, the chemistry teacher [Cameron High School, Nashville, Tennessee] knew about this Upward Bound Program up at Fisk University [Nashville]. This was just before I went into my senior year. And that he helped get me into that program. And that it was when I went up to Fisk during that Upward Bound Program, that they had all kinds of games that we would play during the math sessions, right. And then we had these sort of intellectual conversations during literature and English. But during the games that we would play in the math thing is that I was able to, to, to solve mathematical problems without having a lot of the theory behind it, right, you know. And that I was, it was just natural for me up at Fisk in this, in this Upward Bound Program. And one of the teachers I think was, was talking to my--and that's where I first learned about the word engineering, was in this program. And that she was just, she just made an off-the-cuff comment about "Oh, you should be an engineer, you could be a good engineer," right, you know. And that I asked the question about well what is engineering and what do they do? 'Cause I just wanted to get out of high school and, and have a better life. I had a different motivation than, than what they had, right. So if I, I needed to go--then like the chemistry professor told me hey, you can go up there, you can up your, your background and improve it and you might be able to get a chance to go to college, right. And that inspired me. That's why I did it, right. That's why I went and got into the program. But then when she mentioned that to me, I was saying well what, you know what is engineering and, and what do they do and they would explain it to me. And then I said well what is the most difficult, what--of all of the--cause she was talking to me about civil engineering, you know. The mechanical engineering. And so I--and electric, she mentioned to me about electrical engineering, you know and architectural. So she told me about the basic four engineering, she was just telling me what they did. And so I asked the question well, well what's the most difficult one? And, and she said well, well the electrical engineering is the most difficult one. It requires a lot of mathematics. I said oh, then that's the one I want to be. I'd like to be an electrical engineer, right, you know and that we went through the program. And then it was over. I mean I never had anymore connection to that but it, but it stuck with me that oh, I want to be an electrical engineer, right. You know and that's how I got my focus in life to what I would do after high school. Is, is to figure out how to become an electrical engineer, right. And it came out of that program that I was in where they told me about the different fields of engineering. And that I was, I just wanted to be the best at, at whatever it is that I wanted to do. And, and they said that's the toughest so I thought--but the real thing that motivated me wasn't that, is that the, the issue that issue that motivated me was my dream in life was to be able to get a job and make $30,000 a year because I had gone to a house for one of my teachers when I was in high school. And they were--told me that the house in this good neighborhood where blacks could move cost $30,000. So thought if I could make $30,000, I could move out of the place where I was and move into this place which today I look at it--I mean if I went back there today and say boy that's not really a great house, right. But at that time being able to, to get into an environment like that compared to where I grew up at, I just wanted--if an engineer could allow me to make $30,000 a year I mean that was like great for me, right. If I could just do that cause I move into this very nice place in Nashville were more affluent people lived, right. Which is what motivated me to, to do it, yeah. Story_ID: 21706 Speaker 1: Okay so, so you didn't have any counselors that would speak to you as a senior about National Negro Scholarship Fund or anything? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no I never--no one ever talked to me about that. I, I didn't have any counseling about going to college. I mean the high school where I was going at the time, just didn't talk about that, right, you know. You had in that high school you had kids like me. You had all the black kids, you know in, in South Nashville. Then you had kids like me, then you had the kids who, whose parents were better off, you know those kids talked about college. The rest of us, it just wasn't on the radar, right, but how do you go? Where do you get the money, and how do you get into school, right? I mean just, it just didn't fit, right. So even if they did talk to us about it, when I went back to my neighborhood and my home it was no connection between it and so it just didn't fit. Speaker 1: 'Cause it seemed the aim of the Upward Bound kind of program would be to, you know, motivate the students and get them on a track to go. Speaker 2: Yeah but that came out of, of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], not in my high school. They just recommended me to go to the program. But in that program is where I did-- Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous) Fisk and-- Speaker 2: And the high school. Speaker 1: And the high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was like no connection between the two, yeah. (simultaneous) Story_ID: 21707 Speaker 1: What were your prospects at graduation? Had you figured out how, how to go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or had you, or were you still kind of-- Speaker 2: No, not at that time, right. I mean the--what the, the young lady that was working in the program [Upward Bound Program, Fisk University, Nashville] was telling me that Tennessee State had an engineering school. And so that--maybe they could help me get to that school, you know. And, and that they were able to make some connections. And that I remember there was a lady named Dr. Hudson. She had raised some money from the federal government and the program was called the Thirteen College Curriculum Program. So it was a special program that they would teach remedial courses to kids like me. And so you would get to go to Tennessee State for a year and you would take these remedial courses. And then if you did well, you know then you could go to college. And so the, the people that were in the Upward Bound Program connected me with Dr. Hudson's program. I guess they told them about my natural ability in mathematics, right. And so she then put me in, in the program she picked--it was not a large number of kids like that. She selected these kids, some of them out of this Upward Bound Program and other places. And that's how I ended up going to Tennessee State. But I wasn't allowed to go into engineering school, right. I went into a special program and then once I finished the program, I was able to, to go to engineering school. Speaker 1: Okay so did it take a year to get through the program? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a year's program. And that I actually did very, very well in the program. And that I was able to apply to the School of Engineering coming out of that program and that's how I got into the engineering school. Speaker 1: Just for the record, you graduated in 1967 from high school, right? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 21708 Speaker 1: Okay so you were talking about the graduation experience in high school [Cameron High School, Nashville, Tennessee], '67 [1967], right? Speaker 2: Yeah in '67 [1967], O.R. Jackson was the principal and I don't know somebody else there, maybe a guidance counselor, I'm not sure who, but they would read out the top twenty-five students over the loudspeaker. And I will never forget this experience, right, because I, I had--by the time I got to the twelfth grade I was almost like a straight A student. So I'd gone from a really bad student in the seventh, eighth, ninth grade, some of the tenth, to eleventh and twelfth, I was like one of the top students in the school. And that I remember sitting in the class and they came on, that morning it was my homeroom class I think it was. And there were other people in the class, and everybody was all--Jesse is going to be the top student. Clearly if I didn't make the top ten, nobody could believe I was not going to be in the top twenty-five, right, it just, they just couldn't imagine it, right. And then they started reading out the names, and they kept reading the names and reading the names. And they never called my name. And, and the whole class was like it must be a mistake, right you know, that that my name didn't get called and that I, I noticed my, my friend which was a girl, right, was sitting next to me. And she, she just couldn't believe it. You should be in the top ten, right? Why is it that you're not even in the top twenty? And it turns out that they, they integrate the grade point averages from I guess maybe the ninth grade or the tenth grade up. It might have been the ninth or something and that my grades were so bad that I ended up near the bottom of the class, I don't even think I made the top 50 percent of the class. I was in the bottom, very bottom of the class, right. Because I, even though I made a lot of As in the eleventh and twelfth grade than Bs, it wasn't enough to overcome the bad grades that I had gotten before. But it was a shocker to everybody around me. But it wasn't to me cause I knew that I didn't do well early on. I wasn't expecting to, to be in, in the top of the class. But it was just sort of a--the expectation of other people of me that was, the reason I was such a, sort of an awakening experience for me, is that other people had such aspirations for me. But, but I didn't have them, right, you know. But people around me had them and it was, it was, it was like motivating to me because you, you come from this environment where nobody other than my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell], cares what happens to you. But now people that are coming from the more affluent black community was like saying he's like us, right. You know he, you know they didn't see my childhood. But they all thought I was like them because I was so good in, in school in eleventh and twelfth grade, that I got to be with the, the more affluent black people as opposed to the groups that I was with before. Story_ID: 21709 Speaker 1: Now one thing that bothers me about that story is that--is, is you being enrolled in a remedial program at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] when you're making straight As at Cameron [High School, Nashville]. Now it, it--there's a disconnect there somewhere. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well what happened was--you mean at--I was enrolled in the remedial program at Tennessee State [University, Nashville], right--. Speaker 1: State, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, no what happened was that the, the way the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] scores were done I guess, right is that I did--even though I was very good in the math and science, but in all the other courses the way it got graded, my scores were probably the worst of any student that was considered going to Tennessee State University. You know so I did not do well on the college entrance exams, even though people thought I was incredibly bright. But I performed very poorly on the tests. And that the only way I could go to college was to go into the remedial program. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's how I ended up in the remedial program, right. Speaker 1: You said you did well in that program--(unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah but then once I got there, you know the, you have to--there's an experience I didn't tell you about. That, that when I was--prior to graduating in the twelfth grade from Cameron, I had gotten a job at a manufacturing location near Cameron, out in that same area. It was Aladdin Industries, it was a manufacturing company in Nashville, Tennessee. And I, I was work--when I left school I would go there to work, that's how I helped contribute to my family, right which was--my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] because she had--couldn't work, so all of us would work and go to school. But during working at the factory, I, I worked on an assembly line where we made thermos bottles and that I had the worse job with them because when the thermos bottles came off the big pressing machines, they were full with oil and dirt. I mean basically oily and greasy. I would have to get them and move them over to the line where we washed the, the bottles. It was a really nasty job. But I was able as a high school student, to become over time, cause it was a lot of ladies that worked on this line that washed the bottles and I delivered them from the machines over to where you got them washed at. But I was, I was able in the time when I was working as a high school student, I went from picking the dirty, oily bottles up, thermos bottle over, taking them over to the machine, to I became the lead person for running the whole crew on the line that washed the thermos bottles. And so I was doing very well in, in a manufacturing job as a high school student in that one day--once I found out I could get into this remedial program at Tennessee State, my mother picked me up at Cameron to take me to my job and I told my mother that I'm quitting. That I'm going to go to college and I'm going to become an engineer. And my mother cried and I always tell this story. My mother--I'd never seen my mother cry, cause she doesn't cry, right. And so my mother cried because she thought that hey look I was going to graduate from high school and I had a job in the factory and I was doing well in that, that that was for her the most successful thing that you could imagine for a kid that was her favorite kid, right. You know because the other kid, kids they, they worked in auto repair, I mean but to get into this factory and to be able to be a lead on this group where I'm managing these older ladies that were running this. She just thought that was something she could just talk to everybody about how successful I was, and I was quitting. And, and she started to cry. But the, the thing that I remember about this was she never told me not to go to college. She never said that, right. But she, she cried because she thought I was destroying my life, but she didn't tell me no you should, should, you shouldn't, or you shouldn't. She, she just let me decide and I quit that, that night. And, and I, I decided to take the opportunity in the Thirteen College Curriculum Program to go to college, right. And I went there and that's when it all started. That's how I got out. But it was a very dramatic experience for me for, for, for her because she just couldn't believe I would quit such a valuable thing and become an engineer. Because she didn't know what it was, but to me it was something that I really wanted to do, right, and she didn't stop me. She let me do it, right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21710 Speaker 1: So now did you have to work at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] when you went to school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I worked, yeah I, I worked from the beginning. I--they, they had special--because they wanted to make sure we learned. So they gave us student jobs to do. So, so we were able to make money when you were actually going to school, right, but I couldn't stay at Aladdin Industries, right, so--but they put us in dorms. They took us, they put us all in dorms and there were kids from Nashville and from Memphis [Tennessee] and they mixed us up. And they put us in dorms and we stayed together. We were viewed as this sort of special group of kids, right, you know which was not the most positive thing in that respect, right. But we're the special group of, of kids that weren't good enough to be in college, but was in college, right, you know. But that, that's where it all got started for me, yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay. So who at, at Tennessee State do you consider to be like a mentor or what was there any, any, or were there any professors or, or teachers or administrators? Speaker 2: Yes, right. The, the one that had the most profound effect on me was Professor [Satinderpaul Singh] Devgan, Dr. Devgan. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: I think it's D-E-V-A-N-G, or G-E or something like that, Dr. Devgan. It's like D-E, and then it's V-A-N-G-E or something to that effect, yeah. I think he's still there. But he was the most difficult professor in, in the school of engineering, electrical engineering. But he taught a course that was just incredibly inspiring to me. And the course was Electromagnetic Theory, which is radio waves and propagation of radio waves. And that, that course and plus he was just very supportive because he just thought that I was a really hard working student, right. And I worked very hard in, in college, right. All of the things that, that transpired before, it was to me a chance to start over again. And to start a new life, right, compared to the life that I had experienced before because nobody knew how tough my life was before. They just--once I got out of that program, right and didn't look like the special need kids, right you know. Then I was like everybody else, right. But, but more than that, I actually was very good, you know in, in college and, and I excelled in, in running different groups. You know like the IEEE [Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineering] Society and things like that. I became a leader, you know, on, on--not on campus, but more in the Engineering School. And everybody loved me in the Engineering School, right and it just--it was a different, more positive perspective of life compared to the way I grew up, right you know. And--but Dr. Devgan I would say--and Dr. [Mohan] Malkani was the other one, Dr. Devgan and Dr. Malkani. Speaker 1: And how do you spell Malkani? Speaker 2: I think it's M-A-L-K-I-N-A, something like that, Malkina--both were Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. They were Indians? Speaker 2: Yeah, Indian. Speaker 1: Okay so, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah but those two people are the ones I remember the most about the--in my college days in, in the School of Engineering, yeah it was those two individuals. And, and then there was--later on, later on there was a new professor that came. And his name was Dr. Tanner, T-A-N-N-E-R, Tanner. And Dr. Tanner, he came more when I was more going toward a senior. But Dr. Tanner came from Stanford University [Palo Alto, California] I believe. I think he went to Stanford University and then he came there to teach and that he and I developed a very good relationship because in, in a lot of the circuit courses that he taught, I just seemed to be just incredibly--I loved engineering. It, it wasn't like--it, it was more like a passion with me as opposed to the rest of the kids where you just--you wanted to take the courses again, get through the courses. I actually just loved doing it, right, you know and so you didn't have to force me to go to the lab and to do my experiments, right. You know I would just stay in there and I would work on them and I would do them, right. And he just thought I was incredibly motivating to the other kids, right, cause he's trying to get the kids to work harder, right. And that me, he didn't have to motivate me to do anything. I just, I wanted to do it, right, and I worked hard at it. Speaker 1: Okay I mean you can't ask for more than that from a student. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: In terms of a student-motivated or self-directed. Story_ID: 21711 Speaker 1: So now any other aspect of campus life [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Did you, did you participate in, you know, fraternities or-- Speaker 2: No I started out like I was looking to be a Kappa, and then I decided that no I, I was just too focused on my studies in, in engineering. Then I said no, I, I, I did not have a very social life during college. I, I just loved being over at the Engineering School and I loved being in the lab, and I loved working on different projects in, in, in the lab over at the Engineering School. So I just stayed mostly in the Engineering School. So it went from early on in life where I was more outgoing to in college I became more focused and just very motivated, right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay now those days at Tennessee State, this is at the--Tennessee State had been involved--I think the black students in Nashville had been involved in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: High level. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, prior to you, you know, coming-- Speaker 2: No, no, no that was, yeah, well no I was there during the time when Dr. Martin Luther King was shot, and that that was probably one of the most frightening times of my life at Tennessee State because they--the night that he was shot, people started throwing things and throwing firecrackers out, cherry bombs we call them, out the windows and it was a lot of disruption on campus. And they brought in the, the National Guard in that the, the National Guard turned and started shooting at the dorms. So it was, it was a, it was an incredible frightening experience, right during that, during that timeframe because none of the kids on campus had weapons. And so it was a foolish thing that, that happened, right, but, but luckily nobody got hurt, right, you know. But no that was--but I was there during that timeframe, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah that would have been early on. Speaker 2: It was around '68 [1968], yeah. Yeah I was, I was a sophomore. Speaker 1: Spring, you were a sophomore. Speaker 2: Yeah I was a sophomore in that timeframe because I had started in '67 [1967], so it was the next year. Speaker 1: So, so did--was there, there a black student organization on campus, or-- Speaker 2: No, not, not, not really. I mean mostly it was the fraternities and the sororities that, that were the only real student organizations. But you, you had the typical ones for the university. But if it wasn't going on in the Engineering School, I didn't really participate that much in it. I was, I would say you would not have found me doing things on campus that would have not have been connected with the School of Engineering. But most of the organizations in the School of Engineering, I was involved in. But, but not so much in the broader, broader campus, right. Speaker 1: So did being on the campus broaden your general education about, you know the black community and about the world do you think? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the, the--because the--you have to sort of take where I grew up and the kind of dialogue that took place there and the language that was used. And then you move me into a university setting where the language and the dialogue was radically different. It, it gave me a much broader perspective about other paths in life that I could take that was different than my previous experience. And it opened up my eyes because even though--whether I've gained a lot from a lot of student interaction in the broader context of the school, but the, the professors in the School of Engineering were very well educated. And, and very motivated to, to, to support the students, to encourage the students. And as a result, that was like a whole new environment for me, right. And I just relished that environment, right, that was like the cat's meow for, for somebody like me, right. That, that I could see the other side of life, right, and how positive it could be, right, and how--and what you could do because I'd begin to really learn what engineering was all about, right. It was different than having the young lady up at Fisk [University, Nashville, where Russell was in the Upward Bound Program] tell me what it was about, to actually start to experience it, right. And that changed my life, right. Just, just the--being in that group and interacting with people that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21712 Speaker 1: So as you were, you know, nearing the end of your stay at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], what were your thoughts about school? Were you thinking of going to graduate school at that time? Speaker 2: Yes, yes the--Dr. Tanner, which is the gentleman I talked about earlier, right, I mean he, he thought--there was another professor I didn't mention, it was Dr. Carlisle. But the both of them thought that, that I would do well to go to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], right, and that I should not just take a job but I should go to graduate school. And, and that I remember distinct--a conversation with Dr. Carlisle because he wanted to work at this place called Bell Laboratories [New Jersey]. I didn't know what it was, right, you know, but at the time. But then when he told me about it and as I learned more about it, my whole perspective in life changed and I wanted to work in a research and development environment. And more important than that, I wanted to, to work at Bell Laboratories. That was like the most important thing for me once I, once I learned about it and I learned about all the inventions that took place at Bell Laboratories and, and all the, the things that people described to me. I just felt that if I could get there and, and work in a place like that, it, it would be a dream come true for me, right because even though I didn't know it as much when I was young, but the ability to explore and to take risk and to do things differently, and to imagine things that didn't exist, you know, those things I didn't appreciate that when I was young, but as I learned about the inventions at Bell Laboratories, I didn't realize that boy if I could just do that, look I could create all these new things that I'd only dreamed about, but I could actually work on them and, and make them come to life, right, was like special for me. But Dr. Carlisle told me, oh man, nobody can get a job at Bell Laboratories, right. So, so he would know--he thought it would be great for me to go to Stanford. But he didn't think that I could get into Bell Laboratories, right, you know because I, I think he had said oh well he had tried to get in there, they wouldn't accept him, right. And so here's a guy teaching me which I think is great and he couldn't get a job at a place that I want to get a job at, at a time where blacks were not readily accepted at that institution, right. So it was more like one of these things where you dream about something that may never happen, right. But--go ahead. Speaker 1: But you, but you, well when you graduated, you were the top student-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I went from the kid that couldn't get into Tennessee State University and had to go through a remedial program, to graduating in the top, number one in engineering school. Yeah, so, so I made a lot of strides from when I entered to when I left, right you know. But that was because of a lot of support from the professors there and people wanting to see me do well because I worked so hard. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21713 Speaker 1: So even after this discussion with Dr. Carlisle about Bell Laboratories [New Jersey], you actually were hired by Bell Laboratories, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how did this happen? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, well their--Bell Laboratories because I learned, later learned this. But there was a black organization in Bell Laboratories, a few blacks were, there right, and that they were fighting that there should be more blacks given an opportunity to come to Bell Laboratories and that these black colleges, which are historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs], that they felt that they should have some of the black guys that were in Bell Laboratories to go to these black colleges and see if you could find more engineers there, right. And as a result, you could get more blacks coming into Bell Laboratories. And so they sent a guy down to look at students and everybody was super excited that Bell Lab, Bell Laboratories would send a recruiter to Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee], that was like--that just didn't happen right. I mean they would never do that, right. But they sent this black guy down to, to just see if there were any students at Tennessee State University that was good enough to be sent off to graduate school. Because you had to have a master's [degree] or a Ph.D. [degree] to go there. So they would send you off to graduate school to, to--then you could come to work at Bell Laboratories. And so everybody kept telling this recruiter we got--we have this guy here which is Jesse Russell, right, you have to talk to this kid, right you know. So all of the professors were just, just--it was almost like, like, like PR, you got to go talk to this, this guy. This kid has tremendous potential, right, this black kid that was Jesse Russell, right, had tremendous potential. And the guy asked to speak with me. So I went over to the Career Office and, and I met with them. And he was incredible, incredibly impressed with me because not that I, only that I had very good grades and academic performance, but I had a dream of working at Bell Laboratories. And, and so he just say hey look, I can't guarantee anything for you, right, but what I'll do is I can get you an interview. So they made arrangements for me to go to Holmdel [New Jersey] which is the place, I mean if you know anything about Bell Laboratories, I mean to be able to go to Holmdel, New Jersey to Bell Laboratories was like--they had just built this new huge mega facility for scientists and engineers, right. And that I get to go there to be interviewed. So it was, it was like incredible to be able to just go there and be interviewed, whether you got a job or not, right. I mean just to be in the place was incredible. And that I went there and that I, I got interviewed. Everybody was white that I interviewed with. But everybody liked me. You know and I had interviewed at IBM [International Business Machines], it was a lot of other companies that were recruiting, I was very highly recruited out of the School of Engineering. And--but I only would consider jobs in research and development, I wouldn't consider any other jobs. Because I was being highly recruited, so I wanted to do what I wanted to do. So I went to Lawrence Livermore [national Laboratory, Livermore, California], I went to a lot of the government research institutes, but it was nothing like going to Bell Laboratories. And so when I got there and everybody talked to me, that they were incredibly impressed with me and they, they made me a job offer. And the people at the school were shocked that I, that I got the job offer, right. But they made--they gave a job offer to me and then they paid for me to go to Stanford University. They paid everything for me, they paid for housing, everything. And I went there, I did my master's and I came back to Bell Laboratories. Speaker 1: That is, that's the way to go to school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right, well compared to the way I went to school, that's a much better way to go to school for sure, right. Speaker 1: Stanford, so you graduated from Tennessee State in '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: And then I graduated from Stanford in '73 [1973]. Story_ID: 21714 Speaker 1: All right, so it just took you a year to get your master's [degree; Stanford University, Palo Alto, California]-- Speaker 2: Yeah I got out in a year. Speaker 1: So what did you--did they require like a thesis or something, or what did--what was the requirements? Speaker 2: Yeah we did a thesis. I think we did a thesis and you did graduate work and that I had started to go for my Ph.D. [degree]. And so I was going through the qualifiers and that I had just gotten married, 'cause I had my first kid in 1972. And so at the same time I was going there. So they put me in--in that I just was tired of being poor and so I decided not to--I, I decided not to complete the qualifiers for, for, for the Ph.D. at Stanford [University]. And I left to go back to Bell Laboratories [New Jersey] and, and that's where I ended up staying. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did you meet your wife at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I met her at, at--she actually went to Fisk [University, Nashville], but I, but she was the, the lady that was sitting next to me in the high school [Cameron High School, Nashville] class where people couldn't believe that I was not in the top ten, right. That's who I ended up marrying, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay so you met her in high school, that's good. Story_ID: 21715 Speaker 1: In terms of your master's degree [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], like what were you focusing on? What aspect of electrical engineering? Speaker 2: It was computer engineering. It was my primary focus, right. At the time I had gotten into holography, holographic work, but, but my passion was E&M theory, electromagnetic theory, radio waves, the same thing that I had gotten from Dr. [Satinderpaul Singh] Devgan [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] when I was in undergraduate school. You know I just liked that. But I did my master's in computer engineering. Speaker 1: Okay so it's called a Master's in-- Speaker 2: No, it was Master's in Electrical Engineering. Speaker 1: M-S-E-E. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's M-S-E-E, Master's in Electrical Engineering, right. Speaker 1: All right, okay so, all right so '73 [1973] you go back to New Jersey. Speaker 2: Yeah I returned to New Jersey after completing my master's, I returned to New Jersey and at the time when I was at Stanford, a company called Hewlett Packard had just invented a silicon chip referred to as a microprocessor. And it was one of the very first ones that was done by this company called Intel I guess they'd come up with the silicon. I worked [unclear] someone here at Packard on their computers and then Intel had come up with this chip called--I remember it was the very first one. It was called the 4004, it was called a microprocessor. And, and that I became enamored with that because I was doing my master's in computer engineering. And that I was--when I came back to Bell Laboratories, I did some of the very first work in applying microprocessors to developing what they call telecom management systems, or, or which manage the telecommunications network, right. I was in that area and I created a new platform using microprocessors. It was the first time it had been done to actually design a system that could monitor and track the flow of traffic through the telecommunications network, right, using microprocessor technology. It's one of the first base platforms that was done inside of Bell Laboratories. And I did that almost right off the bat when I came back. You know I just got into it and right away it was what I had dreamed about, right, is that I could come back and all of a sudden I'm doing really innovative stuff that's not been done before, right you know. And, and it's a black guy and he's doing it, right, you know right it was like--that--in an institution that was not known for accepting blacks and giving them, you know, prominent jobs like that. But I was able to get in and just do the hard work that I rose very quickly and was doing some very leading edge work in the use of microprocessors for designing telecommunications systems. Speaker 1: Now tell us what is a microprocessor? Speaker 2: A microprocessor--the thing about--it's like a mathematical computing engine that runs on a silicon wafer. So they were able to put a lot of--prior to microprocessors, we had to do all the design of these computer based platforms like the mini computers and, and the big mainframe computers were done with discreet logic devices. And then when Intel came up with this device where you could actually write software that ran on the unit that could actually do all the same functions, and you could control devices and control machines with that. So this silicon, it was a simple silicon chip that you could put into a computer and make anything intelligent. So you could build new things and make them intelligent by writing software running on this silicon device, which was called a microprocessor. And that I did one of the first ones inside of Bell Laboratories, right. Speaker 1: Okay to handle phone-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we would, yeah we were actually writing--I designed a programmable system that could monitor the flow of traffic through the network so if there was every congestion, like on Mother's Day where you had too many calls going over certain circuits, where this would detect the flow of traffic and then it would redirect the traffic to a different trunk group so we could switch it from one trunk group to the next and make sure that the network didn't seize. So we could see the levels of traffic grow on the network and then reroute the traffic to other places. And so I designed the system to do that. It was one of the first ones that was used inside the Bell System that was electronic based versus mechanical based. Speaker 1: Okay, so was it one of the first ones or the first one? Speaker 2: No that was, that was the first--I mean the project that I led at that time as a young kid was, was the first application of microprocessors for telecommunications based applications because it had just been invented the year before when I was at Stanford. Story_ID: 21716 Speaker 1: But that's--I always had a knack for that, right, the things that looked difficult to do. I was just drawn to, to learn it. If it was new, I wanted to work on it, right and I was just--like I--being challenged was something that motivated me and inspired me. So if it was something that--it was the same problem when I was a little kid, right is that the toy break or the television break, right, that I was the kid that had enough self confidence to go try to fix it. You know if you say oh this is something new and people are not doing it, then I would go try to do it, right, you know. Speaker 2: Is there a certain way that you're, that you naturally think or was trained to think that enabled you to solve problems in ways that other people can't? Speaker 1: No I have--I really don't understand this myself personally. But I am able to somehow or another take myself out of the present and put myself into the future and, and look back at, at the present, right. And when I'm able to do that--a lot of people think it's a strange--that's why I never talk about this because it's a strange thing. But a lot of times and even today my wife bothers me with this, right, where I will wake up early in the morning and I simply lay in bed and everybody thinks I'm sleeping, but I'm not sleeping. And, but I'm able to imagine things that don't exist. And, and I, I later--and then somehow or another I, I'm able to see things that don't exist and be inspired to work on them. And that the next day I'll come in to work and I say oh, I know how to fix this problem, right. Or I know which direction we should lead this research, right. I have no idea how I'm able to think of that. And, and it's been that way from as long as I can remember. I know since I left college, right, that I'm able to do that, right. And so I have this special capability or knack, I'm not sure what it is, I don't understand it myself. But I, I can see things before they happen. I can imagine things that don't exist. And when I wake up, which I was not asleep at the time, but when I wake up, I'm able to remember what, what, what I was sitting there thinking about. And I typically have a direction or solution to go work on. And, and, and even today I do that. When we have problems here, if you look at some of my new work here, I mean that people today are just thinking about this work and I thought about it in 1992. You know and I actually started the, the work on it, but now today everybody says oh this is, this is great, new stuff, right. But, but it had to be ten, fifteen years ago I was thinking of it. But no when you say how I think, I mean I don't know why or how I think that way, but, but that's, that's just the way--it's always been that way for me, right. Speaker 2: I was reading I think in 'Discover Magazine' about sleep science suggesting now that people take ideas and thoughts and images as they go to bed and sleep somehow helps people order things. Speaker 1: Evidently--I mean that's the way it is with me. I mean you know now I'll go to sleep and then it usually--and it's almost very consistent (unclear), I'll wake up at around five or so o'clock in the morning, but I never get out of bed. And I just lay there and my mind tends to focus on whatever problem that I had or whatever I was thinking about when I went to sleep. And, and I'm able to figure out just by laying there, analyzing I guess, the problem. I'm able to figure out oh, I know what we need to do. And, and it's been that way my entire professional career I've done that. And I always find myself thinking of something that doesn't exist and imagining how to make it exist, right, you know what I mean? And again I have no idea why that happens or how I do that but, but I tend to do that. Story_ID: 21717 Speaker 1: What year was the microprocessor invented? Now you say (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah it had to be like in 1972, 1973, somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Okay. And so when, when you come back to Bell Labs [New Jersey] in '73 [1973], what is their result of your invention? I mean of your idea? Speaker 2: Well no I was given a project which was--I was--just like they do all the young engineers, right, you're put on this project that's not that risky, right. So they, they--you know it's typically the older stuff that the engineers that's been there for a long time--they don't want to work on that anymore. So it's just like in football, the rookies get those jobs, right. So my job was to, to, at the time was to work on this old electromechanical switching system because the other engineers had moved on to the new, new stuff, right. And that I created a way using microprocessors to take this old thing and make it new, right. By, by being able--where they couldn't see how to monitor the traffic that was coming out of this electromechanical switch, I was able to come up with a creative way to monitor the electrical pulse that was coming out of the, the relay and then to be able to create a microprocessor that sampled that and created digits from it that actually allowed us to count the number of calls that were being switched through electromechanical system, which most people--nobody wanted to work on that because that was old stuff and that was the job the rookie got, right. You don't need to invent anything new, you just need to keep this working, right, and watch it and if somebody calls in, you have to fix it. Story_ID: 21718 Speaker 1: But, but that wasn't (unclear) the first time I did that, right. When I was at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I never will forget this, this experience, which is very similar to what happened here when I first came out of graduate school [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California]. I went away for the internships, you know like the summer jobs that you get, and it was actually here in New Jersey. I went to work at a cryogenic plant. It was called Air Reduction I think was the name of the company. I think they no longer exist. But, but I went there and I was working on superconductive material in that we were--I was working with this scientist from London [England] and I was his lab technician in that the problem--that he was running these experiments on superconductivity. And the longer it, it took a long time to get the samples ready to put into this nitro chamber to cool it down to the level where you could check the resistivity of this material, which was a superconductive wire. And that you had to put it on this apparatus and then you had to solder it and then put it into the chamber to cool it. And that I worked for a summer as a college student from Tennessee State and I invented an automatic soldering system. You know so I was able to, to look at this problem and I speeded up the whole process of actually running the samples, preparing them and getting them in the cooler. And I, I used these carbon blocks and I, I designed a electrical circuit that would--that all I had to do was put the sample on the rod and I put it into this machine that I invented, and that it would clamp together because of the, the heating of the solder I figured out, was within--actually the boiling point or the melting point of that was lower than the melting point of the carbon blocks. So I used these carbon blocks and I actually was able to, to create this mechanical, electromechanical system that would come together and I'd use electrical energy to heat it. And it would automatically solder the thing, and it was a perfect solder every time. And my, my boss, which was the engineer, just couldn't believe that this kid from college came up with this apparatus. And I remember they, they had this big thing at the end of my summer and took pictures of me. It was--but, but yeah, no I--but I always do that. That, that is something that I have just done my whole career. I, I tend--if it's a problem that needs to solve, to be solved, I just chase the problem until I solve it, right, and I solve it by just imagining what it would be like and what the solution would be like and then I go work on it. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 21719 Speaker 1: Your career has been from what I understand, linked to the development of cell phone technology and cell phone systems. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Just kind of walk, walk us through what, what you've been able to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: From the beginning, what, what were they like and what did you--how have you done--what you've done. Speaker 2: Well the, the mobile phone system was actually run by my boss. He had actually did some of the original work on cell phones which was called mobile telephones. And so he did some of the original work on that and that in 1984 I was selected along with another scientist from Bell Labs, his name was Arno Penzias [physicist; Nobel Prize in Physics, 1978] in that we were selected to testify before Judge Green on the breakup of the Bell System. And that during, during that time we were all trying to save the Bell System, right, because if you save the Bell System we thought you would save Bell Laboratories, which actually didn't happen. But, but in 1982 they decided to break up the Bell System and that I, I had testified before Judge Green and it went very well and I, I never will forget that experience because I received an award from the--a guy name George Saunders, at least his group, which was the Chief Attorney for the Bell, for the Bell System. Because Judge Green, which was the, which was the, the judge for the, for the divesture hearing, somehow or another he, he just liked me, right. He, he heard me talk. I was explaining how the, the network was not against the other guys, you know we treated everybody, the same kind of thing. And finally they decided to break up the Bell System. And the work that I was doing was all of the local outside plant (unclear), which was the portion that went to a company called Telcordia [Technologies], which was called Bellcore, which was the part of Bell Labs that went to the telephone companies. And the other piece stayed with AT&T. Well the one piece of technology that Bellcore or the telephone companies didn't want and they sent it back to AT&T, was the mobile telephone system because it wasn't making a lot of money and that people didn't know what to do with it, right, you know. And that the, the problem was that every time you make a telephone call if the person wasn't in the car, you didn't get the call and as a result, it'd go to no answer, to busy, to message, and you didn't get to charge any money for that. And so it was even though people raved about the benefit of having a phone in your car, it, it was still not something that everybody could have, right. It was not that kind, it was very expensive. I think the phones were like $3,000 and the price per minute was like through the roof, right. So only the rich and famous could, could have cell phones. Well because of the breakup of the Bell System and the, the example I was just telling you I was involved in, I decided that I didn't want to go to the telephone company, to Bellcore, I wanted to stay inside of Bell Labs because that was my dream, right, so I wanted to stay there. So my boss--my job left. I didn't want to go so he allowed me to stay and in that the job that he recommended to me, he says look, we have this thing called the mobile telephone system and that it's really not, it's really old technology. It's almost like the electromechanical job I got when I came out of college, right. Very old stuff. It was great theory, but it was very old and, and the engineers had sort of allowed technology to pass them by. And he says if anybody could go and breathe a breath of fresh air into this thing because I think--this is what my boss told me. He says I think that this mobile phone communications technology will be the future of communications. And he says that, that if anybody can get--to turn this thing around, it's you. And I didn't really want the job because the, the, the job was in the back of the building and that they had put this group because the, the, the Bell companies didn't want them and they sent them back and then they put them in the back of the building. And during that timeframe, right, it just wasn't viewed as well send black people to the back of the building to work wasn't--because I thought wait a minute. I had just won 'The Most Outstanding Engineer in America' [Eta Kappa Nu Outstanding Young Electrical Engineer of the Year] in 1980, right. Why do I have to take a job in the back of the building, right? You know the--so there were a lot of black connotations with that. And that, but my boss told me--he was a Jewish guy and he told me, he says no Jesse I think that this is something that you could really help us with and this is going to be the future of communications. You should go back and, and work with the team, and I agreed to take the job. And, and I, I went into, to the back of the building, right and took the job. Story_ID: 21720 Speaker 1: And that it was an all--my group [mobile technology, Bell Laboratories, New jersey] was all white and I was young. And I was the, I was the manager because I, I was the supervisor. So I went back there and, and I was asking these guys what's the problem? What is the--why is it that this is, is not great? It sounds like a great idea to me, you know what I mean. So, so why is it that we can't make money? And then they were explaining to me why we couldn't make money. And the, the thing that struck me about what they were doing was they were following the vision of Vidovale [ph.] which was--and Alexander Graham Bell. You'd think in nine, in the '80s [1980s] or early '80s [1980's], you know we would have moved beyond that. But the, the, the vision of Vidovale was putting phones in places. So if you go back and study the Bell System, you will note that once the Alexander Graham Bell invented the, the telephone, that Vidovale really drove the growth of the Bell System and what he was doing was we should put phones in, in businesses, in homes, in public places where people congregate, right. And the only place that they had not put a phone was in the car. And my boss, you know a team of guys starting in the '60s [1960's], had come up with this mobile phone and put it in the car. Well when I went back to meet with these guys, when they told me what the problem was about you--you were not making money because the phones, the calls went to no answer. My reaction was that oh, I know what the problem, I know what the problem is, right. You guys are focused on putting, still focused on putting phones in places and we ought to be focused on putting phones on the people, right. Because if we put the phones on the people, the minute the phone rings, it would be a natural inclination for them to answer it. And every time they answer, we could make a dollar, right because the minutes were very expensive, right. And I said we could turn the business around. We could make a whole lot of money. And, and that people were looking at me as if I was nuts because I didn't know that the phones were these huge boxes that went in the trunk of cars, and they had these big clunky handsets that went in the front part of the car, right. Speaker 2: Was that the brick basically? Speaker 1: It was prior to the brick, right, prior to the brick, right. Actually I have one sitting on the, the headset is sitting on one of the desks over here. But when, when--because I didn't know that, they, they didn't want to tell me that I was sounding dumb, right you know. But the--what, what happened was when I raised the question, then they started to explain to me, oh well the problem is there are more people than there are cars and this was designed for cars. We don't have enough spectrum and we can't really, you know, the technology is not at a place where you can actually miniaturize things the way I was thinking about them. And then I started to explain to them because I had become an expert in digital signal processing. So I started to talk about digital techniques and interacting with some of the other guys, saying, look if we digitize the speech substantially--at that time we had never done anything below 32 kilobytes ADPCM, and you had this young black guy talking about we're going to do eight kilobytes. Now which is almost like a factor four below what anything that had ever been done before, right. And I said no we're going to do it. And that we're going to go over and get some of the research guys, and I started going. And then all these guys got all fired up about this idea, right, this kid--cause they were older, this kid had come up with, right. Say no we're going to digitize the speech and then I described how we were going to use different-digital modulation schemes and, and all of a sudden guys that didn't want me there started to say this is not a bad idea. You know that this kid is talking about, right. And so I went from the black guy that took over the white group, to all of a sudden the white guys liked me, you know. And, and it was--I always tell the story it was a real awakening for me that innovation is colorblind, right. It, it, it--if you really have a good idea and you're willing to work hard and pursue it and be persistent in that, have a passion for it, people see the passion, right. And they, they sort of don't see the color, right. And all of a sudden--and these guys were really smart. The guys that had built this original mobile phone system were really smart, right. But they started to see the passion in me about creating this digital cellular technology. And next thing you know, they got on board and we started--it took us about four years and we made the first digital cellular call to any place in the world, in Chicago [Illinois] which was the first place that the first mobile system call was made. So we took it back to the same place and, and that was the birth of what's known today as digital cellular communications, which is the reason you walk around with cell phones on you today. Story_ID: 21721 Speaker 1: So did--what was the process of getting it [cell phones] smaller? Getting it small enough to walk around with? Speaker 2: Well the--it had to do with--we had before always done the math which is the algorithms that we ran with the system. We had done it using floating-point arithmetic. And that what I was proposing is to do integer based arithmetic in terms of writing the algorithms, which would allow us to, to actually use smaller devices and to completely digitize the information because you would have to use a more powerful processing engine if you were going to use floating-point arithmetic to run the algorithm. Even though they would be more accurate, is that the--using the integer based arithmetic to do it, right, would allow us to use less power and to run a, a lower processing device which then could be packaged into something much smaller than what had been done before, prior to that. And that everyone was, was concerned about the quality of the digital signal that would come out of that. And, and that what I was saying to people was yeah it's not going to sound as good as analog, right, you know, but the ear is a great integrator, right cause I say you listen to something long enough, right, it sounds good even though it's not, it's bad, right. And that we built it and it's right, it sounded tinny. When we built the very first one, it sounded like artificial speech, right as opposed to the smooth speech that you would hear out of analog devices. But over time I was almost ostracized in the industry, right, because everywhere I spoke, right the--and it was a company, very famous company called Motorola. And that Motorola thought that the world--almost God intended for radio systems to be analog. And you got this, this guy that's running around the country, in Europe, and--saying no, we should make this all digital, right. And that, and they claim well the speech is going to be bad and you will degrade the service and the quality of the service. But it, it didn't stop me. I continued to speak and continued to drive and push for the creation of digital processing for speech over these wireless devices. And then I created analog modulation schemes to support it and next thing you know, I was able to show that we could put four times as many subscribers on the same radio frequency band as the analog guys had done before. And that's really what launched the whole digital revolution in cellular radio. Story_ID: 21722 Speaker 1: Okay in 1986 you were Director of AT&T's Cellular Communications, Telecommunications, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you--I think you just explained a lot of what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no that happened--I started out as, as, as a department head and then when I moved over, and then I went on to become the director running the whole thing, right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About 1986 I was actually in charge of the whole thing. And, and rebuilt the, the whole business for, for, for the company. We took that business from like--it was--I would say maybe $100 million, and when I left it we drove it to well over $5, $10 billion. Just with the creation of digital cellular. Speaker 1: There seems to be a flurry of research activity in 1987. A number of papers, I think it was like five published in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You and a gentleman named [E.S.K.] Chien and another one [D.J. Goodman]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, those were all the guys that were, that I brought into the group to develop digital cellular communications and became an industry, not just a technology, but it became an industry. But yeah no we did--I was invited all over the world, China, Europe, to speak on digital cellular technology before anybody knew what it was, right. I was going around the world speaking on it. And that all of a sudden once we demonstrated the very first one in the United States, it exploded all around the world, right, yeah. Speaker 1: This is the beginning of the digital revolution. Speaker 2: Yeah and wireless communications, yeah. I had done work in digital prior to that, right, but it was wired, not wireless, right. And that I took a lot of the learning and knowledge from wire line, or wired communications and started the whole initiative to do digital in the wireless domain, which had never been done before. Speaker 1: And all this has, you know just two or three years ago when all the analog television became digital. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. So you, you think it's a long time ago, but yeah that's right, that's exactly right. But, but no we, we actually did it before the television converted to all digital, that we converted voice and mobile voice to all digital, right. Speaker 1: So this--what I'm suggesting is maybe this is--(unclear) once you set something in motion then, is now taking over the whole communications-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no I mean if you, if you were to just digress back to what we were talking about earlier, right, is that you're talking about a small group of guys in the back of a building thinking of something that now represents the entire communications industry. Because I think maybe like three or four years ago, might been a little longer, is when mobile phones outsold wire line phones. And now today they're completing displacing them. You know and so, and it was, that's why lots of people talk about my work because that work actually launched a whole new revitalization of the communications industry. Speaker 1: And just--I think in 2000 the last of the pay phones. Speaker 2: Yeah that's right, that's right. Which is back to this point I was making to you earlier about putting phones on people versus putting phones in places. What you're seeing the end of an era that built something called the Bell System that got promulgated around the world, and now all of a sudden that's being completely dismantled because what does it mean to put a phone in a place? You know it has no meaning anymore, right, and if you talk to today's young people they don't think of phones in places, which is what I grew up with as the, as the, the focus of all of the work that we did inside of Bell Laboratories was to put phones in places, right. Story_ID: 21723 Speaker 1: So when you formed your own business [incNETWORKS, Inc]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what was the, what was the, what was the thinking? Speaker 2: How did we get to that? Yeah, right. Speaker 1: How did you get to that? Speaker 2: Yeah, back in 1992 I was asked by the president of Bell Laboratories that what, what he saw in 1992 is that we're having this incredible expansion of, of cellular radio based on the work that I had done in the '80s [1980s] right, but this was in 1992. And that the problem that we were facing at that time when the president of Bell Labs called me in. He said look, I, I'd like for you guys to take a look at this problem. And the problem was, not much different to the problem I told you about before my other boss asked me to go take a look at it. I seem to have a history of that, tough problem--they go get Jesse, say you go fix it, right. But in this case it was a situation where the cost of building these digital cellular systems, or cellular systems in general was very expensive to build. And the reason that they were expensive is that the radio portion of, of the network, not the signal processing, the work that I had done earlier, but the actual NRF [New Regulatory Framework] portion of it was still analog. And that the problem was is that every time we designed a new cellular system, it was more like an art not a science. So we'd have to start over and create the new, even though it was digital, we'd have to create the new cellular system with custom designed radio subsystems and so forth. And so what he asked me was is there another way to do this where you could design a radio system that could learn and adapt or could configure itself or could be intelligent. And that there was some work that was done by Motorola for the United States government many years back, which is called software radio. But no one had ever made it practical to, to, to do for what we call commercial applications. So I got together a team of people and that what we started looking at and I said hey look, here's what we need to do. We need to build a radio system that we can control it with software, which is to make it programmable, and we need to teach it to learn such that when you deploy the radio system, it could see its neighbors and automatically reconfigure its frequencies such that it could create its, sort of a cellular system inside of another cellular system. And, and so that's what I said that's what we're going to build. And I just made it up. You know, just like I just told, described it to you. And that--and I said that what we're going to do is that we're going to build these cellular systems, which were called small cell cellular networks, where everybody could have their own private cellular system. Which is not different from what I did in, in the early '80s [1980s] where I said I want everybody to have a cell phone. And so if I can make it digital, it could be cheaper and smaller and we could put it on people and everybody could have it. In this case, in 1992, once the, the president of Bell Labs asked me to look at this problem, I said I, what I came up with is that let's go and build something using software defined radio, cognitive radio, software defined, is flexible design, Cognitive radio is where the radio actually learns about its environment and it automatically adjusts. I said we're going to build that where, where we can convert the design of radios from a science, I mean from an art to a science. And then we could build these cellular systems less expensive and as a result, everybody could have their own private cellular system. You could have your private cellular system in your home, you could have it in your office or when you leave your home, there's no such thing as having phones in your home anymore. Just like we didn't--I, I wanted to put phones on people, but now I want to take phones out of the home, right. So I said that, that then when you go home if your cell phone is with you when you go into your home, then you would have a phone at home. When you leave home there's no need to have the phone at home if you're not at home, right? So when you leave, the phone goes with you. Then when you go to your office building, you can have your own private cellular network inside of your office building. And then your phone would automatically adapt to that system just like it would adapt to the one at home. And so we started trying to figure out how to make that work, right. And that we worked on that from 1992 till almost 2000, to maybe 1997. And, and that I, I, I recognized something at that point that I hadn't thought about before. And that I started seeing kids all around with cell phones. And, and I could see all of these cell phones. And I said oh, I know what's going to happen next. We're going to see the Bell System theory of what we call the public-to-private migration of communications. And just what that viewpoint was is that every time there is a, a expansion of a public offering, the businesses who are on the public system instantly say oh, I don't want to be on the public system anymore because all my information is going to be exposed. And so if you study the, the history of the Bell System, you'll see a movement from public telephone service to private branch exchange which were like PBXs [Private Branch Exchange], or you'd see from public data networks to LANS which are local area networks. So I knew that from my history and experience. And so what I said back, it was about 1995, I said oh, I know what's going to happen next. We're going to see the public-to-private migration of cellular radio systems. And that the future cellular radio systems will be privately owned and they would interwork with publicly cellular radio systems. And, and that the heart of making that happen is software defined radio and cognitive radio, which we had started work on in 1992 and we had got it working and demonstrated it for the first time, but we didn't know what the application was for it, right. So we created this radio that might--that the president asked me to look at. But we didn't know what to do with it, so we invented the--and that's the beauty of the laboratory. That's one of the reason why I wanted to work there is that you didn't have to have a destination to start. You could start something down a path and the destination would reveal itself to you over time. Speaker 1: It was research driven. Speaker 2: It was more research driven. And that, I mean we've lost it in America now, right, because we dropped from number one down I think we're like number eight or something in innovation now. Because we've lost the motivation and the investment by the government and the focus of the government on innovation. It's coming back now with the new president [President Barack Obama], but we'd lost a lot of that and the United States has drifted way down. Story_ID: 21724 Speaker 1: But, but to just complete the story of, of what got me started with this company. So when I detected that idea, I then realized that oh, okay I now know how to change all communications and make it wireless everywhere. Because see before my work was to build what's called an outside-in cellular system, which means we build all the towers, then we shine RF [radiofrequency] energy on the buildings and we train the people of how to go to the edge of the buildings in order to get communications, right. And, and, and people are trained easily, right. Because it shows the power of cellular radio, that these people were willing to be in the center of the building where they weren't getting any reception or coverage, and run to the windows where they could use their cell phones. And that what I felt was why should they have to do that? Why don't we go and build an inside-out cellular system? In other words, miniaturize the towers and then plant the towers inside of buildings. And, and as a result you now can have, and inside of homes, and that led to the whole new generation of cellular radio that we talk about today, which is called small cell networks. These are miniaturized cellular networks that you can put in a home or you can put in a building. But in 1995 I didn't think of that, right, that came later. But I, I, I saw these kids and I knew oh, the businesses are going to want this thing. So we should start now thinking of how to build these new types of cellular networks. And that we started working on and built some of the initial hardware inside of Bell Laboratories, inside of my organization. And then all of a sudden they broke up the Bell System, I mean they broke up AT&T, or Bell Labs again. So I've been a part of every breakup of the place that I loved and, and, and only had a vision of working in, that I participated in breaking it up twice. And so this time was when they decided to divide up AT&T and Lucent Technologies into two separate companies, and to break up Bell Laboratories. And I stayed with AT&T again to form something called AT&T Laboratories. And that's where I was doing this work in the late '90s [1990s], and that came around 2000 when they broke it up. I just said oh, I've had enough, right, of, of constantly breaking up something that, that I had such a passion for, that I decided that this is--building these new types of cellular systems is the future of cellular radio systems. And I would like to be a part of that. So I cut a deal with AT&T to spin out my work to form a company which is called incNetworks, which is the company that, that you're at right now. And that the primary charter was how do I commercialize that idea? And so I invested a lot of my own money, I got friends and family, we put money in. And I started my work in 2000. But nobody else saw a need for that, you know, so, so it took us until just recently, maybe like a year ago, 2010, almost ten years, before people saw what I saw. And that now small cell networks is sort of the cat's meow, right, that's what our company's involved in. But we put a lot of the original thinking and work into that and now it is--the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and others are looking at giving spectrum to build these small cell networks and things of that nature. So it's a good feeling that all of a sudden people started to recognize the value of, of your work. But that has never caused me to, to be negative or anything like that. It's, it's back to the point that I made to you earlier, is that I have a tendency to do that and so I expect that people will view me as here's the--here he goes again, right. You know coming out with something that nobody needs and nobody wants, right, you know like digital cellular, right. Now here, here he goes again with small cell networks, right. Creating private cellular networks, right. And that I got some creation of that, that last year in 2010 our company was selected along with a lot of the well known companies to be put on something called the Technology Advisory Council for the chairman of the FCC. And our job was to come up with new innovations that would spur job growth and new opportunities in the United States to try to get the United States back on track as being one of the top innovation engines in, in the world. And that our work got recognized as this is the future and now they're looking at allocating spectrum for it and, and it, it's--we're now like oh, everybody's talking about it now, right. But in 2000 or 1992, nobody saw any need for that, right. But, but now I, I think that the next role in, in communications will be public cellular networks that you know and love, right, and that you will see your cell phones will no longer be owned or controlled by the public cellular network, they will be owned by you personally, and they will be assigned to your personal cellular network that you have in your home or in your office, right, depending on whether you have a business cell phone or you have a personal cell phone. And that's where I think the future of cellular radio is in that at that point you will see the complete elimination of the need for wires. Whether you've got wires in your home or wires in an office, that will all go away if you look at the kind of work that we're doing and the bandwidth that we're generating using these small cell networks. Story_ID: 21725 Speaker 1: Your company has been described as a 4G company. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And G stands for generations I know, but describe--that's about as much as I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what is a, what's the first, second and third-- Speaker 2: Well I'm probably the guy that you all, you all punished for creating that, that name, right. But, but no it, it goes all the way back where to the creation of digital cellular. I, I was trying to think of a way to show that I was doing something different than what my boss had done. You know so my boss had created the first generation of cellular radio. And, and that we just made up that name. And, and we called it 2G, which was second generation. And, and then that just sort of caught on. And that when people wanted--when we went from making telephones truly mobile, which is really what 2G was, when we digitized it, we were able to take the phones out of the cars and put them on people. And that created the, the second generation of cellular radio, which all I was trying to do is to make what I was doing sound different than what my boss had done. And to show people that hey, this is a whole new way to do cellular radio is digitally do it as opposed to analog. And that was called 2G and that after that it just sort of caught on. And then when we went from, from making voice completely mobile to making the Internet completely mobile, we called it 3G. You know and, and so you might ask well what is 4G because it's all digital, right, because that started with 2G, right. That they're different views of what 4G is, right. Some people believe it's making the cellular network all IP just like you have the Internet all IP. But, but the way I define 4G is, is really creating private cellular networks where everybody could own their own cellular networks and own their own cell phones and have those completely independent of the public network. And so when you leave home, you can negotiate, your phone negotiates with the people that--with the large carriers, which are the public phones, and it can decide at this location this is the least costly way for me to connect with the rest of the world when I'm out of my home. And so I connect to, to that public system. Or I connect to another public system if that's more cost effective for me when I'm away from my home. But your phone no longer is owned by the national carriers, it would be owned by the individuals who owned the private cellular networks, whether they be in your home or in your office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but that's my definition of 4G and that the, the, the other people would call it just making cellular completely IP based. So the one that I have this completely IP--the one that I propose is completely IP based, but when you--I think of the word generation differently than, than a lot of people think of it is that if you're doing truly fundamental work that, that has the power to displace the predecessor technology, then, then that degree of innovation takes a long time to realize. And that a ten year window is not unreasonable to create a technology platform that has the power to completely displace the technology platform that was its predecessor. And, and so just making cellular all IP is not sufficient to do that. But the ability to create private, personal cellular networks to replace or to augment--is not replaced, but to augment public cellular networks, the kind of technology needed to do that such as software defined radios, cognitive radio techniques. The way you can put boxes inside of a building and then they can sort of auto-communicate and create their own private network arrangement for you in a wireless context or in a cellular context, is unique. So coming from the history of Bell Laboratories, right, we tend to have a higher standard for saying it is the next generation than what the public at large might call the next generation. And so I think it's some of the history speaking here as opposed to--are both of them 4G? Yes, right I mean you're just going to have a 4G which is an all IP, all digital network outside. And then you can also have a private 4G all IP, all digital network inside. And I just called them by two different things. I tend to say outside-in cellular networks, versus inside-out cellular networks, and that you're going to need both of those types of networks going forward to completely replace the wires. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 21726 Speaker 1: So this is what's next, what you're talking about now. Speaker 2: I think there's something to, to--if you, I told you about my story where I wake up in the morning and then I, I, I--somehow or another I'm able to see the future, at least get out of the present. That's my escape of, of mental relaxation, right, is the ability to step out of the present and step into a new place and imagine things that don't exist, right. And, and as I always say to the kids, and that's the question why not? Why doesn't it exist, right? And that inspires me to, to, to do what I do. But, but no I think the next generation of cellular is not what I'm working on. We certainly tend to make money at what I'm working on, but the next generation of cellular radio I think is going to be deeply bound into holography and holographic imaging. And that I think that you, as I was sharing in a speech that I gave at the commencement exercise at Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee] recently here, because everybody is wrestling with this question of what is 5G or what is the next generation of cellular telephones? And we have these smart phones and tablets and things like that. I--what I shared with the group is that my view of the next generation of cellular radio will be your cell phones will be become devices that you can point to a location in front of you, because those devices are controlling the network which is managing all the information, and that you will be able to point to a location and create a holography image of the person that you're talking to. So we'll have a way of bringing the person that was on the other side of the phone or the network in this case, to actually an image in front of you because communications is about moving intelligence from one person to the other faster. I mean and I said this in a speech. I spent my whole life just focused on, at least my professional life, not my whole life but my professional life, focused on how do you move intelligence from one human being to another faster? And, and that even though the work that I'm doing now with, with small cell networks is about making video as mobile as voice because I can get tremendous capacities with these private networks. But I, I think we're still missing something because when--the reason you came here to talk to me as opposed to calling me on the telephone, even if you could get an image of me, is that the non-verbal communications of the whole person is much more powerful than the facial communications, which is moving your hands and how your body reacts to things. So if I could create the next vision of cellular radio, which you might call 5G, it would be to use holography as a way to move because I now can move tremendous amounts of information with the new types of systems like I'm working on now, that I would want to be able to have a device that not that I can see them on the screen, but I can see them standing in front of me and I'm getting a complete image of them taken from where the other phone was that actually puts them in front of me and I see the whole person and I'm having a conversation with them just like I'm having a conversation with you in front of me. And now it's a much richer communications than just seeing a facial image which is really what I'm working on today. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a projection as to when-- Speaker 2: The, the--if I were to give you my projection, I'll tell you what my projection is. People think I'm too optimistic, so but, but I'll tell you what I think. Is, is that we've been on the path of every ten years, like small cells and private cellular networking technology came of age in 2010,. I mean people started to hear about the kinds of things that we've been working on in this company for quite some time. But it became more visible and now people are starting to--with the invention of, of the iPad and iPhones from, from Apple, what they, they changed the phones but they didn't change the network. And so now we're coming out changing the network, right. That ended in 2010. It's now real that's happening, we're building them, right. If we stay on track, the kind of thing that I'm talking about as 5G would happen in 2020, is, is that you would see different types of cellular systems. They will grow out of these high capacity, personalized or what we call personalized cellular networks, right. It will grow out of that type of environment. But I think holography as a means of communicating will be much more prevalent and apparent than what I'm doing today which is you can pick up a cell phone and I can see you and you can see me, right, you know. But I see a facial image of you as opposed to all of you, right, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21727 Speaker 1: Now when you, when you started in 1973, what was the state? Cause you alluded to earlier that the relationship between technology in the United States in Japan and other countries in the world. What, what was the relationship? Speaker 2: No, I mean we were viewed as a national treasure in this company, in this country [United States], right. And, and, and everybody asks me that question, asks that question and what I try to tell people is why did you want to be in Bell Laboratories and what was special about that? You know and, and right away everybody gravitate to oh, no it's a bunch of smart people there, right. And maybe these, these were maybe the top 10 percent of the smartest people around was in the place, right. And I said no, no that wasn't what was special about it. What was special about it was the synergy of putting smart people in a common place where they had to interact with each other and had to intellectually challenge each other every single day, right. I mean so it wasn't just that they were smart, right. But it was the environment that was created of having those kinds of people or those types of people that think, that could think any way they wanted to think. They could think about anything that they wanted to think about and then put them together in one place and allow them to interact with each other. And it was the synergy of the interaction that made it special because you can take a bunch of smart people and I always give the example, right. Are you creating a team of champions or a championship team, right? So you can have a bunch of individuals that stand out in the crowd among a group of people, but if you could get a team to stand out, you win more games. So what I try to explain to people is the reason AT--I mean the reason the United States has fallen is that they've let their national treasures of a team-oriented environment drift away, right, places like Bell Laboratories. And, and that's why Singapore and other places in, in Asia and--have outstripped us, right. Because we, we decided to have a team of, of, as I said not a championship team, but a team of champions, right. So we just sent all these very smart people to all these different places, right. But now they're not producing the same as they were producing when they were inside of Bell Laboratories, right. So what happened, why they're not together, where every day you got to interact with these people. And every day you have to deal with the mental challenge of somebody that's also very, very smart. And it just causes you to mentally, continuously grow intellectually, right. And I'm fond of saying, you're talking about special words that, that I use. I kid with my son all the time. My son is, is very, very smart, he's a very talented kid. And every time he comes up to me with a problem, I seem to know something about it, right. But he's smarter, right, you know. I, I keep saying no, you're much smarter than I am, right. And, and then I said that son, that the most important thing you have to understand is that God gave you a natural intellectual bandwidth. But true intellectual bandwidth is your natural bandwidth raised to your experience power. I said the problem, advantage I have over you is the exponent is very high, right. So I get to multiply, right. So yeah my, my natural intellectual bandwidth is less than yours, but I get to multiply it, right, because of all the years I've done, spent learning and understanding. That's why when you bring me a problem even though I don't know the answer, I can tell you how to go look for the answer. You know, but, but, but it is something I say quite frequently to, to (unclear) draw the extension. No, your true intellectual bandwidth is your natural bandwidth, intellectual bandwidth raised to the experience power. And, and that's why people like me always have value. We always have value. Just like you're sitting here talking to me, I can reflect on all the things and that I know what we didn't write because I was there, right. You know people that learn from me only know what I wrote, right. They don't know what we didn't write. And that's why you want to leverage people like me, whether you're sending us to the schools. You were talking about earlier, so we'd like to send you guys to school and talk to kids and things like--you want to send people out because now they get to tease out of me the things that I didn't write. And that's how the United States became the leader in innovation because we put people like that, they challenged each other and they got them to think about things that they wouldn't normally think about, right. Story_ID: 21728 Speaker 1: Our, our company [incNETWORKS, Inc] as, as I said earlier we're building these private cellular networks, right, where everybody can own their own cellular network. I mean that's what's unique about our company. The question becomes if everybody has their own private cellular network, right, now does it talk to all the other private cellular networks? Where, where there are two fundamental technologies and, and this is what I was sharing with you earlier about the movement of intelligence, right, the--which is this movement of information. What's happening now is that we're having an incestuous desire for information and the movement of data, right. And that what happens is when you build these private networks, you're now creating even more data that's hitting the network. So the, the--what we build is something called hybrid fiber wireless networks. So we take these private cellular networks, then we connect them to fiber optics and then the fiber optics network connect all the private networks together. So the information comes in through the radio and then it goes out through fiber optics. So you're going to see fiber just like you've heard of fios where Verizon is one of the companies putting fiber to your home, you're going to see fiber going everywhere as the transport system and at the edges of the fiber you will see these private cellular networks, as well as the public cellular networks. The public cellular networks will be owned by the larger companies like the AT&Ts and the Verizons of the world. And then you as an individual would own your own private cellular network. The beauty of the change is that today you have a phone and that, that phone is like a smart phone or a tablet and the applications and the information on your phone is not under your control because you get the apps [applications] from the network and they're in the public domain, right. What private networks would allow you to do is to move that information and have it hosted in your own personal private network. So you control the security of the information. And that one of the things that, that, that we're working on, because I have sort of this incredible focus on securing information. Because I believe information belongs to you personally, not to the system. And so you should be in control of that and that we're working on some newer approaches which is something I call security sampling frequencies. And what a security sampling frequency is and you probably don't even know you, you do this when you use your smart phone. If you look at it really close, there's a little dot on it which is a very high resolution camera that's on your cell phone, that it's also on your smart phone and they're also in your tablets. Well thanks to, to the Apple guys, they've really pushed that technology forward. Well we use that technology to create something called security sampling frequencies. And what a security sampling frequency is that when you register for service on the network, whether it's your private network or public network, you enter in how frequently do I want to examine who has access to my device? Which it should just be you, but you could give it to somebody else, but it should just be you. Well that device that you're looking at, I can direct that device to do a retina scan, do a facial recognition scan and as a result I now can use biometrics and I can sample those biometrics and I can integrate the different biometrics. And as a result, I can decouple you from the device. So when you get to a device, I now can say are you on the device or has somebody else got that device? So now I'm securing the person, not the device. Today the network secures the device. And, and so if you lose the device, then all your information is gone unless you stored it in the network, right, that was on the device. But more important than that, right, the network and you are no longer protected because somebody can get it and all your information is gone if somebody hits you over the head. Well with, with security sampling frequencies, even if somebody hits you over the head and then they try to get your device, right, if they turn your device on and I--the network will then look at it and say is Larry [Crowe, interviewer for The HistoryMakers] using the device or not? Right. Based on--and only you know what the sampling frequencies are, as well as which biometrics get integrated into the sampling frequency. And so by doing that we're able to decouple the person from the device and then let the network put the device and the person together again. And so you could go pick that device and then I can say well, cause you can have more than one device. And so what I want to do is, is protect not all the devices. I want to protect the devices cause we do that today, but I want to protect the individual as well as the devices. And, and that's some of the new things that we're doing with these types of, of personalized cellular networks. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 21729 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: You know the, the--I'll tell you a story which you know I talk about this a lot cause it changed my life in sort of a fundamental way being a scientist or engineer, however you'd like to characterize me. I was speaking at Black History Month and I was speaking to some small kids in the class. And I always tell this story because it, it touched me in a profound way. There was a young African American girl that was in the class. And that I was trying to teach them about inventing, you know and this whole thing about you know, you got to be able to imagine things that don't exist and I was going through this whole thing trying to inspire the kids to, to be engineers and scientists. And that I was showing them one of my patents and that the patent had my name on it, which I had introduced myself to the class. And so when the, the kid saw the patent and saw my name on it, and then she said, she raised her hand and she asked me. She had raised her hand and, and I recognized her and say--she said I have a question, right. And then she said are you an inventor? And then I said yes I'm an inventor, right. This is one of my patents and when you're an inventor you get this patent and you can see my name is on the patent and I'm an inventor. And she was puzzled by that. I could see it in her eyes. This is back to the communications I was talking about earlier. I could see it in her eyes that she was, was puzzled that well almost like how could you be an inventor? You know and so when she asked that question, she says that, she said well I thought all black inventors were dead. And, and at first it caught me off guard, right, you know because--and you can have these flashbacks being African American, I'm talking to African American kids and I'm trying to inspire, right. And, and I'm getting this flashback about Jesus, I mean that's right. All black inventors, even when I was growing up, all black inventors were dead, right. And I said oh my God, this has not changed in all these years, is that our young people just like I was, couldn't imagine being inventors, right. Because they weren't real. The inventors were not real. They were just people that you put in a book and, and that people read about them and they're all dead. So, so you, if you're growing up in an environment like I grew up in, it was almost like oh wow, if, if you're a black inventor, that's only something that happened in history, in the past, right. That's not real, I couldn't be that because all those people are dead. So there's no way I could be an inventor. But the, the thing that struck me about that experience, and I'll get to answer your question. The thing that struck me about the experience is I recognized for the first time that what we put in books to our young people really matter. Because it shapes their image of who they can become as opposed to who they might be able to become, you know. And, and this experience changed me. Story_ID: 21730 Speaker 1: So now every Black History Month, I mean whatever I'm doing, I stop and say I'm going to go out and speak. Like this year I was down in Jacksonville, Florida speaking to a bunch of young kids, right. And so I'll just go out and do that as my way of saying--I have to reach out to young people like that. So the question that you asked is, is a good question which is what advice would, would, would I give to, to young people. And what I've always tried to say to them is that never lose the desire to grow and learn. Never lose that desire because if you do, your future won't be shaped by you, it will be shaped by the future. Because you won't have any control over what will happen to you. And, and I try to, to get kids to understand is--and I'm fond of saying this that, that when I speak to them. And that is that, that you only go around once in life and you don't get a practice run. You don't get a chance to do it again, right. So never stop learning and growing, right, and allowing yourself to intellectually, to expand, right. And to me when I try to get out and speak to kids, that's what I tell them and I said to me, if you said I've accomplished anything, and some people put maybe more credit on what I've accomplished than I do. But when I talk to them what I try to say to them is that guys you never get a second chance to do this. So what you say, what you do, how you act, matters. Values are something--my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] used to press this on me all the time. Son, values and principles in life matter, right. I don't care if you never become rich. Values and principles, which is character, matters. And, and that's really what you ought to focus on. And, and when I go to some of these tough, tough environments, black kids say oh, well this guy--he worked on it a long time to get it all wrong. Or this guy invented the cell phone. It's not inventing the cell phone, right. I'm into digital cellular technology and I always try to correct them. But, but what's special about them saying that is how they, they can relate to a cell phone, right. And then they see this black guy and they said man I could, I could do that, right, I could be just like this black guy, right, that, that invented the cell phone. Because he's black and he's real, right. And then I always correct them and say no, no, I didn't invent the cell phone, I invented digital cellular technology which enabled digital cell phones, right. But no, no, I would, I would definitely say yeah man, never, never lose the desire to grow and expand your knowledge, right. Never lose that desire because your future will be shaped for you. You won't have the opportunity of shaping your future. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 21731 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything that you've done to this point and you will see many honors and so many organizations, white and black, or not -- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. That's true, that's true. No, no, yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, is there anything that you would do differently when you look back at everything? Speaker 2: No I, I think that when I was young with my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell], right, is, is that my mother did something for me that I never appreciated until I got old. And, and I always tell this story as well. I, I saw my mother cry twice. I, I told you about the example when I quit the job to go to college to be an engineer because that was a dream that I had. She had a different dream for me, which was to be a leader in the church, right. But I had a dream of being an engineer. And that she, she didn't, she didn't take my dream away and then I remember my mother had never left the state of Tennessee or Nashville. And she got in a car and she drove to the Waldorf Astoria with my sisters when I received an award as being the Most Outstanding Engineer in America under the age of thirty-two in the field of electrical engineering. And that I gave a speech at, at, at that meeting about my life and the challenges that I, that I, that I faced. And that my, my--I got a standing ovation at the Waldorf Astoria after my speech. And then I saw my mother cry again. And I couldn't understand why she was crying on such a great occasion, right. And after thinking about it, is that even though she had meager means to, to help me when I was young, the, the thing that she gave me was the, the confidence that you could do anything that you wanted to do if you just focus yourself on it and do it. And she saw me realize a dream that I had and, and the freedom that she gave me to let me pursue the dream when she had told me to stop at that, and to stay at Aladdin Industries, I probably would have stayed. And as I reflect back on my life is that, that the ability that she gave me to make a decision to go your own way was the most valuable contribution she, she gave to me other than birth. And, and that if I were to do this over again I think when I reflect back on my younger years in college, before college and in high school, I would have focused more on the value of education and the value of growing and expanding your mind. Because I didn't think it was valuable at the time because of the environment that I grew up in. And, and if I had a chance to tell young kids in that environment today what I would say to them is man, don't lose that opportunity because when I look at how much work I had to do to make up for that lack of a good foundation education, it was painful for me to do. I did it, but I wonder how many people don't have the intestinal fortitude, the ethics of hard work that my mother taught me that allowed me to overcome that. So I would say man, I would have focused on, on educating, expanding my mind early because who knows what I could have done if I had used that valuable time to learn and expand my mind, which I completed frittered away. I would have never done that if I knew what I knew today, right, right. But, but I lost all of those years of educating myself. And you can say and others can say it wasn't your fault, right. But I still wonder all these years later. If I could have done it differently, right. But I, but I didn't. But, but I, I turned out okay, right, you know, but maybe I could have done more. Maybe I could have contributed more, right. Story_ID: 21732 Speaker 1: Well likewise when you look back at everything, and look at where you are now, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Now I, I, no I, I think my kids because I, I, I tell my, my kids two principles that I tried to, to teach them. The first one--and they, they tease me all the time about it cause I repeat it every time I see them do something that I don't agree with, right. And, and that the first one is never let other people's behavior define your behavior. It is always better in my judgment to do the right thing even when it's not popular to do the right thing. And then the other one that I use is never let anybody else define success for you because it's your life and that people will look at what you contributed, not where you came from, not where you started at, but where you ended at, right. And, and that's what I try to tell them. And that you can say a lot of people talk about what I've done and so forth and say oh you ended in a great place, right. Everybody talks about look at this guy did this, this guy did that, right you know. And what I think about is how much more I could have contributed to society than what I did if I'd just had a different opportunity when I was young than what I had. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 21733 Speaker 1: Tell, tell us more about your children, cause I guess that's, that's a way that we all can contribute (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well I, I have four kids, right, two girls and two boys, right. Uh, my older one is, is an engineer, manager in engineering for my competitor. So she competes against me. But, but I love her to death, right, because what I, I see a lot of me in her. But I see a lot of me in a lot of my kids. But, but, but in her I see this sort of independent nature because I left my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell] where nobody else would do it and I went out on my own to make my own way. And I remember because we had brought her to Bell Laboratories one time. My, my dream was to have her come and work in Bell Laboratories with me. So we used to bring her up from college every summer. But then when she finished college, right, she decided she doesn't want to work there. And, and her reaction was like too much Jesse Russell, right you know. So she moved to Texas, so I don't get a chance to see my grandkids as much because she moved to Texas. And she, she decided to do it on her own. She, she wanted--she, she left the coup and she went out on her own and she did very well for herself, right. I have another son, almost a similar--my older son is a similar experience where him and I have sort of a, a difficult father/son relationship. His name is Jesse, Junior, right. My older daughter is named Tina. But his name is Jesse Junior and that very, very creative kid. But he--I wanted him--and interestingly enough about the difference in my kids, you know I talk about all of them. But the difference I my kids, my son, my older son, felt that somehow or another with my daughter I did not incline her to be an engineer at all. I never had a conversation with her about being an engineer. She goes to--she did very well in high school and when she graduated she decided to go to North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And she decided that she was going to be an electrical engineer. Had nothing to do with me, I never had a conversation with her about it. And, and she went on to do very good. My son however, I was saying oh, I, I need to make my son an engineer, right. I mean look how great this is, right. And that you know I, I pressed him to go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and I wanted him to be an engineer and, and I learned many years later as, as he came back to me, he decided that he loved music. And, and that--messing with computers and so forth. But he's into music, and creating music and, and doing things. And I just never imagined you know that how could you not want to be an engineer? That my son has to be an engineer. And I drove him to the point that it created even conflict between him and myself, right. Because I was so passionate about him being an engineer where my daughter I didn't press her at all and she becomes a great engineer. But he actually did very well for himself. He creates music and, and that he--digitizing, does signal processing with music creating tapes and working with different groups to do that. Story_ID: 21734 Speaker 1: My younger son [William Russell], which is, is after him, just the opposite with him. He wanted to be like me, where my, my two older ones wanted to be the opposite, right. And that, that's the one that actually works here at the company with me. He runs our System Integration organization. And is just doing an incredible job. He has--his talent is more in leadership, right I mean yeah he's a great engineer, but he has a natural ability to get people to work together and to work at teams, and inspire people to work, right. And he's doing a lot with kids. He works out of Newark [New Jersey] and he helps kids, he brings--every time I look around there's another kid he brings, say hey no, this would be a great kid to have in our company. So he does more recruiting. But, but in the engineer and technology area, the guy is just incredibly bright and just incredibly bright in the things that I've seen him do and to integrate stuff, right. But the real value for him, I get to work with my son to create like a lot of this stuff that I'm creating now, I' doing it with my son, my younger son and we're creating all this neat, new stuff and hopefully it will have a huge impact on the society in terms of creating these new personalized cellular networks. And so but he plays a major role. Now my younger daughter [Catalina Russell], which is the youngest, she goes out, her reaction, too much engineering in this family, right you know. She decides to go into accounting. But boy she has the mental toughness of--I've never seen anything like it before. She is just mentally tough in the way she deals with adverse situations and she's had a lot of them in her life. But she's able to, to deal with them with the kind of confidence that, that shocks me because she's the one that I babied the most, right. And she turns out to be almost the strongest of all of them, right, in terms of how she deals with life situations and so forth. But she works in the company. She does all the accounting and so forth for the company. But she, she works, so, so the, the joy of my kids. Two of them I've lost because they went out and went away to other places. And the other two I get to work side-by-side, so all of life's lessons I get to depart to them, right, and, and that's something special when you can do that. So, so you, if you would say is there a legacy that I'm--all I ever wanted for my kids was just like what my mother wanted for me, just be a good person, right. And help other people, that you'll get it back. My mother used to say that all the time in church. Just help people and you'll get it back tenfold, right, that's what she used to tell me all the time. Just go--any time you can help somebody, just help them. You don't have to worry about them helping you, right, you'll get it back from other sources. That's the way God intended it, right. So it was always a God's lesson that she taught and that was one of them, yeah. Speaker 2: You said you have like four brothers that are ministers? Speaker 1: Three, three that are ministers, right, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 21735 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, its' a little bit different though. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know this may be a strange response, but I'll give it to you. The, the thing that I'd like for people to remember me, cause I've had the opportunity to work with some very bright people in my career, right. And that I've also worked in difficult circumstances in my career. And that the thing that I am most proud of is not all the patents, not all the inventions, is that what I say to people that I manage today is that I never left any dead bodies behind me. And, and what I mean by that is, is that too frequently with our quest for fame and fortune and success, we tend to exploit or take advantage of others. And I--because of the teachings of my mother [Mary Louise Glenn Russell], I vow that I would not do that, just as a legacy to my mother. That I would not--and, and I've dedicated my whole life to focus on excellence with a passion and power, fame and fortune will come to you. You don't have to chase it. And, and that's the way I have, have operated through my life is that I've tried to leave--I'm sure somebody will say I left a dead body here or there. But it was never intentional. And, and that I would never do it knowingly. But no I, I, I think that our value, the contributions of people and I think people are so important in, in that if you're managing them, you should always think of them as investments, not expense. And you should do anything you can to improve the quality of people's lives. And that's what's important to me, right. And that's what I try to work for. But I do know that if you're going to achieve anything in life, whether it's in technology or in any other field of endeavor that you choose, the, the thing that has been the most helpful to me is to focus on excellence and focus on it with a passion. And, and what I tell these young people when I talk to them, be the best that you can be. Just be the best that you can be. You don't have to worry about the people around you. If you're going to be something, whatever your field of endeavor, you should be the best and you should strive to be the best in that field of endeavor. And you don't have to worry about anything else. Everything else will take care of itself, right. And, and that's just the way I think. Yeah, but no I, I, I just--hopefully I've never left any dead bodies behind me. Hopefully I've never had to step on somebody else to achieve whatever modicum of success I've achieved...