 Story_ID: 621252 Speaker 1: My name is Tom Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson] and I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the veo- videographer, and Adam Jefferson [ph.] and Larry Crowe are our observers. Please state and spell your--your name? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Roberts, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, R-O-B-E-R-T-S. Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Yeah, Elizabeth. It's actually Elizabeth Aileen, and Aileen is spelled A-I-L-E-E-N. But I usually drop the Ai- Aileen. So sometimes I write my name as Dorothy E. Roberts. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 8th, 1956, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know you're stumping me on that one. What is it August-- Speaker 1: Twenty-seventh? Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh, August 27th, 2010. Speaker 1: Okay, the location of this interview and the address? Speaker 2: This is in my office at Northwestern University School of Law [Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law], 357 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611. Speaker 1: And tell us what your occupation is? Speaker 2: I'm a law professor and an author, and a social activist. Story_ID: 621253 Speaker 1: Now we have a few what we call People magazine questions that I wanna just bounce off of you (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I'm not having an affair (laughter), but-- Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) that wasn't one of them. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food, oh man. Oh gosh, I like fish. I like maybe a haddock or grilled haddock. That's what I--I'm thinking of what I usually order at a restaurant if I have my, my range of options. I like that. Speaker 1: Okay. What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Well I love the summer. I happen to really like the fall in Chicago [Illinois]. But I like warm weather, so the summer would generally be my favorite time of year. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Somewhere in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you what popped into my mind, is this, a quote from the Bible. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13]. Story_ID: 621254 Speaker 1: We'll get in, a little bit into your family background. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother, her name, her maiden name, and do you know when she was born, and where? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That I know. Oh my mother is a wonderful--was, she died last year, May. A wonderful woman named Iris Rosalee White Roberts [Iris White Roberts]. And she was born near Kingston, Jamaica on November 22nd, 1922. Although there is a dispute about her birthday because she was born ve- very late at night and her father [Alexander White] wrote November 23rd on the birth certificate, but she says it was actually November 22nd she was born on. Speaker 1: Do you know where she grew up, did she grow up in Jamaica? Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up in Jamaica. She lived in Jamaica until 1948. But she grew up there. Her father was a carpenter and her mother [Rebecca Smith White] was a seamstress. And she grew up in the family with lots of children and went to Wolmer's Girls' School [Kingston, Jamaica] which was a very good British school for girls in Jamaica. And so she spent her entire childhood into her early twenties in Jamaica. Speaker 1: Did she have a number of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yeah, she had, oh let's see that's. I knew my Uncle Carlton [Carlton White (ph.)], Uncle Bertie [Bertie White (ph.)], Uncle Alfred [Alfred White (ph.)]. And then my Aunt Violet [Violet White (ph.)] and Aunt Carmen [Carmen White (ph.)], and then she also had a younger brother who died and two sisters who died as well, two other sisters who died. Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you any stories about what it was like growing up in Jamaica? Speaker 2: Tons of stories. She talked about it all the time. She had a very fond, very fond memories of growing up in Jamaica. She admired her parents very much. I never heard her say one negative thing about her parents, and she often referred to how well her parents brought her up. She had a very--almost idyllic story about growing up in Jamaica about how people were good to each other, people were honest, you know, people were kind, people were smart. And she had an excellent education. She remembered the things she had to re- poetry, she recited as a little girl, she could remember stanzas upon stanzas of poetry she recited as a girl. All sorts of stories about Jamaica and how people of all different backgrounds got along together. She didn't have anything bad (laughter) to say about Jamaica. She was very, very--thought very, very highly about Jamaica in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Of course it was under British rule at the time. And actually my mother didn't really have much bad to say about that (laughter) either to be honest. But she didn't really talk about the British, it was the Jamaicans who she had an extremely high opinion of. And her childhood, she described as almost perfect, that her--her parents were excellent parents. She had an excellent education, and a wonderful family, and she very often talked about it. Story_ID: 621255 Speaker 1: Did she go to college? Speaker 2: Yes. Well in 19--my mother [Iris White Roberts] has a fascinating story (laughter) we could take up all the time talking about her. But in 1948, she and her older sister, my Aunt Violet [Violet White (ph.)], left Jamaica to go live in Liberia, West Africa and teach there. And they became schoolteachers in Liberia. And while they were living in Liberia, a man from the United States happened to be passing through and he told my mother about Roosevelt University in Chicago [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. And my--and my mother filled out an application and they sent the application back with this gentleman and she was accepted to Roosevelt on a full scholarship. And so she left--I--I'm not sure what the year was, but it would've been the early 1950s, she left Liberia--Monrovia, Liberia to go to college in Chicago at Roosevelt University. So she graduated from Roosevelt and then she was accepted into the Ph.D. program in anthropology at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and she was working on her Ph.D. there at--in between she married my father [Robert Roberts], who was a professor at Roosevelt. And--and I was born and that was when she, she stopped working on her Ph.D. at that point to focus on being a mother. Story_ID: 621256 Speaker 1: Now you talked about her parents were very, very good. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What do you know about their background and experiences? Were they--do you know--were they born in Jamaica also (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah, they--they were from Jamaica. Their ancestors going back as far as I know were from Jamaica. I--I assume that they were the descendants of slaves who were brought from, probably West Africa to Jamaica. And I know that my mother's [Iris White Roberts]--mother's father lived to past 100. And I also know that my grandfather's brother, Eustace [Eustace White (ph.)] my mother's Uncle Eustace was a secretary to Marcus Garvey. So those are some details I know. Also my mother's Uncle Ben [Ben Smith (ph.)], who I believe is my grandmother's brother, moved to Canada, Montreal, Canada and started a business there, and I believe he was pretty well known in the community. I remember seeing a newspaper article about him at some point, that he was, you know, had a significant presence in the black community or Caribbean community in Montreal. And my--I have my Uncle Carlton [Carlton White (ph.)] moved to Montreal and is still living there now. But, so those are--then there's other relatives in Jamaica who lived in Jamaica. At one point, my sister made a trip to Jamaica and met some of my mother's relatives living there. And I have an Uncle Bertie [Bertie White (ph.)], my mother's younger son [sic.], Bert--Uncle Bertie, who is still living in Jamaica. So as far as I know, her ancestors, you know, for some generations were Jamaicans. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: It was you know, I actually (laughter) wrote the wrong thing, I realize on the interview form, but his--my grandfather's name was Alexander Nathaniel White [Alexander White]. Speaker 1: And your grandmother? Speaker 2: She was Rebecca White. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you happen to know her maiden name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Smith. Rebecca Smith White. Story_ID: 621257 Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about your father. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was his name again? Speaker 2: His name was Robert Edward Thomas Roberts [Robert Roberts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Chicago [Illinois] on August 17th, 1915. Speaker 1: And where--did he grow up in Chicago? Speaker 2: He grew up in Chicago, yeah in Logan Square in Chicago. Speaker 1: What do you know about his background? Speaker 2: Well, I know that his father was born in Wales and came to the--immigrated to the United States and became a photoengraver they called it. I'm not sure exactly what that means, but he was an immigrant. I know that his father Alfie, it's Alfred Roberts, but they called him Alfie Roberts. My father told me that he was a so- a football or soccer star (laughter) in England before he came to the United States. And my father's mother, Johanna Reinert Roberts was born in Chicago, but her parents migrated to Chicago from Germany--or actually my father told me it's the part--it was Germany at the time, it's now part of Poland. But they were Germans. So his father's side was British and his mother's side was German. And as far as I know she was a housewife. And my father also grew up with his grandparents, the Reinerts who spoke German. So there, they didn't speak English very well. And my, so my father spoke fluent German growing up. Story_ID: 621258 Speaker 1: Describe your father [Robert Roberts]. Speaker 2: Well (laughter), that's hard to capture it all. He was a wonderful, interesting person as well. He was an anthropologist. And he loved learning about cultures around the world. He was the kind of person, you could ask him about any culture anywhere in the world and he could give you a dissertation on it. He studied people from around the world and I--I think it's interesting, I find it very fascinating, I want to look into this more, how it is that he was so different from the rest of his family. His brother, Edward [Edward Roberts], I never met because he was so upset at my father for marrying a black woman [Roberts' mother, Iris White Roberts]. And I--I never met him in my life. He wouldn't associate with our family at all. And his other brother, Alfred [Alfred Roberts] and Edward were both businessmen. My father ha- knew nothing about business. He was completely a--a--a scholar, a professor, but just very interested in traveling and learning about other people from around the world. He was very deeply committed to the idea of common--our common humanity and he often talked to us about how people were really the same, how--he felt that people living in the United States were so--were very, basically very similar and that we created these divisions among us that weren't really that important. So he had a kind of idealistic view about race I think (laughter) and diversity, you know, and social difference. Story_ID: 621259 Speaker 1: But another interesting thing about my father [Robert Roberts], my--through my entire childhood he was studying interracial marriage in Chicago [Illinois]. And he interviewed, I--I don't know the numbers, but dozens and dozens of people who, interracial couples from people who had been married in the 1800s all the way to people who were married in the 1970s. And I have this treasure trove in my basement right now that I'm hoping to work on at some point. But it was a very significant part of growing up, because my father was writing this book through my entire childhood. He never wrote the book (laughter), but he just kept interviewing people. But all of these couples became--not all, but many of them became family friends. And it was a very--it--it--it was an important part of my childhood, his--his work, his interviews in Chicago. Also another aspect, I think a part of what led him to be so different from the rest of his family was that when he was fifteen, he had an aunt and uncle who were missionaries in India. And they took him to India with them at age fifteen and he was very, very influenced by living in India. He had a lot of books in our house about India and he had a sort of--he had a almost spiritually he was affected by, I think some of the Indian religions. And he had a kind of free spirit that I think, I'm just guessing, but I think it may have come from that--that experience in India. Story_ID: 621260 Speaker 1: How did his parents react to his interracial marriage? Speaker 2: Well, his father [Alfred Roberts] had died when he met my mother [Iris White Roberts]. His mother [Johanna Reinert Roberts] was still alive, but he didn't marry my mother until his mother died. My (laughter) mother often said that she thought he was waiting until she died to marry her, because I--I guess they were--I'm not sure exactly the timing of it, but in my mother's opinion they delayed the marriage until then. So, I think my--I've never heard that my grandmother was mean or disrespectful to her, but I think my father felt that she would've been traumatized by his (laughter) marriage. So, it--it didn't happen until she had passed away already. Speaker 1: How did your mother's parents [Rebecca Smith White and Alexander White] react to the marriage? Speaker 2: I--as far as I can tell they didn't have a problem with it. My grandparents actually lived with us for several years. And they were very close to my father [Robert Roberts]. I don't--I don't think it bothered them. I think they probably felt that my mother marrying a professor, I think that's what mattered more, that they--they liked the idea that my mother had married a professor. And so, as far as I could tell, his race didn't matter to them. Story_ID: 621261 Speaker 1: Where did your father [Robert Roberts] get his degree? Speaker 2: He--he got his college degree, I think there used to be a university called University of Chicag- I mean Chicago university, there wa- you know, I can't really remember. It--it was not, it was someplace in Chicago [Illinois] and I'm not even sure if it exists anymore (laughter). But his--the big thing was his Ph.D. was from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and that's what he emphasized the most growing up that he had a Ph.D. from University of Chicago. That--that influenced our upbringing a lot because we grew up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and he had a lot of friends from University of Chicago. So we--so I was born on the University of Chicago campus. And so University of Chicago and Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] both have a lot of influence on my childhood. Speaker 1: It wasn't Chicago's teacher college, was it? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I--I should know but I--it really never was mentioned (laughter). I think I came across it looking at his resume or something once, but University of Chicago definitely overshadowed wherever it was he went to college. Story_ID: 621262 Speaker 1: Tell us about your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well this is interesting, when--when I was three months old, my parents moved to Liberia. My mother [Iris White Roberts] said that when she left Liberia to go to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], she promised that she would come back. And I think the Liberian government gave her some support and so she had a commitment to return to Liberia to teach. And my father [Robert Roberts] was interested in doing research, field work in Liberia. So the went together in 1956 when I was three months old. So I have my--we have a picture of me at like two months traveling to Washington, D.C. to get a passport. And I think there was some complication because my mother was a Liberian citizen at the time. She became a Liberian citizen when she moved to Liberia. Anyway, I think there was some complication about my nationality or something, I don't know. But they had--I had to fly with her to Washington to get a passport. And then we--the family stopped in Jamaica to meet my [maternal] grandparents [Rebecca Smith White and Alexander White] 'cause they had never met my parents at the time that they were in Jamaica--my--my mother at the time I should--they never met my father at the time because they were still living in Jamaica. And, and then we went to Liberia. So and my parents spent two years there. And my sisters [Helen Roberts Evans and Evelyn Roberts McClutsky], who are twins, were born in Liberia. And my father was an avid photographer. So he took tons of photographs and movies on these, you know, reels that I don't even know if they're salvageable, but I have all this at my basement. And we used to watch them all the time. On Saturday evenings, he would bring out these movies and we watched movies of Liberia. So I feel like I have memories of being a two year old in Liberia, but I--I don't know if it's from the movies or actual memories. But we watched these movies over and over and over again growing up. My father's very proud of them. He had, not only film of the family, but also he did a lot of field work in the interior of Liberia. I--I think he was the first white person that some of the tribal people ha- had ever seen in Liberia. He showed us all of these movies. So growing up I--I had a sense of what tribal life was like in Liberia. The kind of--the ceremonies, all of that I saw as a four and five year old. And it obviously left, you know, a really strong impression on me. Speaker 1: Was your mother teaching when she went back? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was teaching at the college there, as--as was my father. Although, you know, she had these twins a year after I was born. So she had three little babies (laughter), I think that occupied a lot of her time also. Speaker 1: What did she teach? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure. It may have been anthropology, because as I mentioned, she had been working on her Ph.D. in anthropology, and she finished all the course work, she just never wrote her dissertation. And--this--this whole, you know, my birth and then moving to Liberia disrupted all of that, and she never went back and finished it. So I'm--I'm not sure what she taught, but it very well could've been anthropology. Speaker 1: And your father was teaching anthropology (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was teaching anthropology, yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 621263 Speaker 1: Describe some of the events in your childhood. What was it like--like for holidays? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, once we, we came back to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] when--when I was two from Liberia and we moved into this wonderful gigantic house on Kenwood Avenue between 48th and 49th Streets, a house I could never afford today. I'm so mad my parents [Iris White Roberts and Robert Roberts] ever sold it. But it was--it was--it was like a magical house. It was this huge house with a big backyard and the people who owned it before us were--used to go on safaris in Africa and the wife was an artist. So she had painted murals of African life (laughter) all over the house. Animals, you know, tribal people, and so, (unclear) in my sisters' bedroom, my sisters [Helen Roberts Evans and Evelyn Roberts McClutsky] had the largest bedroom 'cause they shared it. And across the wall were elephants (laughter), you know. And, and it was the kind of house that had secret passageways. And so a big part of growing up was growing up in that magical house. Story_ID: 621264 Speaker 1: Holidays, my mother [Iris White Roberts]--my mother was this delightful woman who had just this great style. She--she'd put on wonderful dinner parties and we would have people, professors, well known professors like St. Clair Drake, you know, was one of my father's good friends and he would be there with his wife Sandra [sic. Elizabeth Dewey Johns Drake]. Professors from all over the world would come to our house. Then my mother would put on these wonderful parties, she's a wonderful cook and she put on great parties, and we, you know, my sisters [Helen Roberts Evans and Evelyn Roberts McClutsky] and I would be on the outskirts looking in. So that's something I remember about holidays is my mother's parties. And then also, we often went to visit my [maternal] relatives in Montreal [Canada], my Uncle Carlton [Carlton White (ph.)] and his children. We would drive to Montreal. In fact, for many summers we would--that would be our summer trip driving to Montreal or we did a lot of family trips, camp--we used to go camping. We used to go to--there was an Indian [Native American] reservation in Wisconsin that we used to go to a lot and see the powwows and we all had our little moccasins. We also were members of the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois], and so there was a series at the Field Museum of sort of travelogues. Peo- members who had gone on trips would come and show their movies of their trips and that was a very common Saturday afternoon activity for us. So, we--I--I, I just had this, a wonderful childhood (laughter). Story_ID: 621265 Speaker 1: My parents were absolutely wonderful people who had these ideals about our common humanity and they thought our family represented, you know, it was a model of interracial harmony. I--I again, I think they were very idealistic about it, but that's how they looked at it. And they were very generous people. My mother [Iris White Roberts], another--another significant aspect of growing up is that my mother felt that our home should be open to people who needed a home. So we always had people who weren't part of our family living in our house, very often foreign students. She was--because she had been a foreign student, she was very committed to opening our house to foreign students or just people who were down on their luck. My--my mother worked for the--I don't know what the Chicago Department of Welfare [City of Chicago Department of Welfare] or something whatever the public service department was for a while before she became an elementary school teacher. And she would bring families who were, you know, didn't have a home to come and live in our house. But mostly it was foreign students that we--we very often had. People, I remember Charles Opata [ph.], I think his name was, I believe he was Ghanaian or Nigerian. There were two Haitian men who lived in our house for a while. A woman from India I remember living there. And then also relatives, my [maternal] grandparents [Rebecca Smith White and Alexander White] lived with us for a while, and at one point my aunt and her son came and lived with us for a while. So I can't remember anytime growing up when we didn't have someone other than our immediate family living with us in this gigantic house we had in--in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: What years did your grandparents live with you? Speaker 1: Oh man, I think it was probably maybe in the late '60s [1960s]. Yeah, that's what it was, it was in the late six--. When I was--in 1969 when I had just graduated from middle--from eighth grade going into high school, my father [Robert Roberts] got a Fulbright scholarship [Fulbright Fellowship] to teach at the American University in Cairo [Cairo, Egypt]. And so, and I remember my grandparents were living with us at the time and they moved to Washington, D.C. to live with my mother's sister who had been living there. So it was when I was, maybe from ten to twelve, something like that they had lived with us. And that overlapped with my aunt and cousin living with us also. Speaker 2: You mentioned that your mother became an elementary school teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What year did she graduate from Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], do you remember? Speaker 1: I would guess it was probably something like 1954, because I was born in '56 [1956] and I believe she went right from graduating from Roosevelt to beginning her Ph.D. program at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. So it would've, you know, I'm just approximating. It would've been in the mid-'50s [1950s]. Story_ID: 621266 Speaker 1: Now going back to your--your neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois], what was your neighborhood like? Speaker 2: It was a great neighborhood. We lived on a block of these magnificent houses with people who were very progressive. Our--to the one side neighbors I remember used to have meetings, like the Socialist Party (laughter) or something like that, and--some political, you know, very progressive political party. We had artists on the block, professors. It was a very left leaning to progressive block, you know, of middle class, mostly white, but there were black, you know, a couple black families on the block as well. So it was an integrated block. We all--we played, you know, everybody played together. We ran into each other's houses. There were kids all--living all along the block and we--we just spent the summers, you know, playing in each other's backyards. It didn't matter, you know, you could be in one house one minute, another house the next minute. That was--most of the mothers I think--well I shouldn't say m- but many of the mothers were home during the summers or there, you know, some of them had housekeepers. I remember maybe four doors down, the Joneses [ph.], the mother was a doc- maybe she was a law- the father was a doctor, the mother was a lawyer maybe. But I remember in many of the homes the mothers were--had significant careers, so I also grew up with these models of women who had important careers. And some of them had housekeepers, and so the kids would just, you know, I don't recall going to summer camp, I think we just played in each other's homes during the summer. So it was a wonderful block, a wonder block for that reason as well. The neighbors were very--but we had block parties. It was a very cohesive, friendly block, everybody knew each other and they were all really interesting people. We had a Frank Lloyd Wright house [Isidore H. Heller House, Chicago, Illinois] on our block, and the people who lived there were artists. And I just remember it being a very socially progressive, fascinating and friendly block to live on. Story_ID: 621267 Speaker 1: Another interesting thing about it was on one side was the Shoesmith Elementary School [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is where I went to elementary school. So right at the end of the block, I wasn't even a block away from my school, which was great. I walked to school, you know, the--my entire elementary school life. That, by the way, is the school where Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] voted, presumably for himself, for president. So it made the ne- the international news. And then on the other side, 48th Street was kind of considered a divide where mi- the middle class ended, (laughter) middle class housing ended, and then there were all these apartments. And when you got to 47th Street, that was considered, you know, where low income black people lived. And of course that was part of the area that went to Shoesmith School. So my school, Shoesmith, was an amazing school that was integrated in terms of race and immigration, you know, status and--and class as well, socioeconomic status. We had, you know, kids who came from poor families, low income families, middle class to very wealthy children as well whose parents believed in the ideal of integration. And so, you know, I had friends whose parents were on public assistance, as well as friends whose parents were probably multimillionaires, you know, executive, owners of business. But also, people who were active in the Civil Rights Movement, like [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. was in my class or Oscar Brown, Jr. I guess it was the III [Oscar Brown III], Oscar Brown, Jr.'s son. John Johnson's niece was in my class. But, you know, the--the publisher of Ebony magazine. And in fact, because of those connections, when I was in eighth grade I was the editor, co-editor, I actually started a school newspaper for Shoesmith. And a girl named Janet de Grazia and I were the co-editors. And we got to meet with John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] to tell us, you know, about how to run a school newspaper (laughter) because he was connected to Shoesmith School. Jesse Owens, his grandchildren went to our school, so Jesse Owens came and talked to us. Then Cassius Clay, now Muhammad Ali, one of his manager's kids went to our school, so he came and talked to us. I got Muhammad Ali's autograph when I was, you know, maybe seven years old or something. Then he signed it Cassius Clay. So it was just--it was an amazing school because of this diversity of backgrounds of people in so many different respects. And it ob- again, it had such an influence on--on me growing up in an environment like that. Story_ID: 621268 Speaker 1: You mentioned that you went to Shoesmith Elementary School [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yeah. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that influenced you? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. I would say the first one who comes to mind is Mrs. McCoo [ph.]. I'm not even sure (laughter) what her first name was 'cause we called her Mrs. McCoo. But she was my seventh grade teacher, and she--she kind of took me under her wing. She encouraged me to ap- apply for writing contests in Chicago [Illinois] and I remember there was one where we were supposed to write about the history of Chicago, especially du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] the founder of Chicago. And she encouraged me to apply for that and compete. And she was--supported me throughout. In fact, I--I was one of the finalists. I can still remember it like it was yesterday, I had to read my essay on stage and I came in second place. I remember there was a--an African American boy who won first place and I can still hear him, you know, (laughter) he was--he was so good (laughter). He was like, had a Shakespearian (laughter) demeanor and he--he won. But Mrs. McCoo encouraged me to--to get that far in the competition and I remember afterwards she took me out to lunch and consoled me, and you know, encouraged me to continue my writing. And I'm sure she probably had something to do with my wanting to start a newspaper at Shoesmith School, 'cause I--I believe we started either in our--in the seventh or eighth grade. She was very politically progressive. I remember when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, the year she was my teacher, and I can still see her coming to class wearing all black and encouraging us to write something to Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King]. And I wrote a poem to Mrs. King, which she made sure got delivered to her. I'm not sure exactly how, and I remember we had an assembly and Oscar Brown [Oscar Brown III] and I both read our poems, they were selected from--by somebody, I don't know who is was--Mrs. King, but somebody. So there was this big assembly. And so I think of her as encouraging me to express myself and also to be politically progressive, to care about social justice and to think about it as something I could make as my life's work. And then the next year, I had a teacher named Mrs. Brown [ph.] who was much stricter then Mrs. McCoo, but she also encouraged me to write and to think freely. So I--I remember that year, we were supposed to write book reports and I remember we learned to write our notes on index cards that year (laughter). This is eighth grade and I, my book I selected was 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America'] by Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Charles Hamilton [Charles V. Hamilton]. And I--I can still remember getting up in front of the class and telling the class about 'Black Power.' And, you know, she encouraged me to do it. She didn't think that that was an inappropriate book for an eighth grader to present to the class (laughter). And she also was supportive with the school--my, my role in the school newspaper. So those two teachers I, I remember very fondly from elementary school. Speaker 1: Now was Mrs. McCoo and Mrs. Brown, were they black or white? Speaker 2: They were black teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 621269 Speaker 1: What type of student were you? Speaker 2: In elementary school [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I have always been a very ambitious student (laughter). I think my mother [Iris White Roberts] instilled that in me. My mother made education the top priority. And I can remember her telling me from when I was very little, you know, "Don't get married until you have--made sure you have your education under your belt." Maybe because she had--I think she--she did regret not finishing her Ph.D. [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. And she used to always say to me, "You're my Ph.D., you know, I had you instead of a Ph.D.," and in a nice way, you know, not bitter or anything like that. But she always encouraged me to strive to be the best in terms of my education and other things as well. And so I can remember from, you know, as far back as I can remember wanting to get good grades and that being a really strong ambition. Kind of a driving (laughter) ambition. So I was always a really good student. And I was valedictorian of my eighth grade class. And I, you know, I can remember that as being like the most important thing (laughter) that could possibly have happened to me. And writing my speech, I can, I get--I can remember it like it was yesterday giving that speech, valedictorian speech and just being so happy that I was chosen, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 621270 Speaker 1: Your siblings go to Shoesmith [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did. Yeah, again my sisters were just a year younger than I was and they were twins. And so they, I actually was two years ahead of them 'cause I skipped a grade at one point, but they, you know, followed pretty close behind me in elementary school. Speaker 1: Let me back up just a second. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Give us your siblings' names and in bir- birth order (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, right (laughter). Well the first to come out was Helen and she is now Helen Evans [Helen Roberts Evans]. She married someone named Evans. She's divorced now but she still goes by Helen Evans Roberts [sic.]. And then the next was Evelyn, who was Evelyn Thomas who she married someone, you know, whose last name was Thomas, who she divorced and she's just recently married last year a man named John McClutsky [ph.]. So she is now Evelyn McClutsky [Evelyn Roberts McClutsky]. Speaker 1: And those are on--those are your twin sisters? Speaker 2: Those are my sisters who are twins and those are my only siblings, yeah. Speaker 1: And they were born one year after you? Speaker 2: They were born, yes, in 1957. Story_ID: 621271 Speaker 1: Now did you and your family attend church? Speaker 2: Yeah. Gro- there was a St. Paul's Episcopal Church [St. Paul and the Redeemer Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] that we attended. You know, I don't remember though, I actually remember more so going to the civil rights meetings there then going to church services there. And I can't quite recall how they were related, but I do remember, even without my parents [Iris White Roberts and Robert Roberts], going to meetings at St. Paul's Episcopal Church. Speaker 1: What year would've this--this been? Speaker 2: This would've been in the '60s [1960s], in the later 1960s, yeah. But I remember meetings about, you know, getting reports about the Civil Rights Movement in the South. Also I remember going to meetings that had to do with the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation]. 'Cause the--the gang, the Blackstone Rangers was present in our neighborhood. I mean they--present in the sense that we heard about them and I remember sometimes they would leave, not a lot of graffiti, but some graffiti on trees on--on our block. And I--I recall there was an effort to try to make peace with the Blackstone Rangers. I--I remember attending a meeting with members of the Blackstone Rangers when I was in elementary school [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. My--my parents didn't--weren't there, but I, you know, we were so independent (laughter) when I was growing up. I did a lot of things without my--a--a lot with my parents, you know, we had these family activities that had to do more with travel and culture and museums, and that kind of thing. And then there were these political activities I participated in that it was just easy to walk to from my house. And I--and I recall St. Paul's Episcopal Church being a center of that. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned you got reports on the Blackstone Rangers-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were those reports coming from the police department [Chicago Police Department] or were they? Speaker 2: No this was more had to do with sort of some social justice work where the--the aim was to--all I can think is peacemaking kind of work. We--well, but also, you know, just growing up in the neighborhood you'd hear--well when you said, maybe police repo- you know, in the newspapers you would her what was going on in surrounding neighborhoods. I mean I--there wasn't--it wasn't as if there were members of the Blackstone Rangers on our block, but close by, you know, in the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: So you were becoming politically active at a very young age? Speaker 2: Yeah, not that real politically active, but politicized and attending meetings. I didn't go on a bus to the south, you know, or anything like that, but I--I did feel at a young age that I wanted to be aware of what was going on politically. I can remember subscribing to the Blackstone Rang- not the, but the Black Panther Party newspaper in elementary school. I know this was before, when we were living in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] before we moved to Egypt. So it was sometime in elementary school and I can remember my--it coming to the house and my mother telling me I had to cancel the subscription. Because, not because she disagreed with the politics, but because she felt it would bring our house under suspicion by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. She was--my mother was very aware of--of ways that, you know, you could get in trouble (laughter) and she didn't want--didn't want us to get in trouble. So I had to cancel it with the, after the first issue came (laughter) to the house. Story_ID: 621272 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what year did you graduate from Shoesmith [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Well then my father [Robert Roberts] had his Fulbright Fellowship to teach at American University in Cairo [Cairo, Egypt]. So we moved to a suburb of Cairo [Egypt] called Maadi. And I went to a school called Cairo American College [Cairo, Egypt], which was a school run by--a private school run by Americans, but it was more of an international school because a lot of the children of diplomats when to this school and also children of other professors who were teaching at Cairo American College--American University in Cairo. Cairo American College was the school I went to and American University in Cairo was where my father taught. And also there was a significant contingent of children of oil executives and staff of oil companies who were in Cairo or in--in somewhere in Egypt drilling for oil for, I guess, U.S. oil companies. Speaker 1: Now this--but this was your high school experience? Speaker 2: This was my first two years. We lived there for two years. So my first two years of high school were at this international school in--in--outside of Cairo, Egypt. Speaker 1: What did your mother [Iris White Roberts] do while you were in Cairo? Speaker 2: My mother worked for the University of Cairo [Cairo, Egypt], I think it was called. It was actually a--a--an Egyptian university. And she worked with foreign students who were going to that university who could speak English. My--we--we tried to learn Arabic, but we--we learned very rudimentary Arabic. My mother probably spoke it the best of anybody. But she--she did liaison work between the university and these foreign students who were coming in to--to go to this Egyptian university. Speaker 1: And when did you come back to the U.S.? Speaker 2: We came back in 1971 when I was entering my junior year of high school. Story_ID: 621273 Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school when you came back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when we came back, we--my parents [Iris White Roberts and Robert Roberts] had unfortunately sold this magnificent house in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). And we came back and lived in Evanston, Illinois. My parents rented a house in Evanston and I went to Evanston Township High School, the big public high school in Evanston. Speaker 1: Where did you live in Evanston? Speaker 2: We lived on Central Street on the north side of Evanston. So, as--it's an interesting situation, it was, you know, a pretty fancy block, but the owner of the house didn't charge as much rent as you might expect for the house. I can't remember all the details, but it was a wealthy family that owned this house. They didn't need the house (laughter). Somehow through connections that my parents had, we were able to rent this house at a very reasonable rate in a very, you know, one of the prime neighborhoods in Evanston. Speaker 1: Now what made your family come back to Evanston as opposed to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, you know, I'm not really positive. I suspect it had to do with finding a really good public high school for me and my sisters [Helen Roberts Evans and Evelyn Roberts McClutsky] to go to. And Evanston Township High School qualified for that. Story_ID: 621274 Speaker 1: What kind of extracurricular activities were you involved in at Evanston High? Speaker 2: Well there wasn't too much time for extracurricular (laughter), 'cause again as I mentioned before, I mean by the ti- in fact one of the reasons we moved back, my--my parents [Iris White Roberts and Robert Roberts] actually wanted to spend another two years in Egypt and I was very set on--there were two things: one, getting into a tough college, I particularly wanted to go to Yale College [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I felt that I needed to be in the United States to be able to compete for that. And also, I, I, I wanted to get a better sense of myself as a black woman, and I felt that at the school I was going to [Cairo American College, Cairo, Egypt], there weren't that many black students. There was actually the children of the ambassador from Liberia were there, but many of the students there were these really spoiled (laughter) kids of these oil, you know, executives. And I wanted to--I wanted to get--I don't--involved is too strong a word, but I wanted to at least be closer to social justice work involving black people in the United States. And so it was really largely because of my pleas to my parents that we moved back to the United States. So while I was at Evanston Township High School [Evanston, Illinois], my main focus was getting straight A's so I could and taking advanced placement courses so I could get into Yale. That--that was my main focus. But I also was involved, I was--I was elected to student council, so I was involved in student council, and also in my--I can't remember whether it was my junior or senior year, I had a teacher named Dorothy Tripp [ph.] who was--who had an interesting class, it was called something like--something about humanity. It was--it was an interesting course where she was just trying to get us to think about our common humanity and social justice. I can't even remember how you would describe it, but we, you know, I remember we studied Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], we studied Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. She was kind of a person like my father, you know. And she, you know, she was like Mrs. McCoo [ph.], she sort of took me under her wing. And there was some--the American Anthropological Association had some sort of program for high school students and she got me involved in it. And I represented the high school in this program. I--I can't remember all the details of it, but it--it involved attending the American Anthropological Association meeting, and it involved meeting people of the Baha'i Temple [Baha'i House of Worship, Wilmette, Illinois]. And the meetings having to do with human rights and humanity. I can't remember all the details, but that was something I was involved in either in my junior or senior year at ETHS as well. Speaker 1: Was she white or black? Speaker 2: She was white, um-hm. And I, I, I can't, I can't recall too much more than that. I mean I was really, you know, those--junior and senior year I was so focused on academics and I had a very difficult load, I took a lot of advanced placement courses. And so I, I spent a lot of time working on my classes. I, I really don't remember doing much (laughter) more than that, other than these other activities I mentioned. Story_ID: 621275 Speaker 1: Now at that time, what did you--what were your aspirations, what did you think you wanted to be? Speaker 2: At that time, I thought I wanted to be an anthropology professor like my father [Robert Roberts], but more geared toward some kind of social justice work. So I, I had this vision that you could use anthropology to challenge injustices based on race and class. I, I wasn't quite sure how I would do it, but I, I, I knew I wanted to major in anthropology and that was the vision I had at, at the time I applied to college. Speaker 1: And where did you--did you get into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got into Yale, um-hm. Speaker 1: When you started at Yale, were you still thinking about anthropology? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I majored in anthropology. I stuck with that. You know, I graduated with a major in anthropology. And I--up until probably the end of--the second half of my junior year when I had to start thinking about, am I gonna apply to graduate school, what am I gonna do next? I still had this vision of being an anthropology professor. When I started thinking about it more seriously, it entered some next steps. I couldn't figure out how I could use a Ph.D. in anthropology to really make a difference in terms of social justice, and then I decided I would apply to law school instead. Story_ID: 621276 Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Well again, I focused a lot on (laughter) on my grades. I actually got straight A's my first year at Yale, I was very focused on my academics. But I also got involved with the--the Black House [Afro American Cultural Center], we used to call it, the black student organization association at Yale [Black Student Alliance at Yale]. I was in the choir, even though I don't (laughter) sing that well. But I was--I was--I joined the choir just as a way of getting to know the black students better and getting involved in activities there. I also got involved in a Christian organization at Yale, which was interracial. But you know, most of my--well, I there--you know, the black students at Yale were very close 'cause there weren't that many of us. And so pe- students in all four years, you know, were very close to each other. I, I think the Black House maybe was where we sort of came together. But I, I can't really recall another organization I was involved in, but we were--it was a very cohesive group. Story_ID: 621277 Speaker 1: Were there anybody--very many people in that organization [Black Student Alliance at Yale] or while you were at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] that went on to become notable in their career, that were your classmates (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the, probably the--well not my classmate, but the most notable is probably Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], who was a graduate student at the time, but he was always around there. And of course Julieanna Richardson--oh she was law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I should go back to. Sorry, we'll wait for law school for that. Well, in my class was [HistoryMaker] Nat Adderley, Jr. who was Cannonball Adderley's nephew and I know he ended up becoming the music director for Luther Vandross. I remember going to a Luther Vandross concert (laughter) and he was--saw him there and greeted him afterward. Let's see, who else was in that class. Well, I--you know, I think many of us became--went on to have valuable, you know, service kinds of careers. I know that at least three or four became doctors, I can think of in my class. And every once in a while I come across a name of somebody who is involved in some social justice organization or lawyer or something like that. But I haven't really kept in touch with everybody. But it was a very impressive group of people. I--Yale was a great experience. I, I really enjoyed it and I thought that the black students there were just remarkable. And I, I really enjoyed having them as friends and classmates. Story_ID: 621278 Speaker 1: Were there any political things going on at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] at the time you were there did, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --did the black students take over the administration building (laughter) or anything? Speaker 2: We didn't do that. The one thing I remember is that William Shockley, the phys- Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] physicist, I think, who wrote about the genetic inferiority of blacks was invited to speak. And I remember participating in a protest against him coming. And I can't remember if we succeeded in stopping him from coming to the campus or if the protest was while he was there. But I distinctly remember participating in that. And also there was a big political meeting about it that I participated in. And I, I can't remember his name, but I, I, I can just see right now this black student who I can--he must've gone on to politics 'cause I can remember him standing up and giving this impassioned speech about why free speech shouldn't protect what Shockley had to say. And, and then, you know, physically participating in this protest where students marched with ban- with placards and shouting something against his being there. That's--that comes to mind. I don't really remember any other major political rallies or anything like that while I was there. Story_ID: 621279 Speaker 1: Did you develop any strong friendships with some of the white students at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, um-hm. Probably the closest friendship I have still with someone from Yale is a white student I met there, yeah. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: It's a--it's a man actually, Hugh Gross is his name. And we've stayed in touch over the years. He's, he's a writer and has just recently, well he also was involved in financial markets. I don't know, he's one of those people who just knows how (laughter) to make a living with other people's money. I don't have any clue how that happens. But his, his actual passion is for writing. And he just--and so over the years he sent me his novels that he's written. And when he's in Chicago [Illinois] or I was in, he used to be in New York [New York] and then he moved to West Hollywood [California], you know, we sometimes get together. And he just recently put on--produced a play that he wrote and I went to see--see it in California. And he just made a movie, independent movie, that--that I, you know, he's been telling me about. And he sends me, he's recently got married and has two--just had a baby like a month ago and has another little girl and he sends me the photos, you know, that kind of thing. So I've, I've kept in touch with him probably more than anyone else at Yale. Then there are other, you know, well you asked me about white, white students in particular, so he would stand out. Story_ID: 621280 Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to do much writing when you were at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Well, I, yeah, I've always much preferred writing papers to taking exams. So, at--I, I tended to take courses that allowed me to write papers. So I've always done pretty well at writing papers and so I, I did write a lot of papers while I was at Yale. I'm in a variety of courses. I, I remember particularly liking writing history papers and I remember at one point, 'cause I, I loved working on papers I took in history courses and thinking maybe I should've majored in history instead. So I, but in most of sociology, anthropology courses I was able to write papers. And in fact, the one course that I did the worst in was physical anthropology. I took it in my senior year, the famous anthropologist Alison Richards [sic. Alison Richard] was in from Cambridge [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England] or somewhere, Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] or something and taught us. And she gave a multiple choice and you know, short answer exam, and I hated it, I hated it. But, the, the most of it was writing, most of the courses I took allowed me to write a lot. And I, you know, again I can--the image of myself up late at night finishing a paper comes right back to mind. Speaker 1: Now, is this where you started developing your research skills? Speaker 2: Well, I think I started developing my research skills in high school [at Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]. 'Cause I--I can remember going to the Northwestern library [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] while I was in high school to do research for papers in my AP [advanced placement] classes. So I can--I also had a wonderful senior year AP English course, a Mr. Crotty [ph.], another teacher who I would highlight as someone who had a lot of influence on me. And he--I think he helped develop my writing skills a lot and we did a lot of creative writing in his class. But then I also took, I remember, AP European history. I remember writing a paper where I compared the military strategy of, I think, Germany and Russia or something in the 1800s or something, but I remember going to Northwestern to do research and spending a lot of time doing research at the library there and really enjoying writing this paper. And I also remember from my AP U.S. history course writing a paper on the--the in- internment policy with the Japanese in--during World War II [WWII]. And doing a lot of research for that as well and enjoying writing that paper. So, you know, this is like forty years ago or something, literally (laughter). I can remember working on those papers like it was yesterday. And I, I, I enjoyed doing the research for those. So I, I think I started. You know, actually I can remember writing those notecards in eighth grade about 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America,' Charles V. Hamilton and Kwame Ture]. (Laughter) So I've been, I would say, my writing--my love for writing and research skills probably started back with Mrs. McCoo [ph.] writing that essay about du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] for an seventh grade competition [at Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. But, but definitely, you know, in college and also I had much more opportunity to develop my, my interest in research and writing. Story_ID: 621281 Speaker 1: When did you--what year did you graduate from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that you didn't think you could do much with anthropology. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that led you to law school. Why law (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Well, I thought that law would be a really powerful tool for actually trying to change policies and institutions. And you know, I think I was aware of civil rights litigation that was able to change the Jim Crow laws for example the way in which the Civil Rights Movement used litigation to make social change. And so it seemed to me the best tool I could get to, to be able to try to contribute to a social justice movement. Story_ID: 621282 Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in at Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well, at Harvard I was a member of the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association]. I became the secretary, maybe I think in my second year, third year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) BLSA? Speaker 2: BLSA, yeah. And that was my main activity on campus. I also in my third year took a clinical course where I worked at the Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts] and so I had a chance to represent poor and low income clients directly through that internship. Speaker 1: Did you know at that time or think at that time what type of lawyer you wanted to be? Speaker 2: Well, sort of a civil rights lawyer I think is what I had in mind. I didn't--I wasn't, you know, I don't recall now being interested in any specific aspect of it. I was mostly interested though in racial justice and opposing the oppression of black people and that was my primary interest. But I didn't really have a particular organization or even aspect of black equality that I was especially interested in. Story_ID: 621283 Speaker 1: While you were at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], other than Julieanna Richardson (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --were there any other classmates that became somewhat notable from your class? Speaker 2: Well, one I run into recently is Peter Lawson [Peter Lawson Jones], who was from Shaker Heights (laughter). He made it well known he was from Shaker Heights, Ohio and I've recently--when I've gone to speak there a couple times, I run into him. He's a commissioner of Cuyahoga County [Ohio] and I've actually spoke at a hearing before him (laughter) when I went there to speak once about racism in the child welfare system. And he's introduced me as a speaker at events there. [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Turner, Sly Turner who was president of BLSA [Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association] when I was secretary of BLSA, went on to become a politician in Houston, and I can't--I don't know if he ever became mayor of Houston, I'm not sure. I have to fact check this. But I know he was a well known politician in Houston, Texas. And then Tony Chase [HistoryMaker Anthony R. Chase], I--I believe--also became a law professor in Houston. They were both from Houston, Sly and Tony (laughter). And you know, people were very loyal to where they came from in law school I recall. And Peter and Sly and Tony all went back to their roots. And I think, you know, had significant careers. Who else was in that class? Oh I know that there, you know, there're others who became lawyers, even partners at law firms. Those are the names that come to mind. Now, I'm sure there're others that are just escaping me, but those are the names that come to mind. Speaker 1: Now was Scott Turow there? Speaker 2: I don't know. I didn't know him if he was there. Okay. Speaker 1: I think John Roberts, the chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, I'm pretty sure I overlapped with him there, but I didn't know him. Story_ID: 621284 Speaker 1: Now once you graduate from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--I mean Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --where did you go and how did you get that position? Speaker 2: Okay. When I graduated, I became a law clerk to Constance Baker Motley, the great civil rights litigator. And I definitely decided I wanted to clerk because I knew that clerkship would be a good stepping stone to whatever I wanted to do in the future. I think I, you know, by that point I was kind of thinking about teaching at some point and clerkships are definitely helpful for teaching. But as a litigator, would be helpful as well. And so I applied to various federal judges, black federal judges. I--I decided I wanted to clerk for a federal judge who had been involved in some way in social justice activism. So I clerked for--I--I applied to Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter] also on the Southern District of New York [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York] and Constance Baker Motley, both of whom had been litigators in the Civil Rights Movement, and some other judges in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] as well. But I, I got the offer from Judge Motley who was my top choice, you know. And I remember her clerk called me and said, "You have this offer from Judge Motley." And I said, "Well how long do I have to decide," (laughter)? I think 'cause I hadn't heard from some others (laughter). And she said, "What?" I think she said, "We'll give you an hour, you know," (laughter). Well you know, I did second thought and it didn't take me long to say what am I doing, you know. And of course I was really, really excited and it's just such an honor to clerk for this great hero of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Now what year was that? Speaker 2: That was 1980 to 1981. Story_ID: 621285 Speaker 1: What was it like clerking for somebody like Constance Baker Motley (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, on the one hand it was--it was sort of larger than life experience just because of her stature, both in terms of her history, her accomplishments, but also just her physical stature. You know, she's stately, I think is the best word to use for her. She's a--she was very tall and dignified and opinionated. And just knowing her history added this extra aura to the job. But on the other hand, she's very down to earth. And so her chambers were very comfortable to work in. She had a secretary, Roberta Thomas, I think her name was, who had been with her prior even to her--to Judge Motley getting on the bench. And Roberta lived in the Bronx [New York] and she, you know, came from modest background and was extremely down to earth, had been through it all, you know. And she set the tone for the whole chambers. And Judge Motley was married to a very down to earth man also who used to come and pick her up every day, Joel [Joel Wilson Motley, Jr.]. And she just--she didn't put--she was dignified, but she didn't put on airs at all. She was not formal, she was just very open. And it was a very, very easy going experience, even though she had this very accomplished history. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about her history and how she became who she was? Speaker 2: Not a lot. You know, some--there would be stories here and there, but you know, there was--at district court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York], you know, this is the trial level court, it's fast paced. There isn't a lot of time to sit around and talking about other things other than the case that's up now and the brief that has to--I mean the--not the brief, the opinion that has to be written and the trial that has to be prepared for. It's not like an appellate court where you have lots of time to work on a--on an opinion. And we were, you'd a think--there was something happening every single day and so it was--it was a very intense, even though--even though it was easy going, it was very intense. And there--there really wasn't a lot of time to sit around and reminisce. Although, she also was--she was just a very generous, friendly woman and she had a home in Connecticut that she invited her former clerks to for holiday events. And I remember--I don't remember the details of what she talked about, but I do remember being at this home, not only while I was a clerk, but even afterward and having more of a chance to talk with her. I wish I had even more, you know, I--I had a Fulbright Fellowship in Trinidad in 2002 to 2003, and Judge Motley wrote me a letter inviting me to visit her in Nevis where she had a home also. That's where her--she's fro- her family was from, her parents [Rachel Huggins Baker and McCullough Baker] were immigrants from, from the Caribbean. And I, I didn't go and I really regret it because, of course, she passed away recently and I, I have that letter saved where she invited me to come, but I really wish I had taken the time to, to visit her while I was in the Caribbean. Story_ID: 621286 Speaker 1: Were there any major cases that you had a chance to work on? Speaker 2: While I was clerking for her? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know if these were major. There--there were two that stand out because of the experience of working with her on them. Neither one, well one of them is kind of almost a comical case. It was a case where ABC was about to broadcast a new TV show called 'The Greatest American Hero' about this kind of fumbling man who discovers, I think, a superhero out- costume and when he puts it on he can fly (laughter), but he doesn't do it very well. And the owners of the Superman trademark sued to block (laughter) the broadcast of this show. And so we have this quick preliminary injunction hearing where we got to watch what was going to be broadcast, you know, the next day or the next week. And, and then we had to decide, does this fumbling hero infringe the trademark of Superman? And so, you know, it was just--so Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley] and I and my co-clerk [David Garcia], we--we're sitting there watching the show and then we go up to her chambers and she brought in everybody, her clerk at--of the clerk and Roberta [Roberta Thomas], and me and the co-clerk and we just sat around the table talking about whether we thought (laughter) that there was enough similarity between Superman and this other guy. And that's how we wrote the opinion, you know, that we ended up saying, "No they're too different to block it and America got to see this program." So, I, I just have very fond memories of that 'cause it was so much fun working on that case. And it was also an example of how Judge Motley was just so open and relaxed about things, even though this was an intense, very intense case, because we had to come down with a decision immediately. Story_ID: 621287 Speaker 1: The other case I--I remember fondly is when there was a class action lawsuit brought by teenagers in New York [New York] who wanted to get married against David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] who was then-- Speaker 2: Mayor? Speaker 1: --city clerk. He was now city clerk, who was in charge of marriage licenses, this was before he became mayor. And I think it's called Moe versus Dinkins [Moe v. Dinkins, 1981]. And we had to decide whether or not teenagers had a constitutional right to get married without parental consent. And the named plaintiffs were teenagers who--the--the girl--the teenage girl was pregnant and she wanted to get married before the baby was born so it would be a, you know, legitimate baby. And Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley] asked me to draft the opinion. And I, at that point, had become very interested in reproductive rights. In fact, that was--at that point what I thought I wanted to work on. I had just thought that this is a really urgent issue. And I was aware from law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] all the constitutional opinions about the right to abortion, the right to use contraceptives, the right to marry, and I put all this together and said, well obviously teenagers have a constitutional right to marry. And I showed it to Judge Motley and she said basically, "Are you crazy?" You know (laughter). "Of course teenagers can't get married without parental consent. You've missed that the state has this huge power over marriage." And you know, now that I teach family law [at Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], and I actually teach that case. It's interesting it's in the case book I use, so I can tell the students the background to how this case was decided. I realized that she was right, that the state has this--but it was also eye opening because I thought well Judge Motley, she's such a progressive person, that she's gonna go along with this. And she just said, "No, that--that's not right. You know, rewrite this," (laughter). "I couldn't possibly rule the way you think I should rule." And then a funny follow up to this is, the following year, I was an associate at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] a big law firm in New York, and the phone rings and I pick it up and it's Judge Motley on the other end. And she said, "I'm calling to let you know that the second circuit just affirmed my decision in Moe versus Dinkins," (laughter). "So I was right." So that was another memorable case. I don't think we had any big civil rights cases. You know, this is the thing about being a law clerk or just about cases that come into the Southern District of New York [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York], it's basically a financial capital and a lot of the cases have to do with finance, they have to do with, what I've learned maritime law, because it's also a port, had a big case, we spent months on, had to do with the sinking of a ship that had tons of corned beef on it. The maritime laws, you know, I thought I was gonna be dealing with civil rights cases, I was dealing with maritime cases or a big maritime case. So there--I can't think of a case that actually was related to Judge Motley's work as a civil rights litigator that we had that year I was there. Story_ID: 621288 Speaker 1: Now how did she, I mean writing these opinions, how did she [Constance Baker Motley]--did she edit them a lot or? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's--it's common. I don't know if the public knows this, (laughter) but it's common for law clerks to draft opinions. And I think it--it really depended on--on the opinion, I mean as Moe versus Dinkins [Moe v. Dinkins, 1981] showed. If, you know, obviously she's not going to sign her name on something that she disagrees with and it--she--that--what the opinion I drafted was just completely thrown out (laughter), you know, because she disagreed with it. You know, I can't remember other than that case how heavily she edited, but she definitely was very involved in the way in which the opinion would go and the writing of it. We merely, you know, wrote drafts and then she did what she wanted to do with the draft. Speaker 1: Who was co-clerk? Speaker 2: His name was David Garcia. And I haven't kept in touch with him at all. I--I--somehow I recall he went to Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], I may be wrong, but I just haven't kept in touch with him. I mean we--we didn't become particularly close, I mean we got along, but we didn't stay in touch with each other afterward. Story_ID: 621289 Speaker 1: Now you left there in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now how did you go from being really interested in social issues (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --to [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP]? Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Well, you know, it's very common for law students, whatever their interests are to go work for a law firm for what you hope will just be a couple of years (laughter). And I thought well let me--let me do that, let me see what it's like. Let me learn the skills. 'Cause that--you do learn a lot working at a big law firm because you're thrown into--depending on the firm, you're thrown into very intense work and you've got these partners who are extremely skilled really training you in--in my case, litigation practice. And so I looked around at the firms and to me Paul, Weiss was the most of the, you know, big firms in Washington [D.C.], New York [New York], was the most progressive, you know, as firms go. It had a reputation for having partners who were involved in--in Democratic politics, but also First Amendment rights, and also it had the reputation for being the best litigation firm in the country and having really stellar partners. So I wanted to be in Paul, Weiss. And so when I got the offer to work there, I thought it would be a great place to be. It was the--it wasn't--to me it wasn't like many of the other top New York firms that were very stodgy and formal and stuck up, you know. It, it really had a sense of just being partners who worked really hard but were really smart, very skilled. It also was diverse in--in--not in terms of race, but in terms of religious belief, you know, Christian and Jewish. A number of the partners were Jewish and I think it, it was known as the first big Jewish firm in New York. And so it, it, it was more comfortable to me than some of the more sort of elite (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Silk stocking? Speaker 2: --yeah exactly, silk stocking types of firms. I thought the associates there were really interesting and, and, and so I--I felt comfortable there. Even though, I believe I was the only black associate there. There may have been times when I was the only, only black lawyer there. And so, I mean now Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore V. Wells, Jr.], the very renowned black lawyer is the head of their litigation department. And Jeh Johnson, who may now be in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration, I think I read, but he became a partner later after I'd--I'd left Paul, Weiss. But--that was my plan, you know, I would go to Paul, Weiss for a couple of years, really hone my litigation skills and then move into some kind of public interest litigation. Speaker 1: Was there a particular partner there that you worked with a lot? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a partner named Les Fagen [Leslie G. Fagen] I had several cases with. Who I'd say of all the partners, I felt the closest to of, of there. I worked with a partner named Jay Greenfield, Max Gitter, Dan Beller [Daniel J. Beller], those are some of the names that come to mind. Story_ID: 621290 Speaker 1: What kind of litigation did you get to? Speaker 2: Lew Kaplan [Lewis A. Kaplan]--I should also mention Lew Kaplan who's now a federal judge, yeah. Speaker 1: But did you get to do some actual litigation when you were there? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. You know, I, I--when I got there, I was not planning to become a partner. I wasn't interested in the big corporate litigation, and so if there were smaller cases where I could have more independence, you know, like a case where I was just working with--by myself or with a partner. I tended to try to get on those cases. And I was successful at getting a number of cases like that. So I worked on a number of really interesting cases that were not--where I wasn't representing a corporation, I was representing an individual or in one case, a museum (laughter) that--that were really fascinating cases where I got to draft, you know, briefs and complaints and motions myself with, again with a partner, you know, supervising me, and also arguing in court. So I never--I was never on a big giant litigation where I spent months sifting through documents for example. I really spent most of my time writing, which is what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Did you write any appellate briefs? Speaker 2: I wrote appellate briefs, I wrote briefs regarding motions, but you know, Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] their partners really valued good writing. And they didn't write ordinary briefs. You know, they would often say this--this, even a complaint should be like a short story, you know, (laughter). And so, I got a lot of great writing training at Paul, Weiss 'cause you have to write quickly, you got to write well, you got editing feedback from a great writer who's a partner there, and I did a lot of writing, but both appellate briefs, but even complaints, you know (laughter). I remember writing a complaint in a case that Jay Greenfield was a partner on. I remember him saying to me, you know, after I did several drafts, you know, "This sings, now this sings," you know (laughter) and that's what he wanted. I mentioned a museum. I represented the Museum of the American Indian [New York, New York] when it wanted to merge with the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution] and move its collection of American Indian [Native American] artifacts to the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C. And there was a trust agreement written by the man who collected all these artifacts [George Gustav Heye], in the 1800s or something, saying it had to stay in New York City [New York, New York]. And so we had to figure out a way to get permission for it to move to Washington. And I worked on that with Les Fagen [Leslie G. Fagen], it was just the two of us, and I had to write this petition. And to write the peti- you know, you could've just written a boring petition, but Les was insistent, "No you have to fill it with colorful details and tell a story about this museum and write, you know, write a compelling passionate story about why it should move to Washington." And so I spent time with the museum director up in the Bronx [New York]. I remember I, I went through a tour of this warehouse where all these artifacts were and just spent time with him learning about the history of the museum, it's significance and writing this petition that was like writing, you know, a piece of creative writing, except it was based on fact. But again very memorable experience of doing research and writing that--it was almost like an, you know, ethnography or it was like I was an anthropologist after all, (laughter) you know, working on this. But you know, a case like that is so different from working on some merger and acquisition or something. But those are the kinds of cases I worked on at Paul, Weiss. And so even though I never intended to stay there, I--while I was there it was pretty enjoyable. You know, it was a lot of hard work. I mean these partners, you know, they called it (laughter) a slave driving kind of place. What is the word--a sweatshop, a sweatshop. Paul, Weiss is supposed to be one of the leading sweatshops. And we did work hard, I mean you were expected to be there night--literally night and day, around the clock. But I have to say, many of the cases I worked on were really interesting and I think that I got some really good training in writing, not dull legal writing, but actually more creative kinds of writing. Story_ID: 621291 Speaker 1: When you weren't in the sweatshop-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --what other types of activities were you involved in? Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I'd have to include here that along the way I got married and when I got to Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] I almost immediately got pregnant. And so every other year I was at Paul, Weiss I had a baby. I had three children [Amilcar Chimurenga, Camilo Chimurenga and Yaosca Chimurenga] while I was at Paul, Weiss. And so other than working, you know, at Paul, Weiss and taking care of babies, there really wasn't a lot of--a lot more to do. I, I really--it was--really only after I left Paul, Weiss that I was able to get back involved in social justice work. With some, you know, actually with some exceptions, I mean there was an overlap between the time I left Paul, Weiss and when I went--started teaching that I did do some work at the Center for Constitutional Rights [New York, New York] on grand jury abuse. They had a project going on involving people who were subpoenaed to testify before grand juries on political cases who had refused to testify. And I remember working with them on legal resources for people who did not want to testify in political cases. And I--I'm pret- that happened before I left Paul, Weiss actually. So I, I, I was involved in some legal social justice work while I was working there. But between the hours at Paul, Weiss, taking care of children, my children, and this project, there wasn't much time for more than that. Speaker 1: Now what year did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in 1982. Speaker 1: And your husband's name? Speaker 2: His name is Coltrane Chimurenga. Speaker 1: And where was he from? Speaker 2: He's from San Francisco [California], but I met him at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He was working on his Ph.D. in education at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when I was a law student there. Story_ID: 621292 Speaker 1: --And reproductive issues? Speaker 2: You know what, I remember in working on that op- draft opinion that Judge Motely [Constance Baker Motley] rejected on Moe versus Dinkins [Moe v. Dinkins, 1981], that I was really interested in reproductive rights issues. So I--it must've been while I was in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], maybe when I took constitutional law 'cause I remember in constitutional law, my professor was Richard Parker and he allowed us to write a paper in addition to the exam. And as I said, I always will gravitate toward paper. So I wrote the paper had to do with Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] and that may have been when I first started getting interested in it. And then working on this opinion about teenagers right to marriage, I think that also helped to generate and nurture this interest, because I, I remember distinctly being really excited about reading those cases and thinking about how they might apply to a teenagers right to marriage. But then what really triggered it was when I was at Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] another associate there, Roberta Wall [ph.] who was, had very progressive inclinations, she--I think only lasted maybe a year (laughter). But she brought to me a case called In re A.C. [In re A.C., 1987], which was a judge's decision in Washington, D.C. involving a woman [Angela Stoner Carder] who was dying of lung cancer who was pregnant and her doctors at George Washington Medical Center [George Washington University Medical Center; George Washington University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] felt she should have a Cesarean section to deliver the baby before she died. She never consented to it. And so they got a judge to order this Cesarean section without her consent. And she was--she was killed by the surgery and the fetus was not viable and died soon afterward. And so--and so I felt that--I was--I was shocked by this decision and in my mind they had killed this woman. A judge had permitted the execution of a woman because she was pregnant. That's how I looked at it. And I, I wanted to work on these issues. And at the same time, there was another friend of mine at Paul, Weiss another associate who just got a position at Stanford Law School [Stanford, California]. And I remember I emailed her and said, "Barbara [ph.] you're so lucky, you know, I'm so jealous, you know." And she emailed back, "Why don't you just do it?" I remember and those two things converged that year and I said, "I'm outta here," you know, I applied to law schools in the New York [New York] area because at the time, you know, my--I had these three children [Amilcar Chimurenga, Camilo Chimurenga and Yaosca Chimurenga] now, all little kids in--in New York and my husband [Coltrane Chimurenga] was working in New York and I just felt I wanted to stay in New York. And so I just applied, I knew nothing about the process and so I just wrote to deans of law schools in the New York area. And I got offers from Hofstra [Hofstra University School of Law; Maurice A. Deane School of Law, Hempstead, New York] and Rutgers law schools and I picked Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey] which was--had a reputation for being a very progressive law school. And I went there knowing that I wanted to work on some issue involving reproductive rights. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988]. Story_ID: 621293 Speaker 1: Once you got to Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how did you decide what courses or how did they decide what courses you were gonna teach? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I ended up teaching criminal, first year criminal law. And I can't really remember why, I think I thought it was an interesting topic. I, I had a couple criminal cases while I was at Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP], but I certainly wasn't an expert in criminal law. But I really loved it and I, I actually its--wh- the main course I teach now to this day is criminal law, I teach first year criminal law. And then other than that course that they wanted me to teach, I really had my choice of--at whatever I wanna teach. So I taught a course called civil liberties, which combined First Amendment law and right to privacy or--which mostly focused on reproductive rights. Speaker 1: And how long were you at Rutgers? Speaker 2: I was at Rutgers for ten years, from 1988 to 1998. Story_ID: 621294 Speaker 1: And where did you go after that? Speaker 2: Then I got the offer to teach at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. I--I had visiting offers in 1997 from Northwestern and Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California]. So I split the year and taught at Northwestern as a visitor in the fall and then I taught at Stanford as a visitor in the spring. And while I was at Stanford I got the offer from Northwestern and accepted it, and started here at Northwestern in the fall of 1998. Speaker 1: And what--what kind of courses were you teaching? Speaker 2: When I came to Northwestern I again taught first year criminal law. I also taught family law. And at the time, I taught a seminar called Women and Their Bodies, about--mostly about reproductive justice issues. Speaker 1: When did you start-- Speaker 2: Excuse me a minute, I need some water, sorry (cough) (pause). Okay. Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry. You said you taught criminal law at Northwestern? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you teach any other courses? Speaker 2: Other than fam- family law and a seminar called Women and Their Bodies about reproductive justice issues--you know, at other times I taught advanced criminal law or other seminars relating to work I was doing, research I was doing. Story_ID: 621295 Speaker 1: When did you start writing? Speaker 2: Oh, right away at Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]. I, you know, I came there interested in writing about reproductive rights issues and at the time, I had begun noticing newspaper articles about women who were being prosecuted for using drugs while pregnant. And my first thought when I read these was, I bet these are black women who are being prosecuted. And so as soon as I got there, I think probably in my first or second year at Rutgers I started doing research on that topic. One of the first things I did is look at a memo that the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] had written about these prosecutions where they were documenting how many prosecutions there were. And they listed as many as they were able to find. And they listed the race of many of the women, which was usually black, and then they had the attorneys representing the women. And I called up the attorneys and asked them the race of their clients. And I calculated that almost 80 percent of the women mentioned in this memo were black women. Speaker 1: Did you do any other research while you were at Rutgers on any of these issues? Speaker 2: Well, that--on that topic I decided to turn into a law review article that looked not just at the prosecutions, but really use that as a basis for documenting a wide range of policies that affect black women's reproductive decision making and have what I describe as punished black women for having babies. That's how I looked at these prosecutions. But as I was working on it, it started occurring to me that there were a range of policies that punished black women for having babies. So that one topic ended up into a much bigger research project that and, and then I also looked at the constitutional implications of this. So I wrote an article that was published by Harvard Law Review on these prosecutions and their implications for the constitutional rights of women of color. By the way, I think that the editor of Harvard Law Review at the time was Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because (laughter) it was published in 1991 and that's the year he graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he was editor-in-chief of Harvard Law Review so I figure he was. So I may have my career to--him to thank for my career. Because of course, publishing an article in Harvard Law Review, you know, brought a lot of attention to me. And I--that's, you know, why I caught the attention of Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California] and Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 621296 Speaker 1: I also then that project turned into a bigger book project. I decided I wanted to write a book that documented and analyzed this long history starting from slavery to the present of policies that regulate black women's reproductive decision making and penalized and devalue black women's childbearing. And that I worked on throughout the years I was at Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]. I, I got a fellowship at Harvard, the Harvard Program in Ethics and the Professions to work--spend a year working on the book, and that was in 1995. And then I--it was--it was published in 1997. Killing--it was called 'Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction and the Meaning of Liberty' [Dorothy Roberts]. Speaker 2: And that became, really a great well known book in terms of--I mean perhaps one of your? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's probably the book I'm the most known for and it's, you know, it was never a bestseller (laughter), but I, I mean I like, I hope it's made a real contribution to the reproductive rights movement. I think many people see it as one of the foundations of the reproductive justice movement moving from a concept of reproductive rights that's very individual oriented toward a concept of reproductive justice that relates reproductive decision making and rights and freedom to broader social justice issue. Story_ID: 621297 Speaker 1: Was there any other publications or articles that you had published before you published the book? Speaker 2: Yeah. I have (laughter) a lot of articles. I've written seventy articles, so it's kind of (laughter). I, I can't remember the exact timing of them, but I know, you know, I, I also wrote a second big article about Title X and what's called the gag rule, which is the rule passed by the federal government that prohibits doctors receiving federal funding from discussing abortion with their patients. And so I wrote an article challenging that law. And so that was another big article I wrote. I'm trying to think of what else I wrote before 'Killing the Black Body' ['Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction and the Meaning of Liberty,' Dorothy Roberts] was published. I'm sure there were others, but I just can't remember the timing of them. But, there were others related to, something having to do with reproductive justice. Most of my writing up until say, 2000 had to do with reproductive justice. Speaker 1: Now do you do most of your own research or do you have research assistants? Speaker 2: I do a lot of the research myself, but I do have and always have taken advantage of wonderful law students who do research for pay or for credit. It's a great privilege that professors have that, you know, we have these wonderful students who help with research. Story_ID: 621298 Speaker 1: And you also, you said you did some things at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You had a fellowship there, was that a fellowship? Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1995 I had a fellowship at a program called the Harvard Program in Ethics and the Professions. And it, it--there's usually, oh I don't know, a handful of fellows who come each year, live in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and there's a weekly seminar and everyone is working on some ethics issue that relates to the professions in some way, whether it's medicine or law or politics or some other profession. So, I wrote on my application that I wanted to do research on the ethics of reproduction and that I felt that ethics should include social justice, and I wanted to write about how we needed to add social justice to our deliberations about the ethics of various reproductive issues like abortion or prosecuting women who are pregnant, and those sorts of issues. And so I was able. It was great, I spent a year in Cambridge with a lot of time to work on this book, and also meet really interesting people, you know, at Harvard. I mean I got to meet Amartya Sen and John Rawls and all these great luminaries in ethics at--while I was at Harvard. Story_ID: 621299 Speaker 1: Now you also did a little time at the University of Penn Law School [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I had a semester there as well, yeah while I was--before I got tenure at Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey], they invited me to visit for a semester. And I have to say, I didn't really get to know the place very well. I didn't move to Pennsylvania. I was living in Montclair, New Jersey and I commuted on the train, Amtrak [National Railroad Passenger Corporation], you know, to, to Penn. And the people I knew there, like [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, that was the year that she had become really famous with the whole controversy over President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] withdrawing her appointment to the [U.S.] Department of Justice. And so she was flying around doing--giving speeches. I, I literally think I saw her once passing in the hall with her suitcase running to catch a flight. And then Regina Austin another black woman I knew there was, herself, commuting to New York [New York]. She was spending most of her time in New York at the time. The professor I got to know the best was Ed Baker [C. Edwin Baker], a First Amendment scholar who just passed away recently. But he was living in New York City and he's--so we would commute on the same train to New York City, sometimes I would see Regina on the train. So the people I knew the best were--seemed to be commuting all the time too. And I never really got to know the faculty at Penn very well. But I did have that year there--that semester there. Story_ID: 621300 Speaker 1: What year did you come to Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Nineteen, well it was a visit in fall of 1997 and then I began full time on the faculty in the fall of 1998. Speaker 1: And you're still teaching criminal justice at that time? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: And still doing a lot of research? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. At--at that point, 'Killing the Black Body' ['Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction and the Meaning of Liberty,' Dorothy Roberts] had just been published. It was published the spring of 1998, when I was at Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California], teaching at Stanford for that semester. And after that book was published, I started to get interested in the high rates of placement of black children in foster care. I think while I was doing research on 'Killing the Black Body' I discovered that thousands and thousands of black newborns were removed from their mother because the mother was found to be using drugs while pregnant. And so while 'Killing the Black Body' looked more at the prosecutions of these women, in a chapter I called "Making Reproduction a Crime," I learned that really in terms of numbers, a far greater impact was the removal of black babies from their mothers. And then I discovered that--that was just a piece of it. That in general, in the child welfare system in America, black children are grossly overrepresented and I, I just thought this was shocking, I couldn't understand why this wasn't a national issue. I'd never--I'd never even thought about this before or heard anything about it or seen anything written about it. And so I decided I wanted to write a book about--again documenting the high rates of removal of black children from their homes, but also writing about the political implications of it. Speaker 1: In one of your articles that I read in terms of the foster, you're talking about the fact that so many of these children, they never get back to their families? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah. Well not only are black children removed from their homes at very high rates, they spend more time in foster care then other children and they're less likely ever to be reunified with their family then other children. Their parents' rights are more likely to be terminated. And so many of these children never go back home. They age out of foster care or they're adopted, or they, you know, some of them find their way back home. But I think far too many of them are never reunited with their parents. Story_ID: 621301 Speaker 1: You also did a lot of writing on child welfare. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you talk about, I think it was three different types of how it was viewed, there was a moral, and how the conservatives more or less view child wel- welfare, could you talk a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, you're talking about child welfare not welfare, but the child welfare system. Yeah, (laughter) I'm trying to remember what you're referring to in terms of the three views (laughter). Speaker 1: Well within the welfare system, you talked-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know if I can remember the three particular views though. It was conservative, what was the other? Speaker 1: There was a moral justification- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for not doing welfare because, you know, the argument was that welfare shouldn't be done period to a certain extent and that welfare also encouraged women to stay on the system longer? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. So I--in addition to the child welfare system, so the, the formal systems of child protection where the state addresses allegations of child abuse and neglect. I've also written a lot about welfare in the sense of public assistance to needy families. These are very often the exact same families. And I've addressed the way in which racism has played into conservatives, but you know, many other people's view as well that people don't deserve government assistance, that if they get they are lazy. That they should be punished for having children if they're receiving welfare and the--also the racialized images around welfare that these are black women who are irresponsible about having children and that they don't deserve assistance. That they--they're having children just to get a welfare check, this is a very common myth about welfare that was promoted especially during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration. But I think it still exists today. And so I've tried to dispel those myths and also point out that policies that punish women for receiving--for having children while they're receiving public assistance are basically a form of eugenics. It's, it's a way of blaming their condition on having children and then instituting a policy that tries to address it by preventing them from having children, which is basically the premise behind eugenics, which is that people who don't have social value shouldn't have children and we should institute polices to keep them from having children. And I think that much of my work has addressed that fallacy that social inequality is caused by, by bi- biology, by reproduction. And the danger of promoting that view and of implementing policies that punish people for the social conditions that they live in. Story_ID: 621302 Speaker 1: And you kind of took that view on biomedicine also? Speaker 2: Yes. Well my recent--so I, I would say after 2000 I really started to focus on racism in the child welfare system and I wrote a book called 'Shattered Bonds: The Color of Child Welfare' [Dorothy Roberts]. I never left behind my reproductive justice work, I sort of carried it forward but added on work in the child welfare system and more recently over the last five years I've been very alarmed by the increasing view that race is a biological category that is being implemented in science, especially genetic science and biotechnologies. And so I've just finished writing a book manuscript challenging that view and advocating for a science that focuses on the impact of social inequality and that accepts the truth that race (background noise)--that's not--okay, that's not mine (laughter). And that accepts the truth that race is a political category, not a biological category. Speaker 1: And there's a lot of opposition to that, particularly in the black community. I mean the Congressional Black Caucus came out in favor of some of the medicines that some of the pharm- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --pharmaceutical companies were working on that were kind of designated for black people? Speaker 2: Yeah, right, well one of--one of the major developments in this trend towards seeing race as a biological category is the FDA's [Food and Drug Administration] approval of the first race specific drug. Drug for heart failure that is labeled for black pe- patients who have heart failure or African Americans, I switch between terminology, black or African American, but at any rate it's a race specific drug. Speaker 1: What is the name of that drug? Speaker 2: It's BiDil, B-I-D-I-L, yeah. And unfortunately, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the black congress- members of the black congressional congress and the black cardiologist association [Association of Black Cardiologists] supported this drug. Story_ID: 621303 Speaker 1: You know, part of what I'm trying to do in my book ['Fatal Invention: How Science, Politics, and Big Business Recreate Race in the Twenty-first Century,' Dorothy Roberts] is explain to people who are concerned about social justice and racial justice why this is a very wrong headed path to take to address it. There's it, it--it's based on a fallacy about what race is for one thing, thinking that it's a biological category when it's actually a political category. And it also ignores the long history of the way in which implementing a view of race as a biological category has been used to oppress black people and other people of color, and, and generally people who are devalued by society. It's, it's historically been a way of painting social inequality as if it's natural and biological. And I think that's one of the most dangerous myths that has been perpetrated in the history of mankind, and had served very well to maintain social inequality. Now added to that today is that it also, this myth also is very profitable for pharmaceutical companies because you can make profit from a pill that addresses biological difference, whereas if you recognize that these inequities are based on social inequalities then, you know, there's not a pill that's gonna fix it, you have to engage in social change. And so, what I try to show in my book is the way in which these false views of race, the, the unwillingness to actually grapple with racism and social inequality and then also the profit making motive by biotech and pharmaceutical companies have all converged to promote this very dangerous trend toward a biological view of race and, and, and its incorporation in biotechnology. Speaker 2: So like, some of the laws like that made being black one eighth? Speaker 1: Right, right, right. You know, I--I--in the beginning of my book, I--which may be cut, because the book is too long now, I tried to sketch out how the very origin of race was in politics as a way of justifying and maintaining the enslavement and colonization of, of people of color. But also then, the way we define race has changed over time. It changes according to which country you're in and so it's just--to me it's just illogical to think it's biological if you have to refer to a law or custom to figure out what race somebody is. You can't possibly determine what race someone is through their genes. You have to refer to--how the law defines what race they are. And so it can't be natural, it, it has to be an invented category. But there is quite a move on now to try to find, you know, the actual genetic origins of race in, in genomic science. Story_ID: 621304 Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit about biomedicine and how it's being used to define race to a certain extent. But you've kind of taken the position that it's really social and environmental issues that really talk about what race is, could you elaborate a little bit more on that? Speaker 2: Well, I define race as a political category to govern people. I think there's a good historical record to show that it was invented as a political system to both morally justify slavery, but also to help govern these groups of people who are supposed to be masters and slaves or colonizers and the colonized. And race is a way of, of demarcating those people in those--with that political status. It's not a natural category, so who, who is black or who is white is not natural, it's who in this political system is considered superior or the master or the colonizer or who has certain political privileges and who is black is who is considered to be in the group that can be enslaved or colonized or denied certain political privileges. That's how you tell, (laughter) you know, who's in what race, whoever is defined to be in those categories. You can't determine it in any natural way. And so that's the meaning of race. It--it's not a biological category. It, it, it, you know, in identifying people it refers to biological traits, but the category, itself, isn't a biological category. And so then when there's certain biological consequences of belonging or being assigned to a particular race, those have to do with the impact of social status or social conditions on the body because you belong to that category. It's not natural, so the reason why blacks die earlier from all sorts of common diseases isn't because they're naturally prone to die of those diseases. It's because they suffer from the disadvantages of being categorized in a particular racial category. And you know, racism has huge consequences for people's lives and some of those consequences are biological consequences. So I think it's extremely dangerous to now look at those consequences of racism that has to do with belonging to a political category and the social and political implications of that, and now saying it's just natural. Because if it's natural, then you don't have to change society to address the consequences. If it's natural, either you say well that's just tough luck, you know, that--God made it that way, you know, which is what people said for a long time. Or, you say, well we can develop some biological remedy for it, which is what I think a large part of the answer being given us today. But that's extremely different from saying we have to change the social inequality that is based on race or that race supports. I think the inequality comes first and race is the way of supporting it. And it's, it's not a natural division that produces inequality. And I, I think that that is extremely important to understand that distinction and, and for our investments in science and social policy to be geared toward addressing the social inequalities that are supported by race. Story_ID: 621305 Speaker 1: Now there's some commentators today that are saying we're, we're living in a post-racial society. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But that--that goes back to the same things you're talking about. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: If you eliminate that as a--it still becomes a political category? Speaker 2: Well, first of all I don't think we're living at all in a post-racial society. I think that's ludicrous. But, I think the idea that we're living in a post-racial society is--converges with this idea that race is a biological category in especially dangerous ways. So what I'm finding is that there is a trend toward saying race is biological, so race exists at the genetic level, but it no longer matters in society, which is just the opposite of what the truth is (laughter). And so, it's extremely dangerous, I think, for people to believe we live in a post-racial society meaning that we don't have to pay attention to race and society. There's no longer inequality at the social level, but then believing what some scientists are saying and pharmaceu- pharmaceutical and biotech companies are prompting that race exists at the molecular level. That--the two of those combined are of really potentially powerful force for moving away from efforts to address continuing racial inequality in our society. Story_ID: 621306 Speaker 1: So the pharmaceutical companies are gonna come out with a pill that will eliminate the child welfare and those sort of things (laughter)--? Speaker 2: Well what they'll come out wi- th- what they'll come up with and this is actually--some people are actually thinking about this 'cause I, I got a call from some researchers who are looking--wanna look at genetic predisposition of children in foster care to conduct disorder. And so what I can see happening is, instead of focusing on wh- what are the social political reasons why there are so many black children in foster care, the shift will be how can we test these black children for genetic predisposition to conduct disorder so we can give then psychotropic drugs to help them. And you have a move from changing the political inequalities that push black children to foster care to coming up with some pharmaceutical remedy for why there are so many black children in foster care. And I, I think it's--to me it was just horrific to get a call from someone who is in the field of social work where I thought perhaps was at lea- one area that was immune from this. You know, to--that even that field now is being influenced by the focus on genetics and even race based genetics. I think it's extremely dangerous. Speaker 1: But maybe part of the problem in terms of social work is that if they can find a genetic reason that it makes their jobs a little bit easier? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it, it erases the need to address the social inequalities that explain why black children, Native American children also are overrepresented in, in foster care. Story_ID: 621307 Speaker 1: Let's get back to your, your career a little bit. You're the Kirkland and Ellis professor at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. What does that entail? Speaker 2: Well, at, at Northwestern, as in other universities there're endowed chairs that are considered an honor to get. And the dean--here the dean selects and the provost approves people who are appointed to the endowed chairs we have here, and Kirkland and Ellis [Kirkland and Ellis, LLP] endowed a chair, that's a big law firm here in Chicago [Illinois]. And our Dean David Van Zandt [David E. Van Zandt] appointed me to the chair, I think in 2003, 2002, 2003, uh-huh 2002. So you know, it's an honor to have it. It's supposed to reflect the accomplishments I've made as a--as a professor and scholar and it also gives me some extra research money, and so that's what that entails. Every year, Kirkland and Ellis have had a reception for me where I can report on the work that I'm doing at their offices. Speaker 1: And what kind of work are you actually doing under this fellowship? Speaker 2: Well, the--it, it--the money goes into my research account and it supports whatever work I'm doing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's--has supported my work on child welfare and race. It's now supporting my research on race based biotechnologies as well. It, there's no designation that I have to do any particular kind of research, it just generally supports whatever research I'm doing. Story_ID: 621308 Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], you, you got a Fulbright sch- Fellowship (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --to do some work in the Caribbean and Trinidad and Tobago. Tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well based on my childhood where, you know, I, I have this very--a lot--this very influential upbringing in--partly in West Africa and in--in Cairo, Egypt, I have always loved to travel and I felt very strongly, I wanted to live in a foreign country and I wanted my children to experience living in a foreign country. And so in 2002 I applied for a fellowship--yes, I applied in 2001 for a Fulbright Fellowship and my daughter [Yaosca Chimurenga] who was then fourteen and I sort of looked at what fellowships were available and where we'd be interested in living. And probably because my mother's [Iris White Roberts] from Jamaica and I, I like the Caribbean, I, I thought--I, I--we wanted either the Caribbean or Africa. At the time my son [Camilo Chimurenga] was about to go to college and he didn't want us to be too far away, so we saw that there was this wonderful fellowship at the Centre for Gender and Development Studies [Institute for Gender and Development Studies] at the University of the West Indies in Trinidad and Tobago [St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago]. And it was run by a Caribbean sociologist, Rhoda Reddock. And I looked her up and she'd done amazing research on labor and women's rights in the Caribbean. And it just looked like a wonderful fellowship and I corresponded with her and she was willing to support my Fulbright Fellowship there, and applied and I got it and we spent the year 2002 to 2003 in--in the Caribbean in Trinidad. Story_ID: 621309 Speaker 1: I did a research project while I was at the University of the West Indies [St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago] and also taught a course on men and masculinities, co-taught it with Dr. Reddock [Rhoda Reddock] at the university. Speaker 2: Now I've gotta ask you, what was that course about (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well it's so interesting. I found that the feminists in the Caribbean were so much more astute then I found feminists here about studying men as opposed to just women. And understanding that--what--men were affected by gender just as much as women are. And so we taught this course based on that thesis that gender stereotypes and expectations affect men just as much and there were particular norms about man--masculinity that affected men in the Caribbean. And so we relied on sociological works, literature, statistics explore generally the idea of gender stereotypes and expectations and norms, and how they affect men and women, and then looking in particular at research that was done on men in the Caribbean. So it's really interesting. I learned a lot from the--from the seminar. And it, it opened my thinking even more about feminist thought. Speaker 2: Were you able to make any comparisons between masculinity in the Caribbean and masculinity in the United States? Speaker 1: (Laughter) We didn't really. I suppose I could do that myself, but we didn't really do it for the course. So I don't wanna expound on that (laughter). But it was fascinating. I really--and I enjoyed co-teaching with Dr. Reddock and learning from her as well. That was a lot of fun. And then I really--the main project I went there to work on was a project on gender, sexuality and HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] in the Caribbean. And Rhoda--oh excuse me a second I need some more water, sorry about that. Dr. Reddock had been trying to launch a research project on gender and HIV for some time and just didn't have the time to really work on it. So my role coming into the University of the West Indies and her center [Centre for Gender and Development Studies; Institute for Gender and Development Studies] was to do the research and write a, a strategy for getting this project off the ground. And so the, the thesis of the project was that if you want to address HIV anywhere, but especially in the Caribbean, you have to look at the gender norms and expectations and taboos that affect people's sexual behavior. You can't just tell people, you know, that's dangerous, don't engage in that behavior. You have to look at the gender inequalities and power relationships and stereotypes and expectations that underlie that behavior. And so I drafted a document that sent--set out this project and a plan for several years to do a big research project on this. And the, the first thing was to put together a bibliography. We hired someone to do that while I was there. And then we organized a symposium which took place the following spring. So after I'd come back to the United States we had an international symposium on gender sexuality and HIV. And then, Rhoda and a couple other professors at the University of the West Indies and I co-edited a book made up of the papers at that symposium, and last year we published a book called 'Sex, Power and Taboo: Gender and HIV in the Caribbean and Beyond' [eds. Dorothy Roberts, Rhoda Reddock, Dianne Douglas and Sandra Reid] made up of, of those papers. It's published by a Jamaican publisher, Ian Randle [Ian Randle Publishers Ltd.]. Speaker 2: Now were some of those things you found there, are they similar to some of the issues that African countries were dealing with in terms of addressing HIV? Speaker 1: Yeah. I think that some countries in Africa and also in the United States. I think one thing that ties--we, we subtitled it, 'In the Caribbean and Beyond' because we have papers addressing HIV in--in Africa and also in the United States, including among Caribbean immigrants to the United States. But, you know, the rates of HIV are highest among blacks in southern Africa, blacks in the United States, and they're at very high rates in the Caribbean as well. So that, you know, we were looking at the whole diaspora and ways in which race and gender, sexuality interact to increase the risk of HIV infection. Story_ID: 621310 Speaker 1: Now when you came back from the Car- Caribbean, you did a stint at Fordham law school [Fordham University School of Law, New York, New York] also? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well, I--Fordham has this great visitorship called the Bacon Kilkenny visitorship [Bacon Kilkenny Distinguished Visiting Professor of Law] that invites distinguished professors from around the country to come to New York [New York] for a semester or a year--I think you can do it for a year as well. And they have an apartment on the Upper West Side, a really nice location right across from Central Park [New York, New York], and--which you get, you know, free of charge. You can actually walk to--past Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts] to the law school from the apartment and you teach there. They gave me the option of teaching two courses or teaching one course and putting on an all expense paid symposium. So I picked the latter and so I taught family law while I was there and I also put on, co-sponsored with their child welfare center at For- at the Fordham law school a symposium called The Racial Geography of Child Welfare. This was an idea I had been working on looking at how child welfare agency involvement is concentrated in black neighborhoods, you know, in New York, Los Angeles [California], Chicago [Illinois], and I called it The Racial Geography of Child Welfare, 'cause I think it's important not just that there're high rates of black family involvement in childe- the child welfare system, but also that it's concentrated in communities so that the whole community is affected by this presence of the child welfare system. Whether you're, you yourself are in foster care or not, you are very aware that many people in the community are in foster care. And that--and all the families are at risk of being placed--of their children being placed in foster care. So, Fordham very kindly supported this symposium and it was--it was really great. It had a huge turnout 'cause there's so much activity around the child welfare system in New York. And activists and people in government, and professors came to this. It was a great, great event. And we published a report out of the conference. So it, it was a great visit, just living in New York, this wonderful neighborhood in New York and having the experience of teaching at another school. You know, there's two types of visitorships. One is where, like I did at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] and Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California] in 1997, 1998, where you go basically to be looked over and inspected to see if they wanna hire you. And there, you know, you're under stress the whole time. And then there's a visitorship like the one I did at Fordham where you're coming as a distinguished professor, there's no--there's nothing about hiring you, I mean there's no expectation about that at all. You're basically just there 'cause they want you there for the year or the semester and they treat you really nicely, and the students are really happy to have you there. And you know, in this case, there was the added treat of living on the Upper West Side of Manhattan [New York] (laughter) in an apartment I could never afford, you know. And it was just a very, very nice semester. Story_ID: 621311 Speaker 1: Now in 2007-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you were featured in a documentary film, 'Silent Choices.' Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you get involved in, and what was it about? Speaker 2: Well, the, the producer, filmmaker of the film, Faith Pennick, wonderful, young, black woman who has dedicated her career to making provocative films about social issues. She just approached me. I think she had read 'Killing the Black Body' ['Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction and the Meaning of Liberty,' Dorothy Roberts], and she knew I was an expert on black women and reproductive justice. Her film 'Silent Choices' is about the silence surrounding abortion in the black community. And so I agreed to be an advisor on the film and also she interviewed me for the film. And it's--I think it's a very important film. She's won some awards for it and it addresses an issue that often goes undiscussed as the title 'Silent Choices' suggests. Speaker 1: In the--one of the, I think one of the premises I think on the article you wrote on 'Silent Choices' was that typically with abortion is that sometimes black women are somewhat intimidated by doctors in terms of, you know, making those choices and they don't say anything about it? Speaker 2: Well, one poi- aspect of this that I talked about in 'Killing the Black Body' was the pressure placed on black women to have an abortion or really more to be sterilized, especially in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] into the '70s [1970s]. And you know, it's, it's a very complicated topic that is often misunderstood and the subject of a lot of controversy because black women actually have a higher rate of abortion then white women. And it's sometimes hard to see, well what's the relationship between that and the history of sterilization abuse of black women. And in fact, you know, there's a big controversy going on in Atlanta, Georgia now and some other places where anti-choice advocates have started a campaign calling abortion--anytime a black women has an abortion a form of genocide with statements like a black women's womb is the most dangerous place for a black child, and this sort of thing. Where they're kind of, I think, coopting the criticism of the history of reproductive abuse of black women to then almost blame black women for the decision to have an abortion. And I think an approach of reproductive justice looks at well what are the social conditions that create this higher rate of abortion among black women so that we can address it in a way that doesn't limit black women's reproductive freedom and their ability to have access to abortion. But also is generally--genuinely concerned and wants to address why black women may feel pressured to have an abortion. I don't think it's because of the presence of an abortion clinic (laughter), which is what these anti-choice advocates are saying. I think it has much more to do with social conditions with access to contraceptives, with certain aspects of gender relations in the black community. You know, black women's ability to, to demand, you know, birth control. It has--it's more complicated and also just, you know, higher rates of poverty. I think this is what we have to address so that women have the ability to make decisions whether or not to have children and healthy children in a community that's nurturing of them instead of trying to regulate their decisions according to some social agenda. Story_ID: 621312 Speaker 1: In terms of your career, what things do you think you would like to be known or distinguished about? Speaker 2: Well I think wh- what I think what people would say about me and what I also try to achieve is someone who puts her research and writing into practice, so I've always tried to write on topics and--that are socially urgent and that I hope that my writing can reach a broad audience and actually make an impact, but I've always also tried to be part of some social movement that is advocating what I'm saying in my writing. And so with each of these topics I've worked on, reproductive justice, racial disparities in the child welfare system, and now my new research on race based biotechnology, I've been involved in organizations that are working on these issues and also I do a lot of public speaking. I speak at universities and public interest organizations and other kinds of public forums a lot (laughter), I'd say at least, if not every week, every other week I have some speaking engagement. So, I've, I've--I like--I, I think people think of me as someone who not only writes about these issues, but also works on them, tries to put them into--implement them in some way that can actually make a change for people. Story_ID: 621313 Speaker 1: If you had a student that was interested in doing some of the things that you're doing, what would you tell them in terms of how to get to that--that point? Speaker 2: And I have had many who've come to me and asked me about it. Well, I--one thing I say is, you know, stick with where your passion is. Don't give up. You know, you'll--you can find some way to work on what you're passionate about and to definitely, you know, continue to do that and search for opportunities to do that. I often say there's so much work to be done that, you know, like the silver lining to that is that everybody has a role they can play whether, you know, for my students who are law students whether it's in academia doing research working for a public interest organization, as a public defender or forming some kind of law firm that represents people who, who need advocates. There's just a wide range of opportunities I think. And I think it's a matter of searching them out and staying true to your convictions. So that's, that's the advice I'd give. I can usually give people, depending on the particular issue their interested in a range of kinds of work they can do as a lawyer to, to advocate for what they believe in. Story_ID: 621314 Speaker 1: If you had to do it over again, would you choose a different career path? Speaker 2: No, I really like what I'm doing now. I don't think I would choose anything. I maybe would've spent less time at Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP]. I mean I definitely spent more years there than I planned to. But that had everything to do with having my three children [Amilcar Chimurenga, Camil Chimurenga and Yaosca Chimurenga] while I was there, and I would never want to change that. So it's hard to say I would change that at all. I just so blessed to have the career I have, because I can write about whatever I think is important to write about. I have the time and the space and the freedom to do it. And you know if anything, I just don't have enough time to do all that I wanna do. But I get invited to speak at the most interesting forums and meet with fascinating people of all sorts. I--this is--one thing I love about my career is that even though I'm a law professor I'm just as likely to be meeting with a group of doctors or biologists or bioethicists or social workers or sociologists, anthropologists, religious scholars, you know, I've met with people of all these different disciplines and walks of life. I get to work with people who are, you know, famous and I get to work with low income mothers who are battling the child welfare system. And it's just a, I think a really exciting career to have. And then on top of it, I get to travel all over the place. You know th- this summer I was invited to speak at the World Forum--Forum on Human Rights [World Forum on Human Rights] in Nantes in France, and then I took two kids with me and we spent some extra days in Paris [France]. And then, a few weeks later I went to the Caribbean Philosophical Association meeting in Cartagena, Colombia. We went and spent a few days in Colombia. You know, I sent--I have a little nine year old [Dessalines Chimurenga] and I said, "My goodness this summer you've been to," (laughter), "Europe and South America," you know, his passport is full. In fact, it's funny, when I got to Cartagena, they, they--he's flipping through my passport, there was nowhere to stamp the visa and he found one space in my passport and he said, "You better get another passport because--." But these are--all these trips are trips I've made because I was invited to speak all over the world. I hardly ever need to plan a trip by myself. You know, I usually go somewhere interesting and then add on a few days and bring two or three kids along with me. But, there's also that aspect, I've always loved travel and I get to do that as well with this career I have. And then I, you know, I have the satisfaction of feeling that I'm contributing to help make people's lives better and the world a better place, what little bit I could do. You know, it's good to, to be able to work on that kind of a--that kind of a mission in life. So, it's, it's really, I, I can't think of anything I'd wanna change, other than wishing I had more time for each thing. I think that's the problem. I, I love teaching, I love engaging with students, but sometimes, you know, teaching--it's hard to teach and write. So sometimes I wish I could just write all the time, but then I would miss being in the classroom and teaching. And then sometimes I wish I could just be an advocate for--I mean my, my real passion is for poor black mothers caught up in the child welfare system, and I've often thought maybe I should just take off a year and work as an advocate helping mothers organize. That's what I'd really like, not so much represent them in court, but organize to know their rights and, and be able to protect them better. So there's that and sometimes I wish I could off and spend another year in the Caribbean (laughter), so. It's really just not enough time. But, but the thing is I enjoy every single piece of it so much would--I could it 100 percent of my time. And I think it's--I'm very, very blessed to be able to do all of these things in one career. I, I really can't think of anything I would rather do. Story_ID: 621315 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and dreams for the African American community based upon everything you've done so far? Speaker 2: Wow. Well I guess my main hope and dream is that the African American community would be able to fulfill the promise we have of self-determination and building our own institutions that, of course, are integrated with the rest of America, but that are focused on our own welfare and accomplishments and flourishing in America. I--I think that's an important part of African Americans having equality in this country. So I think there are--just about every institution in the United States I believe is a racist institution that has to be radically changed to serve black people on an equal basis. So I think a big part of what our community has to do is continue to advocate and agitate for change of those institutions. They have such a hold on black people that they have to be changed. In other words, I'm saying I don't think that we can only work on institutions within the black community, I think that's important, but I think that the major institutions in the United States, the public education system, the criminal justice system, the healthcare system, all of them have not only not given blacks equal treatment, but they've been affirmatively harmful to black people, especially the criminal justice system. And of course I'd throw in the child welfare system as well have all affirmatively damaged black people and our chances of having a good life in the United States. So a large part of my work has been on addressing those, you know, racism in those institutions. I think alongside that also what we need to do and I dream of is building up institutions within the black community as well and there--I think there has to be both. I'm not a separatist that says that blacks should be divorced from the rest of America. I think that America has huge resources that black people deserve to take advantage of as much as anybody else. But I also think that blacks have a history and a culture that--and a love for each other that would--that is reflected in our own institutions, but that just haven't been able to flourish because of the--the damage done by these mainstream institutions. And so my dream is that there would be an elimination of racism in these mainstream institutions and at the same time, a flourishing of black institutions. I think both are essential to the equality of African Americans in the United States. Story_ID: 621316 Speaker 1: When you look back upon your career and even your life, what stands out the most? What are you most proud of? Speaker 2: I, I, I guess, I guess what stands out the most would probably be the work I've done on reproductive justice. My book 'Killing the Black Body' ['Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction and the Meaning of Liberty,' Dorothy Roberts] and then the work that I've done with reproductive justice organizations like the Black Women's Health Imperative that I've been on the board for ten years of and other organizations I've worked with to develop a--an understanding of reproductive justice. And--and working on implementing that in policy, but also within the black community with other black women to help black women organize around this idea of reproductive justice. I think that stands out the most, but I--I, you know, my work in the child welfare system is also very important to me and this work I'm doing now, I also think of it as sort of encompassing all that I've done because I'm trying to advocate a bigger view of humanity I think that emphasizes our common humanity, but also the importance of eliminating the social inequities that--that really disregard our common humanity. So I kind of think of my work now as being a--a broader work about the nature of human beings that encompasses all of my other work as well. Story_ID: 621317 Speaker 1: Kind of a similar question. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be a better understanding of--of what it means to value human beings as actually equal and deserving of equal respect and working to materially make that a reality in the world. For me, that's meant mostly focusing on injustices against black women, but also black people in general and women. And other people who've been devalued. I've recently been doing work on disability rights as well 'cause I've seen how it is very similar to work I've done on racial justice in the sense that there're similarly institutions and policies and ways of thinking that devalue people with disabilities and paint their problems as biological problems. And so even though that's not the main focus of my work, I think there's a--there's a philosophy or a way of thinking about human beings that undergrades my work that has to do with our common human dignity and what it means to really value that in society. To have institutions and polices that really value that. And, and so that--that's what I'd like my legacy to be. Story_ID: 621318 Speaker 1: I have to go back and ask you a question I should've asked you earlier. Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure. Speaker 1: Your children's names and their--the dates of birth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh okay, okay. So my oldest son is Amilcar Chimurenga and he was born September 9th, birthday coming up, 1982. And then my next son is Camilo Chimurenga. I should tell you what their names--do you wanna know where their names come from? So Amilcar is named after Amilcar Cabral who was the leader of independence movement in Guinea Bissau in the Cape Verde islands in West Africa. The next one is Camilo Chimurenga, was born July 7th, 1984 and he's named after Camilo Cienfuegos who was leader of the Cuban revolution. And then, Yaosca Chimurenga, it's my one daughter, born in--on October 21st, 1986 and she was named after a soldier in the Sandinista Liberation army [Sandinista National Liberation Front] in Nicaragua who I read about in a book called 'Sandino's Daughters' ['Sandino's Daughters: Testimonies of Nicaraguan Women in Struggle] by Margaret Randall about women involved in the Sandinista liberation struggle. She's Yaosca. And then my little one who was born September 21st, 2000 with a fourteen year gap (laughter)-- Speaker 1: You got two birthdays coming up. Speaker 2: I do, his too, yes. Then my daughter's right after that. He is Dessalines Chimurenga and he is named after Jean Jacques Dessalines who was the leader of the Haitian Revolution and the first emperor of Haiti. So they all have revolutionary names to live up to (laughter). Story_ID: 621319 Speaker 1: Following up on that, what message or lessons do you want to leave for your children [Amilcar Chimurenga, Camilo Chimurenga, Yaosca Chimurenga and Dessalines Chimurenga] and your grandchildren? Speaker 2: Oh wow, well largely what I said about my legacy. But I would think for my children that they should, whatever they do, they should try to do something to serve other people and to em- to make other people's lives better. Whatever they do, I mean there's no indication they're gonna follow in my footsteps exactly at all (laughter) though, so whatever they do. And to in any way they can to support in some way changing--changing ways of thinking that have oppressed people around the world, I mean just to say it broadly, because again, I don't know--still don't know even with the oldest one what particular path they'll take. But that it's important to--to think of how you can serve others and show love to other people. Story_ID: 621320 Speaker 1: And finally, is there anything about your career or your life that we haven't touched on that you would like us to touch on? Speaker 2: Well I guess the one other aspect of my life that I didn't talk about is that I am--I'm a Christian and my religious faith has a lot to do with how I think and I think my--my desire to serve other people and to keep on track, not be too distracted by material things and also just to have courage to take positions that are controversial. I think--I think having a faith in a higher power that protects me and expects a lot of me I think has an influence on how I lead my life too. And my--I think also my trying to have the guide of loving people always doing everything out of love I take from my Christian faith and it's something that I try to aspire to as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much. We really appreciate your time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, oh thank you. Story_ID: 621321 Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of my mother, Iris Roberts, Iris White Roberts, and my father, Robert Roberts. I would say it's probably maybe around 1954, I think it was before--when they were dating, it's before I was--I believe it was before they were married and definitely before I was born. I can see my mother's very thin there, so once she had children she put on some weight. So I would guess 1954. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh that's a picture of me and my mother. I--you know, it maybe this picture was taken in Jamaica when I was--I don't know, I can't tell if I was three months old or maybe I was a little older. Fi- it's, it's either in Jamaica, it would be in 1956, but it's either in--at the stop in Jamaica on our way to Liberia or in Liberia, in Monrovia, Liberia, West Africa. I was a few months old. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a picture of my mother and my first born son Amilcar, and he was quite a big chubby baby, so he may have only been maybe four or five (laughter) months in that picture with my mother. So it'd be in 1982. And he--that's just Amilcar and proud grandma. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my sisters, so they were--I was probably approaching two when they were approaching one in Monrovia, Liberia in 19--probably 1950--end of 1957, beginning of 1958. Of course it's always warm there so it's hard to tell what month it was (laughter). Speaker 1: Awe, those are my three first born children, Camilo Chimurenga, Yaosca Chimurenga in the middle, and Amilcar Chimurenga at the end, and that's on our deck in Montclair, New Jersey when I was teaching at Rutgers [Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey], and so I'm guessing Yaosca was, I don't know, what does she look like, maybe four and Camilo maybe six and Amilcar eight or something like that in the 1980s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of me and my two sisters, Helen [Helen Roberts Evans] and Evelyn [Evelyn Roberts McClutsky] and my Aunt Violet [Violet White (ph.)], my mother's older sister in front of the pyramids in Egypt during the year that my father was teaching at the American University in Cairo [Cairo, Egypt]. So I was probably thirteen or fourteen then, and my sisters twelve or thirteen at the time. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my parents, Robert Roberts and Iris Roberts. My mother is pregnant with me there, so this would've been in--sorry, it's dusty, do I have tissue anywhere, I'm sorry, I dug up these. Okay, so this is--would've been in nine--either--I was born in March 1956 so it may have been in the winter--again my mom looks like she's wearing a sweater there, so I'm guessing it was probably in the winter of 1955, a few months before I was born, maybe right before I was born. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in the middle with my sister Helen and Evelyn in our living room in--on Central Street in Evanston [Illinois]. And I think we were in college when this picture was taken. And we're standing in front of a--a painting in Arabic that my mother brought from Egypt that we hung in our living room. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture taken a couple years ago, I think, let me--do you mind if I just look, no there's nothing back here. Okay, so I think it was taken in maybe 2008 and it's a picture of me with members of the board of the Black Women's Health Imperative and [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height during a reception we had in Washington, D.C. for Ms. Height. And yeah, so, I believe it was 2008. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And that's Dorothy Height in the middle? Speaker 2: That, in the blue, in the fancy hat, and also in the picture next to me, can I point or I don't know if I just say right or left, so this is Byllye Avery who was the founder of the Black Women's Health Project [National Black Women's Health Project]. And if you haven't done an interview of her, you definitely should. She's a key figure in the black women's reproductive health movement. And so she founded the project which is now the Black Women's Health Imperative. And there are other members, this is Eleanor Hinton Hoytt is our president...