 Story_ID: 543443 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Steven Craig Roberts, Sr. S-T-E-V-E-N, C-R-A-I-G, Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. St. Louis, Missouri, 04/11/52 [April 11, 1952]. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an entrepreneur, business leader, community activist. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 18th. Speaker 2: --18th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the Victor Roberts Building, 1408 North Kingshighway Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri. In St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 543444 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No, I mean, I enjoy everything for the most part. You know, I'm a little bit of a type of individual who likes to explore different lands and different cuisines. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, that's changed. When I was younger it was probably green, because I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] it's probably more maroon and white (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think fall is probably my favorite time of the year. Growing up in St. Louis, Missouri, it's an area that--it's a nice transition. You still have the warmth, the little bit of summer, but you have the great colors of fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, well, recently, I guess, it's probably been, yeah, San Diego [California] we like a lot and the Bahamas, Nassau. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying? I don't think I have a favorite phrase or saying. I mean, you know, it kind of depends upon which audience I'm speaking to or if it's some of our staff or family members basically. I try to be diverse in my vocabul- so--vocabulary so I try not to repeat things too often. But no, I don't think there's a favorite saying. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 543445 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Victor Roberts] side. But-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Delores, D-E-L-O-R-E-S, Talley, T-A-L-L-E-Y, her maiden name-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S [Delores Talley Roberts]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth is St. Louis, Missouri. Her date of birth is 05/7/30 [May 7, 1930]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back-- Speaker 2: Well, I think we can probably go back certainly to the mid-ei- 19th century, or 18th century actually. We can, we can kind of trace where family members came from, a little family history there. It's not as, as thorough for instance as my father's side so whatever questions you wanna ask on that I can, it, you know, discuss it. Speaker 1: Well, what, how far back in terms of date can you, I mean, what date can you go back to (unclear)? Speaker 2: Like I said probably the mid-1800s. Speaker 1: Mid-1800s, okay. Speaker 2: The mid-1800s probably pre- pre-Civil War. And the reason why I say that is you know my mother--and this is why we say we're third generation St. Louis, fourth generation Missouri--my mother's side of the family, on her father's [William Talley, Sr.] side, very interesting, her father's father, which would be my great-grandfather, was a former, a, we believe, was part Chickasaw Indian [Native American] and probably part, you know, African American slash slave at that point. And we believe he was built--he was born probably in the mid-1800s which is why I said that because we know that he met my great-grandmother after the Civil War, and it was in an area in the South. It was probably about the same time that the Native Americans in the South were being pushed west to reservations. A lot of people have heard of the Cherokees for instance for particularly being moved out of South [South Carolina] and North Carolina and the Trail of Tea- Tears [Trail of Tears]. Well, there was several other Native American tribes who were affected the same way because, you know, from the white pioneers in those days, they looked at all Native Americans as the same. They, they didn't, they didn't respect necessarily the history or the traditions of any of 'em. And they just said basically, we're taking your lands and we're moving you west for the most part. So we think that, that he or his family may have been a part of that migration, but we also know that several members of his family because they, he never discussed, some were sold off in slavery. So, so we know that he ended up in southern Missouri in a place called--near Blytheville, Arkansas, but it was actually directly over the Arkansas-Missouri border. Of course, as you know, clearly southern Missouri and Arkansas and Tennessee, that area were aligned with the South in the Civil War. So for him to develop his own farm in southern Missouri--is called Hermandale [Missouri]--was pretty exceptional. I mean he must have had a lot of interesting traits and abilities because again, we only knew of him basically. Speaker 1: Oh, so, so he founded his, he had his own farm and it had a name? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, the family still has the farm. It is, again, like I said, it's on my mother's father's side of the family. So when he passed in the '30s [1930s], you, the four, no, six children, all received a portion of the ownership. And until recently my mother's great aunt, my grandfather's youngest sister, was still living on the farm. Now, she wasn't farming, she had individuals working the farm for her, and so the farm will actually always be in the Talley family because there are so many relatives involved. And for many years and even today she received once a year a small check for her portion of her ownership in that family farm. So, you know, when people say well, you know, "How'd you guys get in the business?" We think it may have probably been in our genes for a long time. Clearly, you know, if you look back it probably was in our genes fifty to seventy-five years before we were born, we just didn't know it. So that's kind of my father's, my mother's father's side of the family. The, on the, on my mother's mother's side--well, my mother's father's mother's side we, we don't know much about whom that lady was. You know, we know the number of children, we have her names and things but don't, don't know much. Story_ID: 543446 Speaker 1: On my mother's [Delores Talley Roberts] side of the family, which we call the Bell side of the family, now this would be my grandmother's [Selma Bell Talley], my mother's mother's side of the family, the Bell family was really very interesting. There were twelve children. And the Bells, when you, when you look at pictures of them, or at least the ones that we have, they range in every color, shape, size that you can imagine. When you would look at the family you couldn't tell if they were Native American or if they were Italian or Irish or African. I mean I remember as a youngster seeing some of these, these, these great uncles basically, these uncles, who were my grandmother's siblings. And she was kind of, of the twelve children she would have been toward the bottom end. And, and I wanna say that she had a twin, my Uncle William Bell [ph.], who when you look at the two of 'em, you know, my grandmother was very fair, had green-grey eyes, slim, my Great Uncle William, her twin, was probably about my complexion, slim, and had, you know, kind of a, I think, almost a Hispanic, Latino look if you were to see him walking down the street. But then you look at her s- brothers and sisters, they were all different type. I mean, they were, some of them were kind of short, some were very tall, some were very fair. In fact, you know, there are stories, of course, in all families, African American families I think, where at least one of the brothers moved to California, started passing for white, no one ever heard from him again. I mean, you know, a couple of relatives kept in touch, but I mean now, two generations later we, we wouldn't even know, you know, except for if someone came to us, his last name was Bell from California, then we might have some, some, some understanding of, of who that individual was, so. So we, so it's very interesting but their father, Grandfather Bell, was a very interesting individual. He, again, we don't know where he came from, somewhere out of Mississippi or Alabama, we do know that. We know that he was taken away as a youngster from his parents and we say taken away, I'm sure that one or, one or both were probably split up s- and, and, and went into slavery, they were in slavery. But we know that after the Civil War that he was a very talented individual. We're told that he, you know, had a number of different businesses. He was kind of a minister, which is probably why my uncle, my mother's brother, William Talley, Jr., became a very successful minister, he has a couple of churches. They, so, so, so we think a lot of that, the impact of genes is more significant than a lot of us ever can imagine. But Grandfather Bell, it was kind of interesting, he was a tough character, I mean, he was not someone who was pushed around very easily. Story_ID: 543447 Speaker 1: And I remember hearing a story from my Aunt Sadie [ph.], who was the oldest of the twelve children and she was the last to pass, just a few years ago, she was probably in her late nineties. Aunt Sadie would always talk about the story when she was a baby, very little, they were living in an area near Dyersburg, Tennessee, and remember this is all about that migration of folks who were probably on plantations in the deep, Deep South and they were slowly moving their way to Chicago [Illinois] or St. Louis [Missouri] or Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or Cincinnati [Ohio] out of the South. You know, they just couldn't get on a jet or a train, I mean they had to work their way to, to the North. So Aunt Sadie, a baby, you know, my great-grandfather, my great-grandmother, he had a cabin, had a little farm in Dyersburg, Tennessee, and was farming the farm and doing okay. And, and one evening, no, before the evening came he was kind of warned by some of the white folks in the community that, that they wanted his land and he needed to leave basically. And they say he was a tough character, he says, you know, "This is my land, I work it, I'm staying here," basically. So one evening, there, as, as they describe it, there were Klansmen [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came to say, you know, "Either you leave or we're gone burn you and your family out," basically. And he was a very smart guy. He had put gun turret or, or holes in the side of his cabin all the way around but they were very low on the ground, so he never, if he would shoot out, he would shoot (laughter) through the window. And I, I don't know how many people came that evening but they threatened to get him out and they started shooting, and, and, of course, he fired back. And we know that because he said he scared 'em away and couple of 'em were wounded. So after that he realized that he needed to move a little further north and out of that which is kind of how he ended up in the, the St. Louis area but I'll talk about that story later. But what's interesting about the story was one of his older sons was on a ferry boat basically going up the Mississippi [Mississippi River] or Ohio River, I can't remember which one, and this white gentlemen came up to him and was just asking, you know, this kid, because he's, I think he said he was like a teenager or early twenties, you know, well, you know, "Where are you from, son?" And I think he said, "Well, you know, my folks are from Tennessee, Dyersburg." He said, "Oh, really, what, what part?" And he kind of told him what the area was. And he kind of looked at him because this guy was kind of tall and, I think Charlie Bell [ph.] was his name, handsome looking guy, and, and he said, "Well, you know, was your father Charlie Bell?" And he said, "Yeah." He said, "Oh, yeah," and he was limping. He said, he says, "You see this, you see my leg, you see why I'm limping?" He says, "Yeah." He says, "Your father shot me, we were there one night trying to take his farm." So it's kind of interesting, it's one of those stories that, that you just kind of never know in history where things happened. And, of course, he then shared that with his siblings and it's, it's been kind of a family story just to tell how tough the guy was. Story_ID: 543448 Speaker 1: Of course, over time he [Roberts' maternal great-grandfather] moved and many of the family members moved to the St. Louis area because St. Louis [Missouri]--talked about, there was a lot of promise, you had, if, if, if you can imagine the turn of the century going from the 19th to the 20th century, St. Louis was the third largest, one of the third largest communities in America at that time. In terms of wealth it was the second largest only behind New York [New York] because you had a lot of industrial, what people would call barons today but, you know, there were people who made steel here, major steel companies, brick companies, it was a major railway as well as river way. And, of course, you know, the story always that we were told being raised here was that St. Louis should have been the Chicago [Illinois] but what happened because some of the folks and the business leaders in the mid-1800s decided that it was more interesting to keep the ferry business I'm sure for personal gain than to build a bridge. And what had happened all of the rail folks wanted to have an easy way to continue the rails across the river and this was a (unclear) middle of the country, and they refused to do it because they wanted to keep the ferries going. So what happened all the rail yards went to Chicago basically and that's why Chicago, you know, is a great huge city today and quite frankly St. Louis isn't. And so, if you can think of the migration from the South of many of these folks who were recently freed, then, you know, St. Louis was a easy stopping point, you know, maybe like Cincinnati [Ohio] was because it was right over the Ohio River, so it was easy to get to and some of 'em because they found jobs didn't go any further. Story_ID: 543449 Speaker 1: So that's kind of my mother's side of the family. My father's side of the family is-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --we have more history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, did your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] talk about growing up herself and what it was like for her in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah, oh, often, yes, and still does. She, now remember, you know, she is now being raised in St. Louis by her father [William Talley, Sr.] and mother [Selma Bell Talley] and they are in what we would consider today a segregated neighborhood. For them it was a way of life in St. Louis. Speaker 2: What did they call that part of town, the part of town she was raised in? Speaker 1: The Ville area [St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: The Ville, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for the most part, yeah, which you've, you've probably heard about. And, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. So she was raised in The Ville? Speaker 1: Raised in The Ville. But, you know, in those days, if you think about being raised in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], you moved a lot. I mean, very few people had homes that they owned, first, unless you were a doctor, a lawyer, or fortunate enough to have a business. So for the most part a lot of people lived in, they call 'em flats, and St. Louis would probably have more two family, four family flats than probably most major cities still. So these were basically what we call shotgun units. So you'd live upstairs and you basically lived in three rooms that went straight through from the front to the back with a bathroom basically, usually the kitchen was in the back, kind of the middle room was divided up with, with bedrooms and then the front room was kind of the living room area. So, The Ville area, and many parts of St. Louis, were, were fill of, full of places like that so that, you know, if your, if your father was a maintenance working at, worker at Monsanto [Monsanto Chemical Company; Monsanto Company], which was a good paying job or at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], you could afford a flat and have three or four kids and, and, and, and, and feed your family. The public schools were actually very good at that time even though again they were segregated. Major schools here were like Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or Vashon High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. And then, of course, the elementary schools around-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --that community. Speaker 2: --did your mother go to Sumner? Speaker 1: She went to Sumner-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and my father [Victor Roberts] went to Sumner. They were about five, six years apart in terms of age, so they didn't really know each other but they knew people in, in the classes in between and before and afterwards. So, you know, as they got older and got married, of course, they would know, you know, almost a generation of Sumner graduates and, and they have been active with the different reunions. So, so, you know, in that, in those days, of course, there was no busing, so you walked to school wherever you lived. And, and, you know, I know that they would live in, you know, in one area and then probably they would move up to a slightly bigger flat as they called them or apartment. And my father, the same, well, we'll talk about him in a minute but his father [Squire Victor Roberts] was a, was a physician and so even being as stable as a physician was, they kind of moved around because, you know, you, as you made a little more money you would want to get to a nicer neighborhood for your children. Story_ID: 543450 Speaker 1: Now what did your mother's father [William Talley, Sr.] do for a living? Speaker 2: My fathers was a maintenance worker. He was also a, as was my grandmother [Selma Bell Talley], he drove a taxi. You know, in those days a lot of the folks, even today I guess we're going back to it, you know, people to survive would have to have a couple of different jobs. You know, they might have the one paying job, but then they would also look for another hustle somewhere as they would call it. And driving a, a taxi was one of 'em. If you could afford to create your own little business they would do that. You know, I know my grandmother for instance would, would, you know, help other people and probably got paid for it, she I know could sew and cook very well. So what you would do is, and I knew she would take in some kids while the people's parents were, were working. And you did what you had to do basically to get by. The kids, you know, kind of in the neighborhood where my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] would grow up, they were all always looking too for little odd jobs, things to do just to, you know, get a few nickels, pennies, quarters, or whatever to, to make it for the most part. So my, my grandfather would kind of do what it would take. And my grandmother, of course, had four children, my mother was the second oldest of them. And, and she had, of course, this other support family around because remember now she had twelve, eleven siblings basically. And when they moved, many of them moved to St. Louis [Missouri], a few like I said disappeared, went to California, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], some other places, but many of them moved. So in St. Louis, if you can imagine my grandmother, she had her younger sister, she had her oldest sister, Aunt Sadie [ph.], Aunt Bea [ph.] was the youngest. She had Aunt Eula [ph.] and several others. I don't remember except for Uncle William [ph.], her twin, I don't remember a lot of the boys, well, there was Uncle Gus [ph.] was, he was a painter. And Uncle Gus was one of those guys when they'd walk in a room, you, you wouldn't think that they were related, he was related to them because, I mean, he has very light eyes, very tall, very handsome, very statue- statuesque. I mean, he looked like today he'd be a, been a model but in those days, everyone had to find his skill and he was a painter, very good painter and wallpaper hanger. So there were a few. So, so my grandmother had a, you know, a support group. So with my mother, when she was raised, all of her cousins, you know, were kind of in the same community. So I mean, I remember as a youngster always seeing relatives around all the time. And it could have been my mother's siblings or it could have been, you know, her aunts and her aunts' children and stuff. So, you know, it's, it's kind of interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they had a tight family and-- Speaker 2: Very tight, yeah. Story_ID: 543451 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] have a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she did. Very interesting story. Remember again she had four children. I'm number two also. My brother, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], who's older, I have a younger brother, Mark [Mark Roberts], and a younger brother s- a younger sister, Lori [Lori Roberts]. And again, in those days my dad came back from World War II [WWII], you know, was struggling to finish his education because remember his father [Squire Victor Roberts] who had passed by then was a, was a physician so, you know, he always thought he might become a doctor. Speaker 1: Maybe we should identify your father. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What's your father's full name? Speaker 2: His, his name is Victor-- Speaker 1: Victor. Speaker 2: --Roberts [Victor Roberts]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is October the 7th, 1922. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was born here in St. Louis [Missouri] too? Speaker 2: Born, well, actually, he was born in an area called West Helena, Arkansas. His father was practicing medicine there. But he was probably three or four years old when they moved to St. Louis. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And well, tell us, we're gonna catch the stories up together-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at some point, but, but tell us what, what you know about the, the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Okay. But before let me just finish with my mom. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Very interesting, you were saying, you know, my dad comes back from World War II, he's working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] because, you know, that's a good job, he's going to school, he meets my mom, they have a whirl- you know, a wonderful romance. She-- Speaker 1: Is, is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I'll find out, I'll give you a call back on that. I know that, I think they met at college because they were at a p- a historically black college [HBCU] here called Stowe Teachers College [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Stowe Teachers College. Speaker 2: Yeah, now it's today it's called Harris-Stowe [Harris-Stowe State University], you know, Harris [Harris Teachers College] was the, the one where the white kids went and Stowe was the one where the black kids went. And, of course, now it's merged and it's a state university here. But I believe they met there, they probably met at one of the social events. I mean, I do know that they did not know each other prior to World War II. And again, my mom is about five years younger than my dad, so, so you know, they wouldn't have been in the same Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] group, they wouldn't have been actually, normally in the same college group except he had gone to World War II and, and had come back. And he was, he was in the [U.S.] Army, he was primarily stationed in the Europe, Europe Theater [European Theater of Operations]. The, so we think that's, I'll find out how they met-met but, you know, they met, dated. And again remember it's a time, he, she's about seventeen, eighteen, I think she's in her second year of college, he's probably equivalent junior in, in college with his credits, he's working at the post office, but remember now his father is deceased at this point so because he has an older sister [Marion Roberts] and a mother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] who really never worked, my grandmother, he had to kind of take care of his family 'cause that was part of the responsibility of, of, of young people at that time. So, you know, by 1948, my brother Mike is, is, is born. He's working, she can't finish school nor can he because he's working, she's raising, you know, children, taking care of the house, you know, I'm coming along a few years later. He's called back to the Korean War because of his age basically, I mean because of his service and because of his age. So he's off and, and, and they tell me stories of when I was little and they were at Fort Sill, Arkansas [sic.] and a couple of other places, around the U.S. because even though he was never sent to Korea he was in one of those groups that was prepared to go. And then they came back to St. Louis obviously and then, you know, two children there and again, mom can't go back to school, dad's working. Then, of course, a few years later, another child, another child. Story_ID: 543452 Speaker 1: But my mom [Delores Talley Roberts] all during that time would do interesting things. I remember being three or four years old and we would go to Forest Park, which is a major park here in St. Louis [Missouri]. And she would do part-time work at a concessions stand because I remember being--(unclear) the, the reason why I remember is, it was always fun to go out to the park and, you know, three or four I was just kind of running around, but I always remember getting a Hershey's chocolate bar, you know, and it was the only time I'd get one when she was there because she was at the concessions stand and I'm sure that was to keep me quiet for the most part but it was fun. And I remember also the first time I had a Fudgsicle, you know, a chocolate ice cream was awesome. So they always had to work. The other thing that was interesting was my mother was an excellent cook, so was my father [Victor Roberts] but, but my mother was an excellent cook and I'm sure she probably learned it from her many relatives. So when we were young, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I because the other kids [Mark Roberts and Lori Roberts] hadn't come along, they always had a catering business, you know. Now, you know, in those days, of course, the country clubs would, would bring in people to, to serve the folks who would, would be there or if there was a private party, you know, my dad would be the bartender, my mom would prepare the food and she would be one of the servers and stuff. So they had, it was kind of interesting, because they don't talk about it much but they really essentially had a, their own catering business. And I, a lot of people who I have met later through politics because Mike and I were involved with politics or business, you know, these are names of people who I heard about, we know we went to the, what would be the criminal county executive's house and they would mention the name, and di- you know as a five, six year old it doesn't mean anything to you, but later when I'd say, "Well, didn't you--Dad, didn't you say that you used to--?" He'd say, "Oh, yeah, I knew--," such and such, such and such. So it, it was interesting. So, so that's kind of, as a youngster, as we saw my parents even having kind of a job but also having another job to which led us into restaurant business, hotels, and other things later [with The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: The connections, the connections. Speaker 1: And the connections. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 543453 Speaker 1: Yeah you were talking about the catering business and how you were able to use that later on in life. That that seems to me that, well, you and your, and your, and your brother [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and perhaps other people in the family, you know, helped--like a lot of us do but maybe more acutely, you know, make these connections (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, and I think part of it which is why I think it's important with young people today and in the future to expose them to all kind of people, if it's TV interviewers or if it's entrepreneurs, the only way for them to expand their horizon is to expose them to people with different skill sets and different careers so that they will never believe there's anything that can hold them back. Now, did our parents ever say to us when they were in the catering business or my dad [Victor Roberts] was working at the postal service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], you know, this is something you need to do or become a teacher like my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] eventually and I'll get to that in just a moment. No, but one thing I remember very clearly as a child was that my mother would always take us places, I mean stuff we would hate to do. I remember being at the Saint Louis Science Center [St. Louis, Missouri] before it was as major, as, as large as it is now, it was just probably four or five rooms in a, it's like probably a renovated house, and she would make us take Sunday morning classes and we're eight, and nine, ten year old, we're, of course, obviously the only two little black kids there. And, you know, and for us we'd rather be in the backyard in the neighborhood playing with our friends instead and yet she would say, "No, you're gonna do this." And so she would always expose us. And I really think that as we developed later in life, in high school and college and beyond--law school and beyond that the influence of looking at any opportunity that's presented, you know, in a very engaging way was important to our development. Story_ID: 543454 Speaker 1: Interesting story, and, and, and I'll get back to her teaching career in a second, the theater that we own in St. Louis [Missouri], we call it the Roberts Orpheum Theater, it was always an Orpheum theater. It was, it was created in 1917 by two brothers, the Cella brothers. And these guys who family kept it all the way until we bought it three years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now these are two white guys? Speaker 1: These are two white guys, Cella. And what happened was in the, you know, the early 1900s, the Orpheum Circuit was a connection of about twenty-six or twenty-seven theaters all over the U.S. in places like Milwaukee [Wisconsin], Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], all over. So if you're in vaudeville or you're in theater, you would get on what they called the Orpheum Circuit so you can get booked all over the country basically. And so these two entrepreneurial brothers, the Cella, C-E-L-L-A, brothers, founded this theater and a couple of other theaters plus they were in, in real estate development and, and a variety of other business, sounds kind of familiar, you know, a hundred years later, ninety years later, we have two other brothers who have gone into a, a variety of, of business too. But I remember as, and in those days, and this is in the early '60s [1960s] probably, I remember as a eight or nine year old going to, they called it the American Theater [St. Louis, Missouri] because it was always Orpheum. And then the Cellas made it a movie theater for a while and they called it the American Theater because another theater they had called the American was torn down so they just changed the name and then it became a back to kind of a legitimate theater-theater, with plays and musicals and things like that. So what would happen from time to time is some of the theater groups would have tryouts basically and there was a tryout, again this is early '60s [1960s] at the, what we call the Orpheum Theater today. And I remember again, you know, my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] says, "Well, we want, I want you to go and just tryout and, and, and see what kind of roles that they had," and stuff like that. And also I think it was like a modeling tryout, I mean, there was kind of a combination because I remember, you know, there were some people sitting in the audience looking and judging these kids. And basically she drug us down there, I remember it was a school night and we waited around probably about an hour, it was bunch of other kids, (unclear) we were the only kids of color there. And I remember, you know, kind of walking on the back stage and seeing the, the spotlights because the, the theater lights were overhead and I said, ah, this is kind of cool because I had never been on a stage before 'cause our elementary school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] didn't have stages, if, if you did a little play it was in the gym basically. So I remember she said, "It's all right, you know, you'll go." I said, "Mom, but we've been here for an hour," and things like that. So eventually we each got our chance and they kind of would tell you, go walk this way, turn, and say something. And I remember, you know, very clearly walking as it is today, across the stage, kind of looking out at these folks, looking up to see the theater because I had never been in the Orpheum Theater before. And I said, yeah, this is kind of cool. And, you know, you have the, you know, the anticipation of walking across the stage in front of a lot of people and you're, you're nervous, I--even as youngsters, so I did it. And, and it's kind of interesting but we weren't, we were by the way we were not selected, we didn't become, you know, the, the famous Denzel Washingtons of that time or anything like that, Will Smith. But, but it's interesting that probably forty years later the same stage that we walked around that we were not selected for, the same theater that probably ten years before my mother could not even come into or work, and certainly not perform in that, you know, the, the children, the great- I guess the great-grandchildren of, of, of slaves who couldn't even have worked in that theater, now own that theater, you know, one of the major theaters in America if you look at kind of that circuit. And the only kind of its kind still in existence in St. Louis, right. And remember in those days, when you look at the turn of the, the early 1900s, there were probably thirty theaters in, in St. Louis that all had because, you know, there were no movie theaters 'cause it weren't much of movies at all but everyone had a play or, or musicians would play. So, so that's kind of that interesting experience that my mother would throw at us and say, "Well, try this, try this, try that." Now, we didn't know that we would--we couldn't even conceive of, of, of, of owning a theater like that. Story_ID: 543455 Speaker 1: I wanted to go back and talk about your father's [Victor Roberts] ancestors-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and bring us up, but we're gonna, I'm gonna ask you some more about growing up-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --you know. I'm not gonna-- Speaker 2: But let me finish with my mother [Delores Talley Roberts]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So my mother always wanted to get her degree, so she would always take courses, the time when we were all in high school and, and almost up until we're in college, she finally, she said her vision, her, her hope was to get her college degree before her first child got her college degree. I mean she had always told us that and she may have been telling us that just to push up along to make sure we went to college and we all did. She missed it by just a year basically with my brother [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], you know, he was on the four year plan, and he had to get through and went on, went on to law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]. But she graduated literally the next year and then three years after that I graduated and then we both finished law school and my other siblings went to college. So that was her plan. And so once she finished the degree from being what they call a substitute or, or the substitute teacher, she became a full teacher and she taught, you know, up until six, seven years ago. So she-- Speaker 1: Now, where, where-- Speaker 2: --she loved it. Speaker 1: --where did she go to college? Speaker 2: Harris-Stowe [Harris-Stowe College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Oh, Harris-Stowe. Speaker 2: Harris-Stowe, yeah. Speaker 1: So she, she, she finished at Harris-Stowe by then? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so she just kept taking her courses-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, time after time. And then as it came closer to the degree time, you know, they, they really expected because as a teacher you had to have certification, so and she loved teaching, she's taught everything from kindergarten, first, second grade to high school gym. And that was, I think just a passion, something she always wanted to do was get her college degree. Story_ID: 543456 Speaker 1: All right, now, let's switch over to my father's [Victor Roberts] side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My father's side of the family was, was a little more interesting and, and we'll give you clearly the, the family tree. And we, we know the history of that. We know that that goes back to clearly the early 1800s, and you say, well, why? If, if we were to look at the gentleman who was probably my great-great-grandfather [sic. great-great-great-grandfather], we know that he was white guy who came out of Virginia, whose family was a very prominent--farm owners, plantation owners in Virginia and he moved to Tennessee because there was a lot of opportunity there. Speaker 2: Well, what was his name do you (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, it is on the list of, I'll get it, I can't, I think, I believe the last name was Harwell, H-A-R-W-E-L-L [sic.]. And I know he was related to the Reynolds family with Reynolds Tobacco [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. We also know that the family who were the owners of, oh, god, who--famous slave rebellion as they called it in Virginia was led by-- Speaker 2: Nat Turner. Speaker 1: --Nat Turner. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was, we know that his family were Turners too. And, and, and that's why, you know, we, our family has always talked about our relationship with Turner because, I mean, Turner is really a distant relative of ours, so, so maybe that's part of our genes too (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nat Turner was? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now that-- Speaker 1: --yeah, because, because remember Turner-- Speaker 2: This is Southampton County, Virginia where they had the-- Speaker 1: Had, had-- Speaker 2: --Nat Turner-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --rebellion? Speaker 1: Because remember, remember, Turner was, you know, the pictures that have always portrayed him as being, you know, kind of a, a very dark, devilish looking guy, where actually he was very fair complected and very handsome and very charismatic. So we know that Turner's father was a Turner. Speaker 2: Well there's a, there's a drawing of him-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --it's only a likeness drawn from life-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it's in, I know, 'There Is a River' ['There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America'] by [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't know if you've ever seen him, he's got a hat on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the description that Thomas Gray [Thomas R. Gray] gave of him is a medium complected black man, not dark, not light-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 2: --but medium. And his descendants certainly could go any color from there, from there-- Speaker 1: Any color, sure, sure. Speaker 2: --but so, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And there are descendants that are there now-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Southampton County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: And some in eastern Ohio where his son, Gilbert [Gilbert Turner] escaped, so. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I did not know that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, well, Turner's, this, the Turner I'm talking about-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was from what we understand, one of the children or cousins of Turner's father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, because his father was, was one of the slave owners basically. So, so, so this Turner [Robert Bruce Turner (ph.)] moved to, and I don't know, he probably had money so he bought a, a huge land area in Tennessee, an area called Selmer, S-E-L-M-E-R, Tennessee. That's near Jackson, Tennessee. He met his wife [Alabama Harwell (ph.)] there, or soon to be his wife, which was either part black, part Native American, or mostly Native American, we, I don't know that we actually know what her, her roots are, but she and her--Turner and I think her name was Harwell. Speaker 2: And this is your, your great-- Speaker 1: Great-- Speaker 2: --grandfather? Speaker 1: --grandfather, right. Speaker 2: Okay. 'Cause you, you said your great-great-grandfather was white? Speaker 1: Was white. Speaker 2: And then the, the-- Speaker 1: And that's-- Speaker 2: --the offspring is the one we're talking about now, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And he's-- Speaker 1: And that's Turner so, so-- Speaker 2: Okay. And his, what was his first name, this, this one, this-- Speaker 1: Turner, I, I, we, we can look at it, it's on the-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --family chart. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you had Turner who marries this woman, okay. My great-great, yeah, great-great-grandfather. They had two children, Mississippi and Alabama, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And their names are Mississippi and Alabama [sic. Anna Harwell Locke (ph.) and Nora Harwell (ph.)]? Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter) this was their name. Speaker 2: Mississippi Turner and Alabama Turner? Speaker 1: Yep, and Alabama Turner. And one of the girls, and I can't remember which one became a Harwell, H-A-R-W-E-L-L [sic. Locke]. Story_ID: 543457 Speaker 1: The Harwells had eight children, all girls basically. One of the girls was my father's mother [sic. grandmother, Anna Harwell Locke (ph.)], okay. And, and I've seen p- you'll see pictures I'll give you of, of, of this family. When you look at these girls, they could be Native Americans, they could be African Americans, just a variety. I mean my grandmother, it's kind of interesting because both of my grandmothers were, were very, very fair, even though their siblings were not necessarily and they both had kind of grey or green eyes basically which is why and of, of our group, there, of my siblings, only my brother [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] had gray-green eyes and was very fair, the rest of us were kind of medium, medium brown in complexion. So you had my grandmother's--was part of these girls basically. All out of Selmer, Tennessee. And, of course, all of these kids had children basically. I recall going to family reunions in Selmer, Tennessee, a lot of little side stories I'll tell you about in a second. And I remember always seeing these different aunts--and they would, and I think girls tend, daughters tend to be closer than brothers because I remember all these relatives and the children of these aunts, these great aunts would always, always come through and stop at our house on the way to Chicago [Illinois], California, wherever, so they were always very close knit. I remember going to family reunions where you'd have all these relatives and, you know, I didn't know 'em from, from anything. But my father [Victor Roberts] was able, with his generation, was able to stay in touch with a lot of his boy cousins basically, and one of 'em is the one that has the family tree, he's the, he was out of Tennessee but lived in Minnesota for many years now he lives in Florida, and so we'll give you a copy of that. But kind of interesting, Senator Brooke for instance from Massachusetts, you know, first African American senator from a state outside of, after post-war, post-Civil War, was a relative because what happened was we had one of the sisters married to a Brooke, and it, you know, the story goes on and on and on, and it's, it's interesting because you hear all of these families (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's [HistoryMaker] Edward Brooke, right? B-R-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Edward Brooke, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You hear all of these family stories and they say well did you know that such and such married to such and such, I mean, you know, I never, even though I went to college [Clark University] in, in Massachusetts [Worcester, Massachusetts], I never married, I never met, Senator Brooke, never had a chance to tell him that story. But, but I mean it's, there's, there's, you know, I'm sure that as you all do your research there's a lot of inner linking because of the size of the country at that time in particular what happened to African Americans who survived slavery. So we would always go there for reunions. So my father, you know, we grew up hearing stories about how his mother would go down to see his, his--her sisters and, and, and other relatives and they always had family forums down there, so he would say the reason why he hates watermelon today is because as a kid, they'd go out in the field and they'd punch the watermelon and just take the heart out and eat it, and, you know, you do that all day, all, for a whole couple of summers, you get sick of it, so he never, he's never eaten watermelon ever since then. But, you know, it's funny growing up you would always see him piddling in the garden as he would call it, my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] too because remember they were raised, so everywhere we, we, everywhere we were, at every home we had there was always a small garden in the backyard, tomatoes, even today they, they still do it and I do it because I guess it's just kind of part of, you, you wanna have your hands in nature and you grow something. So that might be genetic too. Story_ID: 543458 Speaker 1: So my father [Victor Roberts] was basically raised in St. Louis [Missouri], went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Very smart, he was one of those kids who would jump two grades so when he graduated from high school he was like fifteen years old, very young because he was just very bright (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, can, can I go back a minute? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think we, did we--I didn't wanna skip the Arkansas part now-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, oh, no, no, and we'll go back because I'll have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to tell you the Roberts side of the family in just a second. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. All right, okay. All right. Speaker 1: 'Cause remember my grandfather [Squire Victor Roberts] was a, was a physician, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But before I-- Speaker 2: This, this is the maternal side you're talking about (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, this is the maternal side. Speaker 2: Of your father's side? Speaker 1: Of my father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And remember right, we got to know them because like I said girls tend to stay closer we think. Reunions, interesting, one of my father's cousins, now I remember going to family reunions, you know, eighth, ninth grade in Tennessee, I'd look at these guys and they were, a lot of these guys were tall, you know, again, attractive looking guys, very fair. I'd look at 'em and, and from my point of view they looked like, you know, white guys who just came off of the farm, I mean, the way they looked, their features, their, the color of their (unclear), but, but they were his first cousins because they were one of his aunt's kids and stuff. And one of these guys, and there were a, a bunch of 'em, I think, it was Clifton [sic.] was his name, he, if you remember the movie 'Walking Tall' and remember the sheriff who was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Buford Pusser. Speaker 1: Buford-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Buford Puffer [sic.] and, you know, he'd go, do you remember there was a character in there who was, he appointed the first black deputy sheriff, well, that was my cousin. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so we heard these stories even before the movie came out. And, and, and my, my great cousin, I'd ask him about this guy because, you know, we were kind of hearing the story, I said, "Well, were you really a sheriff and you carried a gun and all that?" He said, and he tells the story, and this is before the movie came out, and then within a few years the movie came out, came out again. So, so, you know, it's kind of interesting 'cause you never know how your family touches but, but when you see this guy again it's Hollywood they, you know, they portray the actors, someone who didn't look anything like this guy, but he was very strong, very tall, you know, and very fair basically. But he was a character because I remember, you know, they all had nice homes, but one of their homes was sitting kind of up on top of the hill overlooking parts of Selmer, Tennessee. And, you know, I thought I was in Appalachia or some place because, you know, they were just good ole boys sitting around chewing tobacco and talking about, you know, what was happening in the community. And if I had closed my eyes, and, and didn't know that they were cousins of mine, they could have been anyone, anywhere, you know, in the rural South at that time, so it just tells you that people are the same, it doesn't matter what their complexion or their experience, often are always the same. Story_ID: 543459 Speaker 1: So that's kind of my father's maternal side. My, now, my grandfather's side, it's very interesting. He was obviously a very bright guy. He ha- he was out of West Point, Mississippi, West Point, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Now, what's his name? Speaker 1: His name was Squire Victor Roberts. Which is the same name as my father with Squire Victor Roberts, but when my dad went off to the [U.S. military] service he took the Squire off because, you know, growing up in St. Louis [Missouri], people said, "Squire?" You know, "What's wrong with you?" So that's why he doesn't have a middle name because he, he, he dropped the Squire part. And we think the reason why--and we've done some research on that side of the family and just recently met a cousin who I didn't even know existed because we do, we have a TV station [WRBJ-TV] and a radio station [WRBJ Radio] in Jackson, Mississippi, and I'm in a meeting, meeting with some, some business leaders there and, and we're talking about, you know, our roots are in Mississippi, West Point and this guy comes over to me he says, well, you know, "You say West Point," he says, "what's your father's name?" And I say, "It's Victor Roberts." And he, and he almost falls out of his seat, he's a young guy, a few years younger than I am, and he says, "Well, my grandmother was his sister, Viola Roberts [Viola Roberts Lathon]." We didn't even know they existed. I mean, we knew that my grandfather did not like the South, he did not like West Point, Mississippi. We know that he left there, went off to college, so that meant that his father [Wright Roberts] at least had the ability to send him away. And he went to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. He worked on the road for a while, did his internship, went to open a practice in West Helena, Arkansas, and then moved to St. Louis, and he had a practice many years here. But the interesting story about that was he, whatever his experience was in Mississippi at that time, he never went back, he never talked about his relatives but we've met other people over the years, my father has, people who knew him growing up. One guy was a very prominent attorney, Ellis Outlaw here in St. Louis was a good friend of his, and he was a big strapping guy, and he would tell my dad stories about how he would, you know, have to keep some of the bullies off my, my grandfather because he was, you know, smaller in stature, but very, very smart. We believed that the Squire, this is the front of the--Squire Victor [Squire Victor Roberts] was the name of his grandfather who was probably, you know, a plantation owner that, you know, his son, Squire's father, and I can't remember his first name, I can get that for you, which would have been one of my great-great-grandfather [sic. great-grandfather]. Squire Victor Roberts the first, his grandfather was probably the plantation owner. He gave his son, Squire's father, a lot of land basically because from what we're told is that Squire Victor's father was very successful, a very successful farm owner. We believe that Squire, the name Squire was the name of this Irish-English plantation owner, and he was a Squire. You know, they, that's what they called him, you know, instead of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Land owner of a--right. Speaker 1: --Mr., Mr. Roberts he was, he was, you know, he had some kind of nobility but they called him Squire. And so Squire obviously had a relationship with one of his slaves basically, and that's how Squire's father came about. But this Squire Victor gave, gave a lot of land away. What's interesting was that, again, growing up we never knew, we knew that my grandfather had this one sister, Viola, because that's a name we all heard but we didn't know he had about six actually siblings. He never went back, I--to, to Mississippi at least that my father is aware of. He may have stayed in touch with them but he never shared that information. So something-- Speaker 2: So, so-- Speaker 1: --something happened there. Yeah. Speaker 2: So he never told a story about why they, why he left-- Speaker 1: Why he left? Speaker 2: --West Point? Speaker 1: He didn't talk about, and he obviously had some rights to the land down there because I'm sure it was split among siblings. Speaker 2: Now, was your, was your grandfather like raised in West Point? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was raised there. I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. But he left-- Speaker 1: --he was there through, through high school and left and, and never went, they, they think he may have, my father thinks that when he was little that he may have gone back once or twice but he, he never talked about his father, he never, never talked about his grandfather, where, where his name came from, just, just didn't have a good feeling about it. So and that that to us is a big hole. So in meeting our cousin, his name is Harold Lathon, Harold's father would have been my father's first cousin, they really didn't know, they never knew each other. In fact, they talked on the phone and, and Harold's father just passed away so they never met. And, and we've been able to get more information about the family farm and kind of what happened in West Point. But it looks like the only sister that stayed there was Viola. And of course, Viola married Mr. Lathon [Robert Lathon] and Mr. Lathon then had children, which was Harold's father. Now, there is one aunt [Rosetta Lathon Allen] in Detroit [Michigan] that we're trying to catch up with, who we know have a lot of information on, on, you know, that generation. Speaker 2: Is she a Lathon? Speaker 1: She is, yes, she's a Lathon, she's a Lathon because she would have been Harold's father's sister and-- Speaker 2: Now are you all any relation [HistoryMaker] Stan Lathan the movie producer? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because, you know, that would have been-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the Lathon side of the family. But, yeah, that's a good question. It's based on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's, it's, it's not a common name necessarily so. Speaker 1: No, not, not, and, and certainly not-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in African American communities. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: It's L-A-T-H-O-N. I don't know if he's A-N, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, O--he's A-N. Speaker 1: No, this is O-N, and so. Speaker 2: Oh, all right. Speaker 1: But, you know, I'm gonna ask my cousin that. Speaker 2: But then again, you know, it could, you know, those spellings sometimes designate the black side of the family from the white side. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. I'm gonna ask, I'll call Harold today and ask him that question because that is a, because, you know, I've seen that, that, I mean, I, I have not met him, my brother [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] has met him because we're involved NAACP Image Awards, you know, I've been a judge for a couple of years now and we know the producer very well. So, you know, I, I, I've seen these names or I've seen them on TV or whatever but I don't, I don't know but that's a good question, I'll find out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm sure Harold would be happy to know that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 543460 Speaker 1: Victor Roberts, Squire Victor Roberts, Dr. Roberts, you know, he moved to, he and his family from West Helena, Arkansas here, practiced for ver- many years. Speaker 2: Now, where did he go to medical school? Now, this is always important. Speaker 1: Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: How did, how did he become a, a doctor, and how, you know, what was the--? Speaker 1: Well, you know, from, from what we, we're told he went to, and I don't know what college it was, it was, it was, it was probably a college I expect like a Methodist or a Baptist college that was established for African American kids basically. Remember this is after, these, these are the sons of former slaves basically so there were a lot of religious institutions that had colleges that encouraged these black kids to go. Speaker 2: So this is the early part of the century he's going to-- Speaker 1: Well, yeah, yeah, because he graduated from Meharry-- Speaker 2: Black college [HBCU], some-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --but you don't, not sure exactly which one it was? Speaker 1: No, I don't know, but we know it could, it could have been Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I mean, we know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It could have been and, and but he got his medical degree from Meharry? Speaker 1: From Meharry we know that for sure. And that was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --probably about 19--1916, 1917, somewhere around that timeline. It was kind of interesting because my, how my grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] and grandfather met was in, as I told you, now remember my grandmother grew up in Selmer, Tennessee, so, you know, I, we don't know how good the education system was, but we know all the girls finished high school and all of them finished college. My grandmother-- Speaker 2: Is there a story what college they came out of? Speaker 1: Yeah, most of them went to Jackson, let's see-- Speaker 2: Was that-- Speaker 1: --Jackson, Tennessee. Speaker 2: --Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]? Speaker 1: Lane. Speaker 2: Lane, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, because-- Speaker 2: C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] school. Speaker 1: C.M.E., right. And, and remember what I was saying about the religious, a lot of religious institutions created schools for these kids, so most of the kids, most of her siblings I believe went to Lane. And, you know, my grandmother (unclear) fairly bright (unclear) too my, my dad [Victor Roberts] has told me because, you know, she graduated, very successfully. I believe started teaching in Jackson where my grandfather and she met because he was doing a residency or, or some other medical training program. They met and within a year they were married and then that's when they moved to Arkansas 'cause they had one child [Marion Roberts] in Jackson and then the other one, moved on. Story_ID: 543461 Speaker 1: So his children, I guess, ended up staying in Canada, probably. Speaker 2: No, I think it was in Georgia. Speaker 1: Georgia (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he was, he was in Atlanta [Georgia] for years, had the biggest church in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the biggest C.M.E.--I mean, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, Bishop Henry McNeal Turner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: But, but you can see my brother [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] how he looks like both of his grandmothers, fair, light eyes, you know. And, and, you know, my parents don't look anything like that (laughter). You know, I look more like my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] and he kind of looks like my father [Victor Roberts] except my father is more, when you look at my father, he looks almost Native American because he's got very keen features and stuff, so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you'll meet him hopefully before you leave here, at least say hello to him. Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Where were we? Speaker 2: So we were, we were finishing up your father's side of the family, your grandfather [Squire Victor Roberts] getting his medical degree-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and-- Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: --setting up practice-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --here. Speaker 1: Well, well actually he, remember he met my grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] who was a graduate of Lane College in Jackson [Tennessee]. They got married, moved to one of his first places that he did practice medicine was in West Helena, Arkansas, which is, you know, across the river from Mississippi basically (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you're saying Helena-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Helena, Arkansas? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Helena, H-E-L-L-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --E-N-A [sic.]. Well-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --you got Helena, Mississippi, and then you have West Helena, Arkansas. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: West Helena, Arkansas-- Speaker 1: West Helena. Speaker 2: --was the scene of a, was a, a awful race riot-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --at one point. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is it-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and I can't remember, do you know, remember the year when that happened? Speaker 2: I think it may have 19--between 1919 and 1921 around in there. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that would have been, and I'll ask my father that could have been you, you know, if my father was born in '22 [1922] then they were probably there then, yeah. Speaker 2: It was one of the worst in U.S. history, whole black population had to get out, you know. I, I, it's, it could have been '22 [1922] or '23 [1923]. Speaker 1: Or, or, or after that. Speaker 2: It's in the early '20s [1920s], I-- Speaker 1: And it could have been one of the reasons why--as I recall my father saying is it, one of the reasons why he left was because again just the way he was being treated there. So he, he left and moved to St. Louis [Missouri]. I guess, he was just looking for a bigger, bigger market where he would have more clientele. We'll, we'll need to, to track that time to see if in fact that was part of the, you know, impetus for him to, to leave West Helena. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure that nobody could, no black professional could stay in West Helena, Arkansas, after those riots. Speaker 1: After those riots, wow. Speaker 2: So that would be, that would be, we could rest assured that, you know, and if he moved in 1922 it was probably, had something to do with the riots. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Good, good. Story_ID: 543462 Speaker 1: Obviously they, my grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] and grandfather [Squire Victor Roberts] moved to St. Louis [Missouri], raised their two children, both went to Sumner High School here [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. You know, my father [Victor Roberts]--my grandfather was a prominent physician. My dad would tell me stories about some of the things that they would do, I know you'll have a chance to interview him too. But my dad was fairly young, he was a young teenager about fourteen, fifteen, when, when my grandfather died. He was typical of many of the black physicians as I'm told in those days, you know, these are the people who basically worked a lot, I mean, they would work the fifteen, sixteen hours a day basically. They'd come home, eat, go to bed, and go back because as you can imagine in those days, there wasn't very good medical care that was available to black citizens in this, in this city or probably in the country. So he was always busy. My dad would also tell me stories about how this was the, the Depression [Great Depression] time, Depression period and like a lot of people could not afford to pay for medical care. So they would bring him cakes and pies and chickens and all kind of things, whatever they could do to help pay for, for the services. And I think, you know, it was just a tough time because he's working long hours and probably very stressful, trying to take care of people and, you know, he had a very significant heart attack and stroke and, and never recovered from it. Speaker 2: This is 1937 I would guess then? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, this would have been 19--yeah, thirty- yeah, '37 [1937], '38 [1938], that's right. Because well, you know it was, it was well, before my dad had finished high school and went to the [U.S. military] service, yes, that's right. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. And how did this affect the family's income? Speaker 1: Well, it was, it was pretty devastating because remember at the time my father was, my grandfather was only--the wage earner in the family, my father and aunt [Marion Roberts] were basically in high school for the most part. And so, and my grandmother really did not work so that meant that my aunt had to start working part time as did my father after school to try to help put food on the table and keep the rent paid. Because as you can imagine there was, there was no, there was no family legacy in terms of financial welfare because there wasn't much money to be made in those days so I would expect that it was a very difficult time because, you know, you're kind of going from not having to worry about money because you had a, a father who was a physician to, again, had al- my dad always said he always had a nice car. So, so they went from that to, you know, probably, probably it was very tough times because again there wasn't much of a, a practice beyond him because once he was gone there was no one to take his place for the most part. So it, it was difficult. My father also told me how he, one of his part time jobs was working in the tailor shop and we would call it a cleaners today but they, you know, they called it tailor shops because they would do, they would do the alterations as well as doing the other parts of cleaning of clothes. So as a youngster we would always see him, he always did his ow- his own mending of, of his clothes basically because he was a good tailor. I mean, I remember in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri], I'd, you know, getting ready to go out to a prom or something and I'd have something that wasn't fitting right, he'd say, oh, hey, let me do this and he would sew it right up and I'd be in great shape and stuff. So, you know, it's those kind of life skills that you develop as a youngster that stays with you for a long time. Story_ID: 543463 Speaker 1: Now he finished Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], right? And then-- Speaker 2: He finished Sumner-- Speaker 1: --and was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and he finished early because he was two grades ahead so he was about fifteen years old when he finished. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then started college. Speaker 1: Started at Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Started at Stowe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because again, you know, it was a college that was available for, you know, kids who basically lived in the City of St. Louis [Missouri]. And then wo- by then World War II [WWII] was coming along and that's an interesting story. My dad [Victor Roberts] always wanted to be a pilot and--because he had heard of this program at Tuskegee college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] which was the t- you know, the beginning of the Tuskegee Airmen. And many of his friends signed up at the start of the war to become Tuskegee Airmen and they were all selected. He signed up, it was really, it just was funny how things happen. The day that he was going in for his physical he got very sick and so he couldn't go and he missed the physical date and because of that he missed the opportunity to become a Tuskegee Airman. Because remember several of his friends who were, you know, same size, as smart as he was and all, they all got selected and they all left. And many of them came back to St. Louis. And here at St. Louis airport [St. Louis Lambert International Airport, St. Louis, Missouri] we have a wall that shows some of the aviation history and many, many of my father's friends are on the wall so he could have been a Tuskegee Airman. Of course, he could have been shot down and I wouldn't be here today if that had happened. So because he missed that opportunity and, of course, he was later drafted as anybody of that age would have been and he, he went into the, the [U.S. military] service. And he tells the stories of how, you know, he would be training at different camps all over the U.S. and that's why he's always very good in geography growing up because he'd been in all these places. Speaker 1: So this is about 1941 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, '41 [1941], exactly. And he, and, of course, remember, they had not sent many of the African American men abroad at that point, they were still kind of training and they were keeping them to do what they call stateside work for the most part. And then as, you know, '42 [1942], '43 [1943] came on then, and, and there were not enough soldiers in, in some of these theaters, and in, in his case it was, it was the European Theater [European Theater of Operations], they sent him over to--he, he, you know, he went and, and, and he started in Italy and he knows all the way, all the way up through Italy, he saw parts of Germany, and I mean, a lot of these places we heard about because, you know, as, as you can imagine a kid from St. Louis, you know, who was seventeen, eighteen year- no, a little bit older, maybe nineteen, twenty years old, who had never been outside of St. Louis except for Tennessee or Chicago [Illinois] or some place, he, for him to see the world was very impressionable for him. And as youngsters he always would tell us about, "I was here, I was here, there." Which is why when we encourage him to take trips, it took almost forty years before we could get him to do a cruise in Europe because he said, "I've been there, I've done that, I don't need to go." I said, "Dad, its forty years, it's changed a little bit." And he, of course, he enjoyed the experience because he got to see Rome [Italy] and to see Paris [France] and places that he saw as a young man was very influential, so. Story_ID: 543464 Speaker 1: So again, remember, it's Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I growing up in a house where our parents are always somewhat optimistic in terms of what you can do with your life. You know, my father's experience in the [U.S.] military which we heard about, hear about places that we can only read about in our geography lessons. You know, my mother [Delores Talley Roberts], talking, taking us places that, you know, a lot of parents didn't take their kids. Because, you know, these are things that she probably wanted to do as a child but would have never imagined it and now she has children she wants to expose them to these things. So that was kind of the environment that we were raised in so that as we, I know we'll talk later about, you know, being, you know, the largest African American television ownership group [Roberts Broadcasting Company] in, in the U.S., you know, having the largest hospitality, hotel, restaurant business, African Americans in the U.S., prominent real estate developers throughout the United States, all of these things, you know, and people say, "Well, how did it happen? Did--was your father [Victor Roberts] wealthy? You know, did he put you in the business?" And, you know, our father worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] for thirty-nine years 'cause it was a good paying job, take care of his family. And then when he wanted to retire now twenty-five years ago, we said, "Dad, why don't you come work with us?" Because we were just starting our business. And he said, "No, no, I've worked all these years, I'm a go retire." We said, "What are you gonna do when you retire? You're gonna go sit, you don't play golf, you're gonna go sit and piddle in the garden," as he would say at our, you know, sit there with my mom. And, of course, my mom who was still teaching at the time, she said, "Yeah, what are you gone do when you go home? I'm not gone be there." And even if she was there she wouldn't want him to be there, I don't think all the time (laughter) because, you know, he's, he's very energetic, very bright. So he said, "Okay." So we start our business basically and we're both elected officials, both on the city council [Board of Aldermen] at this point. And Dad retired so he comes to work with us, it's just the three of us in one office room which is only probably, you know, fifteen by twenty [feet] in size. And Dad is there answering the phone, he helps us with some memos, because remember the thirty-nine years at the post office, you know, he was organized. And today he's very organized and we, everything he does in his office, his memos, they're all very organized so he came to work with, so he kind of gave us organization and he was really our CFO and today is still our CFO of our company [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri]. So, you know, from the time he started to now he was always kind of watching our back in a sense to make sure that our basics were taken care of so we can be creative entrepreneurs and do all these wonderful things that we've done. Story_ID: 543465 Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities and their dispositions and talents and, who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think in terms of visionaries probably more of the mother [Delores Talley Roberts] because she was always into, you know, wanting us to be at the theater, we'd go in the summertimes to a theater we have called The Muny, the municipal association of, of, of St. Louis [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. And they'd put the big outdoor Broadway shows, huge shows. And I remember as a youngster we would go and sit in the free seats because this theater is in a public park so from the time it started, eighty years ago, you had to always have seats available for free, and they were always at the very top, at the back, but it didn't matter. I remember going out there in, in the middle of the summer, it's hot or whatever, and she said, "Well, look at the plays." And we're up there kind of looking at the sky and playing around so but she always liked theater and movies and things like that, so she'd drag us along all the time. Now, what's interesting is, you know, forty years later I'm on the board of directors of this association which would have never ever dreamed of, of an African American or even a woman being on that board. So those are the kind of influences I think that have opened our horizons. Now in terms of responsibility and steadfa- steadfastness, it was clearly my father [Victor Roberts] because he would say, you know, if you're gonna go to school, go to school and be the very best you can be, you know, or he would say, if you're taking on this project, make sure it gets done all the way through. I mean, what we found as entrepreneurs that the people who are not successful entrepreneurs often are the ones who will not see a project through to the end. Clearly, you know, being steady, but, you know, being consistent is the, I think key to success, you know, beyond the vision of doing great things. And that's what we learned from my dad was that, you know, you get up, you go to work, you do X, Y, Z, you do your responsibility. If you have chores around the house, you do your responsibility. And even though when he came to work with us, we were probably still a little loosey-goosey in doing stuff, we had him here at least to keep the, the direction of the boat going, you know, in the right direction all the time. And I think, so, so, I think, I think if, if you're fortunate enough you learn from, you know, you take in the sense of the best from both parents and that gives you the direction you'll go in your life. Story_ID: 543466 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, a lot, many. Because remember, you know, our parents were the kind of parents who would just always take their kids along. Well they, they didn't leave us with, you know, an aunt or a relative, I mean, they may have, I don't remember that. But I mean I have a lot of early memories. One is, and Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] will tell you this story about when we're probably about three years old, and my dad [Victor Roberts] had been doing some work in the home that we were living in, it was a two family flat so, you know, we lived on the first floor, my [paternal] grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] and my aunt [Marion Roberts] and her family lived on the second floor. And there was plaster that was in the ceiling and it was loose and my parents said, "Look, we're working in that room, stay out of the--." Remember there were only five rooms in this flat for the most part and one's the kitchen and one's the bathroom. So and this was like the back bedroom, and they said, "Stay out of it," but I was on the rocking horse, I loved my rocking horse, like I said, I had to be about three or four. And, and the rocking horse was in this room, and my parents said, "Stay out of it because, you know, the plaster may fall." And so I'm in there just rocking away and, and my brother, Mike, comes in and he says, "Look, parents said you gotta stay out of here." And he's seven maybe, "You've gotta, you've gotta stay out of there." "Oh, no." I'm rocking, I'm rocking. And I remember him instead of, you know, just saying, well, you stay in there if you want to, I remember him literally dragging me and the horse out of the room, and within a few minutes the ceiling fell, you know, so that's an interesting story. Another early childhood memory was again I'm three or four and my dad because he worked at a post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and before he became an administrative officer he was, you know, a supervisor, so he was always in kind of a leadership role. I don't think he ever delivered mail, I think he was more either a clerk, became a supervisory clerk and then moved up to be the third highest ranking person in the St. Louis [Missouri] area, post office service he was what they called the incentive awards officer. So he worked right under the postmaster. Now, and we always tease him and say, "You know, you could have been the first black postmaster for St. Louis if you wanted too." 'Cause, you know, by then his sons were in politics and we could have worked on it. He says, "No, I enjoy what I'm doing, I'm a stay where I am basically. And then when I retire, I'm gonna get my pension and I'll be happy," basically. But I remember every night, my mom [Delores Talley Roberts] would, it would be about 9:30 at night and I'd be awake because I wasn't in school yet, and she would be ironing his shirt because, you know, he was a supervisor on the night shift at the main post office in St. Louis. And I remember the 'Highway Patrol' which was an old TV show, and we had a black and white TV at the time, would come on and I'd be sitting there, I remember Broderick Crawford coming on with his gravelly voice and that's a, actually it's the only TV show I ever remember at this very, very early age. And I remember every night that's how--her routine, I'd be sitting there, 'cause, you know, I wasn't ready to go to bed, my mom would be talking to my dad before he'd go to work, making his lunch, a paper bag, and ironing his shirt and then I'd, I'd, I will always remember Broderick Crawford was over about ten o'clock and my dad would leave (laughter) basically. That's a early memory. Another one was my parents were always kind of active with the Y, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. And my mom would tell stories about how she used to dance in the, what they called the Y Circus in World War II [WWII]. You've probably heard people talk about it. Every city had one where a lot of talented girls particularly would go and they would dance and sing and things like that and that was kind of a part of a, it was kind of like a talent show but it would move around from Ys. And so I remember her talking about the, working with the YW and YMCA. And, and, and because there were very few places that, you know, young African American families could go, particularly for quote summer vacation, the Y camp, which was Camp Derricotte in Missouri [Troy, Missouri] and every other place there were different camps, it was one place they would take us. And, and I remember being, had to be two, when we would go because that was unusual thing, I didn't, never saw a swimming pool before, now, I'm sure that pool probably wasn't crystal clear but at least it was a concrete pool. And I remember my parents would both be swimming and my dad would, would, what he'd call play alligator, so he'd let me ride on his back 'cause I was really too young to swim, and we would be going along and those, those were great memories too. Story_ID: 543467 Speaker 1: I think probably the most significant memory for me as a young youngster before school was being able to walk the neighborhood that I lived in. There was a little grocery store, confectionary around the corner. And in those days parents didn't worry about their kids, you know, walking around the corner or going to a neighbor's house to play. Speaker 2: Now, did you grow up in The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri] you said? Speaker 1: Yeah, I grew up in The Ville, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --this area. In fact, from our building here, the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri], The Ville really is only about four blocks away and the street that we grew up, Vernon Avenue is only four blocks away. My parents' [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] home where they've lived for the last forty-nine years, and we'll talk about that in our next segment about how they were the first black family to move into a subdivision that was created for a black family, which was what some people would call blockbusting, but for us it was called opportunity. And we were the, they, they created a subdivision of fourteen homes, ranch homes, one level, with nice yards and they put it in the middle of what had been an, you know, a predominantly white community. And so Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I we would go to, we would be the first black kids in the school and things like that. That's part of, it's interesting history, that's part of the, the desegregation of housing which was mandated. So they were very good people and they were not, they were black, these were, these were Caucasian developers who said we're gonna create new housing for African Americans who can, can afford it. And San Francisco Court [St. Louis, Missouri] again where my parents live today, is, is a shining example of, of that. Now, it's also a shining example of where there was white flight too because after the subdivision was created within ten years, you know, if, if, if it was 5 percent African American in that community, in that neighborhood basically, it was probably ten years later it was 5 percent Caucasian basically. So, but, but again, that's part of their, you know, we're gonna move out of this flat into a home and give our kids a different, a nice opportunity and stuff. Speaker 2: About how old were you when, when they (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was, I know exactly, I was five years old when we moved. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Because I remember moving boxes with my dad and being, our home was the first finished in the subdivision so when we were there they were still digging holes and doing all kinds of things. Story_ID: 543468 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, if it was on Vernon [Avenue] which is The Ville area [St. Louis, Missouri] it was just kind of the, I mean, the homes were all very, I mean, they were flats but they were home and people took care of their yards and a lot of flowers and things like that. And people were just happy because this is really their first homes that they had. But then when we moved to San Francisco Court [St. Louis, Missouri] it was, you know, it's having a nice lawn, you know, we learned how to cut grass and trim trees and things like that. Those very vivid memories I mean, I think about walking home from my elementary school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] at that, ten, eleven, twelve years old, never worried about anything, you know, enjoyed the fall part of the year because, you know, grasshoppers would be flying all over, the leaves were starting to change, those are the kind of vivid, bright memories of, of, of childhood growing up in this community. Story_ID: 543469 Speaker 1: Tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhoods you grew up in? Speaker 2: Well, the area that we grew up in, at least my early years, say from birth to age five was, the address was 4641 Vernon [Avenue], now that's considered kind of The Ville area [St. Louis, Missouri]. This was an area that had a number of two family flats, a few single homes. But if, if you think about the post-war [World War II, WWII] years when, for instance, my father [Victor Roberts] and mother [Delores Talley Roberts] were looking for a place to live and yet they didn't have enough money for a home by themselves, it was typical of even what you're, you're seeing today I think in some of the other immigrant communities of people moving to the United States. So what they did was they bought a home, a two family flat with my [paternal] grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] and aunt [Marion Roberts] and her family and, of course, my father, mother, and my brother, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], was a couple of years old at that point. And that allowed them to have the independence of home ownership and yet, you know, they shared the same building, two entrances obviously, small yard. But this area was a predominantly black area. It was interesting because it was typically a neighborhood but some people would not say that it was a neighborhood in the 'Ozzie and Harriet' ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet'] time frame even though it was the same time, in the '50s [1950s]. This was an area where you could walk to school, you could walk to the neighborhood confectionary or the neighborhood store, laundry, or, or, or florist. So for me as a youngster, you know, a toddler on up to age five, it was not untypical for me to be sitting on my parents' porch and watching people walk by, or when I got to the age of four where I could literally walk to the store by myself and get a sucker or a piece of gum. So that was kind of the area. Now, for me, it, it obviously was nothing out of the norm. I did not know of the, you know indiscretions of, of a majority of people against a minority of people in this country; did not have a clue of racism. My parents never really discussed it. I mean, I recall, you know, working with my mother, it's probably age three she would do part time jobs like at the Saint Louis Zoo [Saint Louis Zoological Park, St. Louis, Missouri] and Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], which is our major park here. And I'd just go along with her because that's just what we did, there was no such thing as, as really a lot of preschool or nursery school activities. I think the earliest I could go to nursery school was age four. And would go only part time because, one, I don't think my parents could afford sending me full time and two, my mother always wanted to keep her children very close anyway. But I can remember my mom being at what we would call today a concessions stand and, and I liked to always go into that with her. And she probably only worked two or three days a week, but it was fun because one, I was outdoors and two, you know, I'd get a Hershey bar, or a popsicle which we never really had in the house, so it was kind of a, one of those experiences that it's, it's like a dream state and you remember it well, you know, the sounds or feelings but it was so long ago that you sometimes wonder if it was really real but it was. And so my mother, we had chance to really spend a lot of time together say from age, from birth to age four or five before nursery school began and then, of course, obviously I went to kindergarten after that. Story_ID: 543470 Speaker 1: Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri] has a lot of historical meaning to the people of St. Louis [Missouri] I think as the site of the World's Fair I think? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the 1904 World's Fair [St. Louis World's Fair, Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri]. And St. Louis was a different place in those times because in 1904 St. Louis was really the, the, the main attraction for the world for about six months. Kings, queens, princesses, emperors, all kind of folks came, bought homes all along or had homes built all along the Lindell area [Lindell Boulevard] which surrounds the park because they would come for a long period of time when they would come to a World's Fair. So this was a big deal. Also at the time of that time St. Louis was the second wealthiest in terms of family and business successes, individuals mostly. It was a very interesting place because you had a lot of the agricultural and agricultural, light industry and heavy industry in terms of steel and brick were here in St. Louis. Outside of New York [New York] it was, had the, the second largest number of millionaires because so many were centrally located, you had the rails, you had the river, of course, you know, there were no interstate highways at that point and certainly people were not flying. So, so it was a major crossroads for the United States, North, South, East, and West. So Forest Park was kind of the central park in the sense of, of Central Park of New York, it would be the central park of, of St. Louis. And because of the World's Fair it really became a, you know, a jewel of this community and the world because people from all over the world saw it. You know, we think that, and, and remember, of course, I'm out there now, almost fifty years later from that time, so, you know, it's kind of interesting because that park was very influential with me in my very early stages. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think around the country we used to watch the Saint Louis Zoo [Saint Louis Zoological Park, St. Louis, Missouri] on Mutual of Omaha's-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --'Wild Kingdom'-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --with Marlin Perkins-- Speaker 2: Marlin Perkins, yeah. Speaker 1: --was the director of that. Speaker 2: Yep. And, and, in fact, Marlin Perkins probably put it on the map that's why it consistently ranks as one of the top one or two or three zoos in the world, you know, San Diego Zoo [San Diego, California], sometimes in New York--or the D.C. zoo [National Zoological Park; Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute, Washington, D.C.], but it's always one of the very top. We have international visitors here all the time. Yes, and you're right, I grew up looking at black and white TV with Marlin Perkins and never made the connection that he was at the Saint Louis Zoo. I just remember, you know, 'Wild Kingdom' basically. In fact, there are several buildings and statues named in his honor out there. His family has been very generous to that zoo over, over time. Story_ID: 543471 Speaker 1: So, you know, here I am in the '50s [1950s] growing up. And again remember TV is just coming on board. So, we, we catch occasionally, you know, a perspective of what the rest of the world is, of course, as you could well imagine there was no programming on TV that looks like us so except for a few shows that our parents would let us look at. My dad [Victor Roberts], of course, at that time was working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and he was moving up in the ranks but would have different shifts and stuff. And I remember, we never saw Dad during the day because he had the late shift, he'd come in, I mean, he'd go to work about ten o'clock at night, because I remember being with my mom [Delores Talley Roberts] looking at 'Highway Patrol' on TV with Broderick Crawford, I just remember that clearly. My, my mom's ironing my dad's shirt and preparing his lunch. And, and, you know, he would get up and he would take off because, you know, he was on that all night shift basically. And so usually when he would come in in the morning, he would usually go to sleep, it's about the time we were waking up for the most part. So a lot of times, you know, he would sleep during the day and we'd, we'd kind of see him when we would come from school and maybe for dinner and then he'd go back and take a nap. So in kind of those early years it was really very, you know, Mom dominated in terms of our interaction. Now, occasionally we'll do a little family vacation. A vacation for us would be getting in the car and driving to Chicago [Illinois]. We didn't go to Europe or, or to Cancun [Mexico] or someplace like that, it was always related around a family member. It could be you usually, you know, they used to break, we'd go see my [maternal] grandmother [Selma Bell Talley] or if, if there was some other relative in Tennessee who may have passed away, we may load in the car and go there, but that was kind of the way we would travel for the most part. But what was interesting was here I am in, in kind of a very comfortable, nourishing neighborhood [in St. Louis, Missouri] because, you know, everyone on the street knew all the kids and it was just like comedians talk about how neighbors would look out for other neighbors kids and if they caught you doing something wrong, they would discipline you, or certainly by the time you got home your mother would. So this was kind of this, I wouldn't call it idyllic growing up because we had limited resources but we didn't know, we didn't care. Story_ID: 543472 Speaker 1: And then, by the time I was halfway through kindergarten, my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] because they wanted their own home, you know not kind of sharing, and they wanted more space because at that time they had two children [Roberts and his brother, HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] with one on the way [Mark Roberts] so they were looking, you know, what can we do to get more space for our kids. So going from this, you know, historically black, middle-class enclave, you know, I say middle class today it would from an economic point of view it probably would be a minimum wage standard class, but at the time I'd say it was, it was a solid community, black, to a new subdivision that was a part of really blockbusting on San Francisco Court [St. Louis, Missouri]. And what happened was it was a developer who bought this land that was what they call an old victory garden, it was just a huge vacant space that people used to go during wo- World War II [WWII] to, to grow plants and vegetables because it was, it was, the city allowed them to do that and they would harvest it. So this gentleman, I think, his name was O'Donnell [ph.], he bought this land and the purpose of it was to create a suburban style looking one level homes with your, with large front yards and backyards for people of color because remember, in this neighborhood, except for this big open space it was mostly one and two bedroom homes, one and two bedroom flats too. So it was a, an all-white community for the most part. So now you got this new subdivision with new homes, with all the new features being built in the middle of a, what was predominantly white neighborhood. And fourteen families had an opportunity to buy it. And my parents were actually probably the first folks to put money down on it because it seems to fit everything. It was centrally located, schools were not far away. You know, the thing that they probably didn't realize was the, the impact on the neighborhood that that would have because they probably just didn't think about it, they just an opportunity to move their family to a nicer, newer home basically. Well, you know, now you're, you're, you're, you're plunking down fourteen black families, and, and none of these folks were--I mean these were not poor people, even though the homes were only I think $12,500, but everyone who moved in there, there was a dentist, there was a supervisor at the General Motors plant [St. Louis Truck Assembly, St. Louis, Missouri] which wasn't far away, there were teachers, nurses, I mean, this was, it was, it was a, an enclave of fourteen middle-class families. Story_ID: 543473 Speaker 1: And so part of the challenge was now you're coming into a community [San Francisco Court, St. Louis, Missouri] and, and we were the first family to move into that area because growing up for the first few years, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I would be climbing all over dirt hills and, you know, pretending we were in forts because some of these homes were not completed, they were still under construction, so for us it was just, just a big play, playground and we would meet with some of the kids in the community. Some of the things that, that stick out in my mind was, you know, we, and it probably prepared Mike and I for some of the harsher realities of growing up, was, you know, we were some of the very first black kids in this public school called Scullin School [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] which was only about three blocks away. And Scullin was named after a guy named John Scullin who was the head of Scullin Steel [Scullin Steel Company] which was one of the largest steel manufacturer, fabricators in the world based in St. Louis [Missouri]. And so we were one of the first black families to move into that neighborhood and the first to go to that school. And so we know that some of the teachers were probably not as helpful to us when we were growing up as--or going to, to classes. I, I know that Mike particularly they, you know, they tried to, to say he had issues, you know, first it was discipline, which wasn't true, then it was well, he wasn't prepared because he came from the black elementary school over to the white elementary school. All of those things, you know, proved out to be incorrect. You know, they said that I had a problem with a speech impediment, which my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] said, "He's always talked like that, I mean, there's nothing wrong with the way he, he speaks." But it was part of them trying to, I think, frustrate these young black children who were coming into this new environment. And, and that was kind of the, you know, the subtle racial biases that occurred in our early education. To jump forward now, you know, by the time I graduated, there were, you know, seven years later, there were, because there was kindergarten and eighth grade, by the time I graduated there are probably as few of whites as they were blacks when I started, so it, it completely turned around. As well as many of the teachers, very few of the teachers were still there originally. And I think that was just part of white flight, you know, over time the parents took the kids out and the teachers ran also. Story_ID: 543474 Speaker 1: But one of the most interesting stories, you know, we, my father [Victor Roberts] was pretty athletic so he would build a basketball court in our backyard and a lot of the kids in the neighborhood, white and black, would come over there and play. We had a, we had the little, the largest backyard in that area so we could play football, we could play baseball, anything we could, anything a kid can imagine we would do. But I remember only being in that neighborhood probably about two years, probably age six or seven, and I remember there was one little kid who we were in the same class at, at, at the elementary school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] and he'd come over. And now his family, there weren't very many four family flats in, in our neighborhood, but behind us in the backyards that touch each other there was a four family flat, which, you know, kind of tells you that the folks who were probably there were, were, were struggling because the rooms were, they were basically a three shotgun type room. But I remember this one kid who, who would come over and play all the time. And one time his father called him over across our fence, over playing in the backyard and he was a, a kind of a big, fat, you know, like beer drinking looking, you know, cigarette smoking, not obviously taking well care of himself individual. And, and, and he came over to the son and whispered something and, and, and the son then left. And so the boy came back over to me, I think his name was Frankie [ph.], Franco [ph.], something like that and he said, he says, "I can't play with you anymore." And I said, "Well why? We're having such a good time, you know, we play at school and everything." He says, "No, my father says that I can't play with a nigger." So I said okay. So he left, climbed the fence and went back home. And I remember going into my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] and I said, "Mom, you know, Frankie, said he can't come over and play with us, he, he can't play with me anymore because his father said that we were niggers." And, of course, my mom, you know, she was hot, she was one of those people very, very quietly but very, very firm, very radical in terms of her beliefs because as a young girl growing up she would walk into say like the Fox Theatre [Fabulous Fox Theatre] here in St. Louis [Missouri] because she was fair complected and they wouldn't question her, but her sister [Vernice Talley] who would try to walk in the front door they wouldn't let her in. So I mean she had experienced prejudice, you know, throughout her life, so she knew what it meant. And she made it, it was kind of interesting, I mean she didn't say anything mean or hostile about the kid or his parents she just said that, "You know, sometimes there are people in this world who are, who are not fair, sometimes there are people who do not see the worth of an individual of. And if, if, if, if, if he or any other child does not feel comfortable in being with you because of who you are, then you have to rise above it and be better." So that's one of those things that's always stuck with me that, that was really my first real experience, I'm sure there was other prejudiced things going around in school and things but that was one that just stuck and it's probably because my mom's response to that, you know, instead of getting loud and running to the fence or knocking on their door and, and performing, she probably were more, the, the way she handled it was more impressive with me that, or, or left more impressions upon me that it stayed with me my entire life. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 543475 Speaker 1: So the rest of the time as I indicated, you know, Scullin [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] went from like I said very few blacks the first three or four years to by the time I graduated, you saw a change. But even then it was interesting because these, these families who were moving now into this community where we lived [San Francisco Court, St. Louis, Missouri], now we, we were still the only subdivision with new homes, but, you know, as the white flight began, the people who were buying these homes, it was very interesting were like my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts], you know, teachers, nurses, and a few doctors, a few dentists, a few lawyers, you know, just people who had good paying jobs who could afford their own homes. So, my school, you know, had the prodigy [sic.] of these individuals, we had the children who, who basically came from pretty stable homes basically (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So would you guess that the, the, I guess, the caliber of im- well, of parent improved because of white flight? I mean, were, were the whites living there professionals too or-- Speaker 1: No, no, not at all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, these were, this was probably a, a blue collar neighborhood at best. No, these were just kind of people struggling. But they, many of them had gotten into the homes when they were probably very, very inexpensive. But a lot of 'em had been the second generations who had been in those homes, you know, parents kind of took care of them, they passed on and then they just kept the homes, so a lot of these folks really didn't work very hard to get these homes. And, of course, you know, the, the, the lending ability to, to get a home and particularly after World War II [WWII], you could almost just go in and say, "Hey, I'm a G.I.," and they'll write it up basically. So no, you know, there was no question about the, the, the intelligence level in terms of just looking at the kids who were at our schools. And this was no prep school and this wasn't, this was just a school but it just shows that as, as, as a people move up economically that their priorities, i.e. education, and the exposure that they give them tends to make kids a little bit brighter I think. Now, was everybody in the class, in my typical eighth grade class brilliant? No, no, because there were some kids whose parents had moved out of some of the federally owned projects in downtown. You know, single parent homes, did not have some of the basic skill sets that were needed. But I will tell you the majority of those kids did go on to high school. Now, the high school that we went to [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri], which was closest to us was and, but it was still busing, I mean, we, we, did busing in those days we just didn't call it that, you just go take the bus and go to school basically but it wasn't a public bus, you had to, you had to go take, you know, the, the, the Metro, the, the Bi-State bus system [Bi-State Development Agency]. So mostly all those kids went to, went to high school, I mean, it wasn't a question that they weren't going to high school. And in those days they had tracking systems which were basically Track 1, Track 2, and Track 1-A, those were kind of the gifted kids who had what we'd call today Advanced Placement courses and they all had their own classes together. And the Track 1 kids were probably kind of college prep but they didn't call it that. And then Track 2 were the ones who would tend to be, you still had to have some basic education to graduate, I mean, there were certain, you had to take the U.S. Constitution, world history courses but they might do more manual arts or more training related because there weren't a lot of technical training schools around in those days, a few, but not very many. So, so it was an interesting mix because in that then you had, you know, great athletes, you had good scholars, you had I think pretty good teachers for a public school. And in, in my, in my graduating class the majority of those kids of the, say the Track 1, they had a Track 1 group, definitely all went to college and stuff. Some of the Track 2 kids did but they would tend to be more junior colleges and things like that. So, I mean, education was a priority in that generation. It was a major priority for them. Story_ID: 543476 Speaker 1: Now, were there any special teachers or mentors along the way in grade school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] and high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I think that I had, in fact, I was talking to a friend of mine who is in New York [New York], he's an opera singer there and we went to elementary and high school together and we were talking, it's his birthday, so we're talking last night about some of the teachers that we had in elementary school and how, because he teaches opera part time with one of the high schools in New York and so he was saying how the kids have changed obviously because some of the discipline that would be meted out against us in elementary school, you just couldn't do anymore. You know, I mean, if it's slapping a wrist, standing in a corner, we even had some other kind of weird discipline things that the teachers would do that today, you know, you couldn't even begin to think about doing those kind of things. I mean, and today it was, it's just funny because it's just silly. But I would say that the teachers that I would, was probably most, most affected by my upbringing, up, up raising in, in, in, in school, when I first got there most of the teachers were probably over sixty, okay. And that's kindergarten, certainly up to third grade. They were typically matronly, older white women. That was it because these are ladies who probably were not married, in fact, yeah, none of those, it was always Ms. So these were the folks who were the teaching court in the white schools. Now, the black schools it was a mix, white and black, young and old, but in, in, in, in, in the white schools these were folks who had a good paying job and they were there forever for the most part. So up until really third grade, I had not even seen a black teacher there until, I mean, since leaving Cupples [Cupples Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri]. So, there were, there was a young teacher, her name was Mrs. Sharp [ph.] and she was cute, I mean, just she was like, reminded me of Lena Horne she was so pretty, you know, so-- Speaker 1: This was Sharp, her name was Sharp actually? Speaker 2: Yeah, her name was Mrs. Sharp too (laughter). And, and she was just phenomenal because it's just like oh, my god, I mean she was a good teacher and she was pretty, so, you know, all of us boys we were just engaged, you know, third and fourth grade that's we, we, we couldn't get enough of, of Mrs. Sharp. And then, and then it was kind of interesting because she was pretty good, halfway through the year, well, at, at semester break, they moved her to another school because it was a promotion. And then we got another lady, a Ms. Bryant [ph.] who, I still see occasionally, she was very young at the time, just out of school, and we all kind of said like, ugh, you know, she's not as pretty and (unclear). But she ended up being just a very, probably because she was learning as we were learning, that was probably one of our best teachers because she was enthusiastic about the kids, she stayed up with the kids over the years, remember this is fourth grade. So, so, and, and then after that, I, I think there were other teachers that I had, you know, we, it was interesting because we did not know, we, you know, we didn't know personalities and, you know, there were, there were teachers who were married, some who were single, some who were gay, which we didn't know, you know, because you, at that age you didn't ama- imagine. There was some, some who were, you know, like I have to think about it, I told you about Ms. Sharp. My eighth grade teacher was, and, and Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] had the same teacher, was Ms. Ms. Hutchinson [ph.], but when, when Mike had her, she was very young, again very pretty, very smart, very tough, real disciplined, a disciplinarian. But it, you know, between the time he had her and the time I had her, she got married, and it was just kind of a different person to a degree, still tough, still mean, but you could tell there was some softening around the edge. Because I think young teachers had to prove themselves. Today they seem to just kind of survive in, in some of these schools. So I, I would think Mrs. Bryant and Mrs. Hutchinson probably were, were great mentors. Story_ID: 543477 Speaker 1: High school, now where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Went to Northwest High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Northwest High School was an interesting experiment in the sense that the, as St. Louis [Missouri], was growing, St. Louis was probably one of the top ten cities in population in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. And there had not been a lot of white flight outside of St. Louis at that point. So if you look at the population base of the city itself, it's probably around 380,000 people today. At that time it was probably about 900,000 people. So you had ten high schools, you needed two more, so they built basically two more high schools. And in the northwest section of St. Louis there were no high schools, there were a number of Catholic high schools, but no public schools, so there was demand, a need for it. So, where we lived we typically would have been sent to one or two predominantly black high schools because those were the ones closest to our neighborhood. But as Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] became a sophomore he was transferred to this new school called Northwest High School. Now, for us it was almost like, and again Mike faced more because it was three years later before I got there but it was, it was, it was basically the same experience we had integrating the neighborhood we moved into [San Francisco Court, St. Louis, Missouri] was integrating this school because in the school was again working class blue, blue collar, predominantly white area. And Mike would tell me stories about how he and some of his friends who were these transferees into this new high school, Northwest High School, they would sometimes have to fight their way to the buses because there were buses always there to take them away every day. And, you know, the kids would throw rocks at it and spit on 'em and everything else. So it was, you know, people talk about the Little Rock desegregation [at Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], that stuff was happening all over the country and it was certainly happening in St. Louis. Now, you know, you didn't have a governor standing in the doorway but nor did you have police sitting there protecting these kids as they came and went. So there were a lot of fights those first couple of years when Mike was there, it was, it was a, a very serious, not completely dangerous, but pretty serious in terms of effect how you would try to be, be educated. My parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] didn't like it, but then they knew that of the public schools there were really only two kind of college prep schools, Northwest and then the older Southwest [Southwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] which was at the far southern part of the city. So they knew that for their children, and they could not afford private school so they knew for their children to get a good education that this was the right high school. And they were right about it because things did settle down over time. And part of that again was because the more the school became integrated, the more things settled down also, you know, the more the city, the more schools integrated, the better the sports teams got, more interesting our, our theater productions that were going on there. So they, and, of course, the neighborhood started to change too because it's as, as folks would find that their kids could walk to high school versus taking, taking the bus, they bought homes in that neighborhood and, of course, then there was further white flight but this time the white flight was further north and out of the city versus staying in the city and trying to find a home in the city. Again, I would tell you that when I started high school, the number of black students were probably about, hm, 30 percent, maybe. By the time I went back a year or so after I graduated from high school, because I'd do college recruiting for my college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts], I found that there were probably 20 percent white versus, you know, the 30 percent black when I started. So it changed the neighborhood, the neighborhood because, you know, African Americans could find decent housing at a good price just moved into the area and the schools were nearby and then again white flight made it very convenient to find this housing too. Story_ID: 543478 Speaker 1: High school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri], in terms of mentors, I think some of the first mentors I had, there was a lady named Mrs. Lavinton [ph.], you know, again, a lady who I'm not sure that she was ever, no, she was never married but teaching was her life, she loved working with young people. And my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] knew her, I don't remember how or why they knew her but when I got there I remember, you know, she said, "Oh, I know your parents." And she was at that time pretty elderly and she was what they call a freshman counselor so she was the one who would kind of help you figure out what classes to take. And, of course, having an older brother there, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] could kind of tell me, you know, you wanna take this class or this class, this, this teacher does it this way and this teacher, so it's always, it's always nice to have an older brother who can kind of lead the way a little bit. But Mrs. Lavinton was one, she said, "Look I want you to get involved with the freshman newspaper," and I think I ended up being the editor of it. And, "I think you should get involved with student government," and boom. These are things that were kind of alien to me because, you know, we didn't have those kind of discussions at the elementary school level. And, and she was very, very encouraging. You know, high school was kind of daunting because even though I had friends from Scullin [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri], there were still kids from four or five other schools there so, you know, you're, you're trying to figure out where you, you know, what, where, where, where do you fit in into this world. You know, I was a decent athlete but I wasn't a big kid so I wasn't the star of the football team even though I grew up playing football with, with the Mathew, Mathew-Dickey Boys' Club teams [sic. Mathews-Dickey Boys' Club; Mathews-Dickey Boys' and Girls' Club, St. Louis, Missouri], so I always played football and baseball and basketball. But, you know, when you get to the high school level, you know, it's kind of not only skills but brawn and size that, that was relevant. So I would, I would always adjust my, my athletic interests based upon what my ability was. I was probably too small to play football, so then I ran cross country. I was not tall enough to be a really good basketball player so I wrestled, and our wrestling team was one of the best in the state for several years. And because I was, even though I played baseball my whole life, I wasn't a great, great baseball player, so I played tennis because my dad did teach us how to play and we took tennis lessons. So it was always keeping busy and got involved again because of that influence of Mrs. Lavinton. Now, I never thought that getting involved with scho- student activities were important for college because we were never taught, we were never told those kind of things but, you know, I ended up being the editor of the yearbook, the head of the Model United Nations club, human relations club. So I was in ath- you know I was, you know, I was in sports, I was in extracurricular activities, I even did a I Have A Dream speech at one of our talent shows I think my junior year. So, I mean, I was always interested and active. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: I didn't know that that was gone help with college because that was very, my grades were good but having colle- having this well rounded perspective was what colleges were looking for. And, I mean, I've seen that with my boys today, one's [Steven Roberts, Jr.] at University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] and the other one's [Christian Roberts] on his way to George Washington University [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 543479 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: You started-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] in '66 [1966], right? Was it, was it, was it '66 [1966]? Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], right. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] and-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --I mean, I'll, I'll just tell you what, what that impact was. We, I remember the day it happened because as I told you I was head of the Model United, Model United Nations, but also we had a different group called human relations club. Now today they'd probably call it a bunch of other different names but essentially what it was, was a club that allowed black kids from the cities to, city schools to interact with white kids from wealthy suburban schools. And I remember having one of our club meetings with kids from Clayton High School [Clayton, Missouri], which was, you know, the most prestigious suburban high school in St. Louis [Missouri], still is today. And, of course, no black kids were there, it was just all white. So, so we were planning a conference for that spring where we were gonna bring different high school kids in to kind of exchange ideas about race relations, world affairs, and things like that. And there, there I am, only black kid with this planning group, probably about a half dozen folks, and I remember very clearly the, some of the white kids talking about that Martin Luther King had just been shot and they heard it on their radios going out to their, coming out to the meeting and it was kind of like, what? What do you mean? And, and then they were kind of talking from their perspective about, you know, how sad it was and all this. And it was kind of amazing to me because I'm, I'm listening to folks, I mean, I knew what the impact would be on them but I'm listening to, you know, these very bright kids who came from affluent families talking about, you know, how wrong it was, the social impact, and who was involved, and all that kind of stuff. So that I thought was, was interesting. But for me it just kind of made you a little more aware of what was happening in the world. Story_ID: 543480 Speaker 1: I remember shortly thereafter we had a major march here in St. Louis [Missouri] and [HistoryMaker] Alice Windom and a lot of, of our black historians here were very involved with pulling it together, some of the congressional people. And we walked from the Arch [Gateway Arch, St. Louis, Missouri] to Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri]. And I remember asking my parents if, if I could go, it was like on a Sunday afternoon, I asked if I could participate, and really it was the first time ever that I had been, you know, active in, in community civil rights, voting rights issues, and stuff. And then it really kind of blossomed. I mean, I always remember my parents would kind of volunteer with different political campaigns. I remember because my parents were great cooks, particularly my mother [Delores Talley Roberts], my mom would, would go to, you know, the committeemen's fundraiser and would take food over there for it. And I, it didn't mean anything to me, I mean, and some of these names that I heard about at the time really were not relevant to me but later these were political folks who Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I got to know because we were elected officials. And so, so, so, so that to me, and, and I don't know if, if it was because, I mean, we were, like I said my parents were always talking about political activism stuff, but again my dad [Victor Roberts] had a job at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], so he was restricted by the Hatch Act [Hatch Act of 1939]. And, and his wife could not be too much out there doing something but she was always doing things in the community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the Hatch Act just for the benefit of pe- I mean it's a federal act that prohibits-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --federal employees from being involved in-- Speaker 1: In, in, in, in, in political activities, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And what, but did they consider civil rights political activity? Speaker 1: Well, to a degree because if, if, if, if you were out advocat- what, I mean, the, you had a job, and, and, and you had to be careful what you could do because if, if it was not even Hatch related but you were in the front of a march on Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] funeral, then one could say that you were involved in political activities, you get on the, basically a hit list, and they say well, this is somebody who maybe we need to look at a little closer. So most federal employees just would not get involved with that. It was, you know, technically could they have done something? No, but the same effect of it, if it affects your ability to come to work every day then yeah, it would be. So, so I, I think my parents among themselves probably just said, well, you know, to my mother, "You can go do this but I, I better not do this," so. So, so like I said, in terms of, you know, political fundraisers and things like that I saw, you know, my mother would drag us along, because she, she didn't wanna leave us at home. But I remember that march very clearly because it was the first major political event, and it was a civil rights march for, in fact, it was actually the first major march in the City of St. Louis related to civil rights. There had been some boycotting of banks that had taken place because they would not either hire or take black deposits and yet they had city deposits so the, the Jeffer- Jefferson banks [Jefferson Bank and Trust Company]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --activity where many leaders in St. Louis were jailed for several days because of the protests in front of the bank. And I'm sure you'll meet other people who will give you more detail on it because I'm pretty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson was involved in that and [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman-- Speaker 1: Margaret Bush Wilson, got Congressman Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.], Frankie Freeman. Speaker 2: --Clay, William Clay, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so there were a number of, of folks. And that was really kind of the beginning of civil rights activity here. Story_ID: 543481 Speaker 1: But the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] march was really the first evidence of people's anger and concern about civil rights (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there weren't any riots you were saying in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 1: No, no, and that, that, many of us who were either in high school at the time or even later in politics when, when we reflect up on why there was not a riot, and if in fact there had been a riot here how that may have been more beneficial in terms of expediting racial equality, improvement of racial relations in this community. Some of us feel that because there was not this major event that caused the whole community to say, "We've gotta make a change," that, that, that this subtle degree of racism continued and you saw it in the desegregation cases here. For instance, when, when parents sued successfully saying that, that school districts outside of St. Louis, suburbs, were, there was de facto discrimination because of, of, of, of the, the lack of quality of education that children in the City of St. Louis received, the court ruled in their favor. And so what was interesting was the settlement was to a lot of kids to be bused out to the suburban area and even though it was probably about 20, 25 percent of the kids was bused out, and those kids all did pretty much well, kids who were left behind, the structures, the buildings here were in, there were never adequate resources and buildings. So, so instead of a settlement in that way of busing, what should have happened was like in Charlotte, Mecklenburg [Mecklenburg County], Charlotte what's--North Carolina they should have disassembled the city system and then made all of the systems in a sense merge together so that the resources were spread across the board and that didn't, didn't happen here. So now we're faced today, you know, the early 2000s, having a school district [St. Louis Public Schools] that is, that, that had been poorly managed, without adequate resources, and, and children who are not being educated. So people believe that had there been the riot like you saw in Chicago [Illinois] or Harlem [New York, New York] or, or Washington, D.C. and other places that the community, white and black would have said we have to make major changes. Well, well, now what's happened, it's just been kind of a subtle change. I mean, I think the younger generation of people don't have the same racial attitudes, but the housing lifestyles of their parents, like of our generation, they're still very segregated, they still move to certain areas. Now, black folks today can move wherever they want to, but, but then it's where black folks move versus where white folks move back into the cities, so, so the areas we still think are pretty segregated. Which then means that the schools are segregated because if you don't have the people who can afford to live in those communities, or welcomed in those community, then the kids don't go to those schools. So that's why had, had, if all the school systems had been merged that would have eliminated that issue. But so, no, we didn't have a riot. We, we did have the big march, and there were other marches ever since then. Story_ID: 543482 Speaker 1: I remember Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] when I first met him, I guess I was about a senior in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] at that point, it was, I was very active with getting out people to vote. Because remember in '68 [1968], you had King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], then you had Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], so, so for young black folks like myself and Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], the King assassination was significant; that fired us up. And then when Bobby Kennedy was assassinated shortly thereafter, young, you know, educated whites, kids said, wait a minute, this isn't right either. Then you had the war [Vietnam War] going on, which then led, you know, as you well know to Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], President Johnson saying he wasn't seeking reelection. You had the Chicago riots with the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]. You had kids being killed in Vietnam. So there was this new level of activism across the board in this generation. So we here had a number of big rallies, you know, get out, get, you know, getting people to vote. Jesse Jackson came to town with his--because he was now heading up PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] so he had his own agenda and, and a plan to really get people active politically. Speaker 2: Now this is in 1970 when you're a senior, I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah, senior, right. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. I just wanted to-- Speaker 1: Right. And, and, and I was very active with, you know, getting folks out to, you know, register to vote (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's when Operation Breadbasket was big and all of that (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Breadbasket, PU- I mean they were all coming, Jesse was here. A lot, because, you know, St. Louis [Missouri] and Chicago [Illinois] were close but, but here this was a very fertile market for him because there was no, there was a void of political leader, not political but say a spiritual movement, activism. There were, there were other local groups, I mean, there were some, CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. There was a group even that Mike was involved with called HOME [HOME, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri], it was called Helping Men Emerge [Helping Other Men Emerge; Helping Other Minds Emerge (ph.)], basically, which was a kind of a SNCC kind of group that were basically college age males and females who were saying, we've gotta make change here and stuff. So, so it became, it became a, a bed of, of, of political activism. And a lot of those people, particularly in Mike's group, ended up being elected officials because, you know, it was that, that, that political activism that influenced their lives, so they said, we gotta make a change and the way we'll make change is by getting elected to positions. So many of those folks who were involved, and then there were other people who were involved from the St. Louis area who went on to places like Atlanta [Georgia] and Savannah [Georgia] and Augusta [Georgia] and some other cities. And they took that same fire for political activism along with them. And, and had be- had--became elected officials in those areas too. So, so a lot of things happened, it was a very interesting time to be in high school. Story_ID: 543483 Speaker 1: And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now was Percy Green [Percy Green II] active then? Speaker 1: Percy was very, very--in fact, Percy was, you know, he was taking, he was knocking down the barriers of, of, of some of this, these exclusive white clubs that were here in this community, the Veiled Prophet [Veiled Prophet Organization, St. Louis, Missouri] for instance was, was one. The Veiled Prophets was, was an organization, it was a secret society of men who started in, you know, in the 1800s, it was an agrarian group of businesspeople who said that, you know, we need to promote St. Louis [Missouri] better. So-- Speaker 2: What's the name again? I'm sorry, it's-- Speaker 1: The Veiled, Veiled, like V-- Speaker 2: Veiled? V-E-L (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Veiled (gesture). Like, you know, a veiled prophet. Speaker 2: Veiled, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Veiled Prophets. Veil like veil, you know, like a veil you wore. Speaker 2: The Veiled-- Speaker 1: Veiled-- Speaker 2: --Prophets. Speaker 1: Prophet. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: V-E-I-L. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've never heard of that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So this is an exclusive white club? Speaker 1: Exclusive white club. I mean, in, in fact when they would even have the balls, they would have the guy draped so (gesture), so it was a mystical character who came out of one, and I knew the history once upon a time, but it came out of a, you know, Moroccan kind of history of, of, of this oracle who was veiled who you would bring your daughter to, this was their out, this, this is the way that that that they would have this, this was basically was a, a, a big party that they would throw, successful business people to introduce their daughters to society. It was just, just a big ball. But-- Speaker 2: In this mystical guise of a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, this mystical guy. Speaker 2: --kind of a-- Speaker 1: And you walked down, you'd be escorted down and it was-- Speaker 2: Is it-- Speaker 1: --you know, I mean, and, and that was mostly nonreligious, it was more business. And then you'd have for, for instance with the Catholics, you would have the Fleur de Lis Ball, which, which is how the Catholic girls were introduced to society. Now, in that case it was different because whomever the bishop, archbishop was, was sitting there you'd walk down this long walkway and you'd be greeted and, you know, welcomed to society or whatever. So, so the Veiled Prophet, more than the Fleur de Lis because the, the Fleur de Lis was out there basically, and, you know, you had to have money to be in it, and a Catholic and all that, but in this one, it was, it was the wealthy people of St. Louis who were involved, but because it was secretive and, you know, you can't have women and you can't have blacks in it that Percy and, and his group, ACTION [Area Committee to Improve Opportunities Now, Inc.], used to give them the blues and stuff. He broke into a couple of their balls and were arrested. But because of it, it forced them to reexamine who they were and they ended up inviting members of the black community to be members of it. There, there were people who, there were a lot of folks who we knew, you know, successful doctors, some lawyers, and others who were some of the first members of the Veiled, Veiled Prophet. And, you know, their daughters are because I remember one of my cousins was one of the first black girls to walk, you know, for this presentation. But more importantly the changes that happened was that, you know, you had an organization that had a lot of people with a lot of money. And the question is, is were they gonna just continue to raise money and throw nice parties for themselves? Or were you going to influence them to do something different? Well, that happened. Story_ID: 543484 Speaker 1: When we were on the Board of Aldermen, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I, a couple of other of the black aldermen in the city, alder- black--board of--aldermen in the city council, this organization wanted to start doing events called the v- V.P., Veiled Prophet weekend. It was usually over the, the 4th of July. That was a big deal because you could bring in about three, four hundred thousand people from around the region to St. Louis [Missouri] to the Arch grounds [Gateway Arch]. Well, you know, we, we kind of started giving them the blues a little bit about them not being able to use public property, fire, police, and all that. And so their, you know, the, the Veiled Prophet [Veiled Prophet Organization, St. Louis, Missouri] leadership said, you know, I guess, we need to approach this a little bit differently and stuff. So, so they, they began to allow, well, first off we got more black acts in, they, they had more black vendors, you know, because when you did this big party basically what would happen is on the, on the riverfront you have all these vendors who could really make money selling lemonade, orangeade, hot dogs, and things like that. And so we also got them to, to say look you've gotta make a contribution back to this community somehow. So they would start giving support to the Mathew-Dickey's Boys' Club [sic. Mathews-Dickey Boys' Club; Mathews-Dickey Boys' and Girls' Club, St. Louis, Missouri], Herbert Hoover Boys Club [Herbert Hoover Boys and Girls Club, St. Louis, Missouri], some other of the social organizations. More importantly we, we got them to allow them to have these black not-for-profits have booths on the grounds as well as for-profit black entrepreneurs to have, you know, participation in the economic benefit from it. But more importantly we got them to take a portion of their funds that they raised every year and contribute to, you know, some worthwhile event in the community, in our case it was building, you know, some parks in predominantly black neighborhoods, it was rebuilding the riverfront stage, it was those kind of things. So we said, you know, you can use our public grounds and our public services but you gotta give back somehow and they did. And then after about eight or nine years of, it was changed from the V.P. Fair [Veiled Prophet Fair] to the St. Louis fair [Fair St. Louis], and it still goes on on the weekends. So they've changed the name a little bit to Live on the Levee, but, but it's more than just 4th of July now, you know, they have certain events on the, for the 4th of July but it, it, it really spreads for about eight months, I mean, eight weeks during the summer. And what the, what the purpose of it was to promote people coming to downtown St. Louis in the summertime. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, so, so, you know, being there, we influenced or our generation of folks kind of influenced how this very prestigious organization changed its way of doing business. Story_ID: 543485 Speaker 1: Just on the Veiled Prophet [Veiled Prophet Organization, St. Louis, Missouri] again one more time the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the, so this--a character, a businessman, prominent businessman plays this character the Veiled Prophet-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and he's veiled so you don't know which one it is in any given year unless you, like Percy Green [Percy Green II], invade the proceedings and take the veil off of him. Speaker 2: Yes, go grab it off of him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, and, well he just, he blesses the debutantes or something or--is that basically it? Speaker 2: Basically, that's, that's, that's what happens, they would, they're escorted usually by, sometimes by their father but it's usually someone that the father picks. And, and they walk down this, you know, it's very, you know, you got these people in--Bengal Lancers so it's a very, very, it's, it's almost like out of tale of knights of Arabian nights or something like that. I mean, it's very elaborate. It's all black tie, it's all tails. So it's, it's a big coming out party basically for these maidens and matrons of honor for the most part. So it's really a big coming out, it's a social gathering coming out party for, for the daughters, usually sophomores in college of these businesspeople in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 543486 Speaker 1: In high school one of the, I guess, one--a thing that affected your brother, affected you later on down the line. Your, your brother would go to an, and I don't, and you two, I guess, would go to camp, was it Mini- ? Speaker 2: Yeah, Camp Miniwanca [Shelby, Michigan], right. Speaker 1: Miniwanca. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, yeah, tell us about that. Speaker 2: --I'll tell you, tell you a little bit about it. The American Youth Foundation is a group of, it's a, it's, it is a, an organization that was founded in the '20s, the 1920s to create a camping experience for kids from a diversity of backgrounds. Now, when I say diversity of backgrounds at that time I'm talking about the difference between white kids in the rural area and whites kids in the urban areas for the most part. So it is, there weren't people of color involved. The four founders, one of 'em was a guy named William Danforth [William H. Danforth]. Well, William Danforth was the founder of Ralston Purina [Ralston Purina Company, St. Louis, Missouri]. So he kind of had a vested interest in, in, in creating this outreach camping programs because he was a big strapping St. Louisan but who liked to go out camping with his children. So he and three other folks decided that, well why don't we raise the money, he, they all clearly had the wherewithal to do it and they did it and they created the American Youth Foundation. And if you can imagine in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] going up to, you know, upper Michigan and parts of New Hampshire it was probably pretty easy to, to acquire, you know, hundreds of acres of lands to create a camp basically. And part of their process was what they called the fourfold approach to, to teaching and enriching the lives of young people, and it dealt with, you know mental which means that, you know, you gave 'em some education while they're on camp. And spiritual, at the time it was, it was very Christian oriented, but over time it obviously changed to what they call spiritual growth versus a particular religion. Physical, there was always physical activities that were going on there. So that the kids would be fed well, they would get some spiritual training, some education, and they would have fun i.e. with, with athletics. That was probably a very significant influence in our lives because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm sorry but what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was the fourth? You said the mental-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was-- Speaker 1: --spiritual, physical, and what was the fourth one? Speaker 2: Mental, physical, spiritual, and well and religious is, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Spiritual and religious? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so, so, so they were, they were kind of, spiritual is more in the area of philosophy, you know. Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] will you tell you he first heard of Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche] and, and some of the great philosophers listening to some of these top rated theologians. I mean, we had people from Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Columbia divinity school [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]. We had, you know, the head of Ralston Purina speak to us or we had some, the secretary of agriculture because they would, they would come and, and espouse they view of the world basically. So, so you would have these different folks. I mean, the, the philosophers would come in and talk about the spiritual side of y- and then, you, you might have a top religious leader which will come and talk about it, I guess, it usually was Christianity to a, to a degree. Mental and then physical. Story_ID: 543487 Speaker 1: Okay. And it would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --be held, the camp would be held in Upper Peninsula Michigan or in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, the, the Camp Miniwanca was located in an area called Stony Lake, Michigan [Shelby, Michigan]. Which is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about sixty miles [sic.] north of Muskegon, Michigan. So all on the Lake Michigan shoreline basically, so it's a beautiful, beautiful lake right on the shoreline of Lake Michigan, with huge sandy dunes, it's some of the, I think, most beautiful landscape in, in, in the United States. The other camp is located just almost to the opposite, it's, it's in New Hampshire, but it's in the mountains of New Hampshire, and that's called Camp Merrowvista [Tuftonboro, New Hampshire]. Now, these camps were still basically founded as typical youth camps, okay. So you'd have the young people going to them, when I say young people I'm talking about say from fourth grade to eighth grade. You know, that's where the camps really evolved about. But by the time Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I came along, they had created what they called leadership camps that were two weeks where you would go up and you would meet these great thinkers of our time. And you had to be at least a freshman in high school to participate in it--or, no, sophomore in high school. And the camp would go for four years basically. And what would happen is every August you would go up to and in our case we'd go up to Camp Miniwanca because that was the closest leadership camp program to us. Now for Mike it was very, it was, it was influential in Mike which meant it was influential in me but Mike went because remember, you know, this is in the '60s [1960s] and again we had not traveled much and for Mike to go to this camp, you know, with these rural 4-H, 4-F [sic.] kids basically and some suburban type kids, and Mike had never gone camping, I mean, the only camping we went is probably when we went and stayed in some cabins on a camping ground with my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] at some point. So, you know, to, to, to be exposed to these major intellectuals from around the country was pretty substantial. And even today I mean there's some people who I met up there who I still stay in touch with. Very unique place because what happened was, forget about your--I'm sure there were people who were uncomfortable having Native Americans or African Americans or anybody else different than their group there, but I will tell you that once you got to the grounds it was, folks whatever their backgrounds were it almost evaporated because you were all kind of there learning in this spiritual environment, beautiful settings that you would, you would change your perspective. Story_ID: 543488 Speaker 1: And for us, you know, we had always heard of the Danforth family because they were prominent, Danforth Foundation [St. Louis, Missouri], and Bill Danforth [William H. Danforth] was about to become chancellor of Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], he was there for twenty years. Jack Danforth [John Danforth] became a U.S. senator, you know, vice presidential candidate. He at the time was the attorney general [of Missouri], so, I mean, you know, these are names that you, you, we'd hear about all of the time, but now we're there speaking with them because they were obviously very interested in their grandfather's camp. They would just be walking around the grounds. So for us it kind of broke down barriers in terms of our ability to be approachable to whomever, I mean if it's a president or a king or a queen or a state senator. Speaker 2: Now, were there many other black kids there? Speaker 1: Not many. And, and part of Mike's [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] challenge and I picked it up after he finished his four years were to and, and, and the foundation understood the need to have more people of color there because they knew that the world was changing and they had to have a more diverse campground for their kids to have a truly unique experience. So Mike would go out, in fact, the reason why I was there is because he recruited me and he found a few other kids in St. Louis [Missouri] that I knew to come. And remember, you know, for a black parent to send their kid off for two weeks to this camp [Camp Miniwanca] in Michigan [Shelby, Michigan] was difficult for a couple of reasons, one is it was something outside of their sphere, sphere of understanding. But two, a lot of kids worked during the summer so how you gonna send, you know, how, how you gone go and not work during the summer for two weeks. So it was, it was kind of a challenge for us to encourage parents to allow their kids to go up there. But every child that I know went up there, and there're maybe a few exceptions, particularly the leadership program, absolutely love it. And, in fact, I have sent my children there. In fact, Mike and I have sponsored scholarships to send other African American kids there just like we were on scholarship. And so my older son [Steven Roberts, Jr.] who's in college, my high school son [Christian Roberts] now, he'll finish his fourth year, and, you know, my hope is that my daughter [Darci Roberts] will go up there too. I've got two nephews who's been there, all of Mike's kids have been there because it, it just gives you a different set of leadership skills that other, you don't get any other places, in a beautiful setting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you were there in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 1: High school, yeah, yeah, and then-- Speaker 2: Did you go for four years? Speaker 1: Yeah, I went for four years. And, in fact, I even went back one summer when I was in college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] to be a counselor in the, what they call the younger boys program that's the typical fourth through eighth grades so I spent about six weeks up there, you know, being a camp counselor which was, you know, kind of hard but it was fun because of the, you know, I was getting paid and getting fed and it was a beautiful atmosphere. And then I went back and, and, I took my boys when they were very little to a family, they have family camp too where you can take young, young kids up and then you just kind of do fun things. And then I became on the board of the American Youth Foundation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, you know, we're, we're keeping the legacy in terms of encouraging, you know, a diversity of the camp experience for, because of having diversity there. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 543489 Speaker 1: When you were a senior [at Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] did, was it already set on where you were gonna go to school when you-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, oh, no-- Speaker 1: --were on the verge of graduating? Speaker 2: --no, I, you know, one, one thing that, you know, I love about my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] is that they never told us what or where we would go to college. They just said you're gonna go to college. You know, in, in, in my generation, you know, parents were so locked into they want their kids to go to this school, that school, or this school, whereas in, in my parents' generation they were just happy that our kid, their kids were probably intelligent enough to go to college. So, it was always, you're gonna go to college. They didn't really care where but you just went, they just wanted you to go to college. So when Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] took off his, after his senior year to college, I'm like, I mean I kind of felt left behind because, you know, Mike and I are very close. And he was telling me about all the fun things he was doing at college and so as a sophomore then I'm saying god, I wanna go to college, right? And I can remember very clearly that, you know, I'd listen to him when he'd come home and talk about college experience. And so by the time I was a junior in high school, I was looking at colleges and trying to figure out, you know, where would I like to be? So and I was always interested in geography and history and particularly American history is one of my favorite subjects. And I would always read about New England and, you know, the founding of the U.S., and the congression- the constitutional activities, finding, you know, the Bill of Rights, and the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] congress- congressional meetings. So it was, it was always an interest. I was always interested in that part of the country. And I would always hear these great colleges in that part of the, in that part of the world, part of the country. For me, remember I'm a Midwest kid who had never been on the airplane until I was a senior in, in high school so, and who had never been to the East Coast. We took a trip to California once but that was it, it was Chicago [Illinois] or, or somewhere close in. So I re- I can remember it very clearly, I was reading Jet magazine, you know, African American publication and we'd get it at home, like the Ebony. I was just reading through it, it was during the summer after my junior year and, and there was a, an article about Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts that said that they were doing, they were creating scholarships for black students to come to their school. And the reason why they were doing it was because again remember this is now '69 [1969] so there's riots in the street. And, and, and I'm sure that on their campus there were people complaining about the lack of diversity on their campus. Story_ID: 543490 Speaker 1: And, in fact, I ended up getting to know a judge who was, who, who, who was a judge in Memphis [Tennessee] who was one of the rabble rousers up there. And, and he told me, one of the reasons why many of you all got scholarships was because I gave 'em hell. Speaker 2: Now, who is that? Was that, not D'Army but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, D'Army. That's exactly right. Speaker 2: I kind of thought it might have been him. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, D'Army was up there. He said the r- he got there because somebody told him of the school and he went there and got a full scholarship and he, he was raising hell about not having more kids. And because of him they made an effort to do it. Now, I don't know because of D'Army's activities it ended up in Jet magazine but I read it, okay. I didn't know anything about Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts], all I knew it was in Massachusetts and I knew Massachusetts wasn't a big state so I figured well, Worcester [Massachusetts] can't be too far away. And, and just to go back to D'Army for a while. Of course, I meet D'Army later, I'm, when I'm up there I've heard of him, and but I didn't really know him because he had, he was, he was gone by then. But his son ended up going there and his son also went to Wash U law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] where I went to law school, so it's just funny how the world is because, and he worked, he did some intern stuff with us here [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri]. So, you know, this guy who caused a little bit of a ruckus there, you know, influenced a kid from the Midwest to go to New England where I got a wonderful education in Boston [Massachusetts], in the Boston area. And, and, of course, his kid did the same thing I did and in fact I think I checked with the dean of our law school, Wash U, and he and I are the only two kids ever, two of the students ever to have gone to Clark and to Wash U law school which is interesting. And then because we're now doing a hotel in Memphis, you know, I've kind of reconnected again with D'Army and his son, so it's just, it's a small world (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's interesting 'cause he's, they've, he's been on the board to preserve the Lorraine Motel as a museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Oh, really, I did not know that. Speaker 2: He's the chairman of that board-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --that's preserving the Lorraine as a civil rights museum. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: So it's funny 'cause, I mean-- Speaker 1: It's a small world. Speaker 2: --your brother was talking about preserving the hotel, you know, the Mayfair [Mayfair Hotel; Magnolia St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and other hotels, I was-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --I was thinking about D'Army, but I had, I didn't know there was any kind of connection (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact, when his son had his graduation from law school there was a big party and they invited me over to it and stuff so D'Army and I, we, we've been in touch. The hotel that Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] was in- you know, is he's talking about that we're, we're gonna do in Birmingham [Alabama] is the old Gaston hotel [A.G. Gaston Motel], which is like the Lorraine, I mean it ends up being, you know, an important location for civil rights activities because Gaston is where King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and many of the religious leaders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, he was saying you were gonna have a Dr. King room-- Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: --a room that he, he slept in. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Name the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --rooms after various leaders that slept there. Speaker 1: Yeah, different leaders who were there, exactly. Story_ID: 543491 Speaker 1: I happened to be reading in Jet magazine of all things, you know, this is not a leading periodical for finding a college to go to, you know, this isn't like the top best five hundred colleges in America. And it's interesting because I, I did a little research and find they have early decision application, okay. And so I apply just because I was gonna apply to colleges anyway, but this is the only one that I was interested that had it. Well, to, to my kind of chagrin to a degree, but ultimate joy was that they accepted me. I applied November 1st, I knew by December 1st, I was in a real college, you know, I'm in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. And then by the 15th of, they had given me a large scholarship so it was kind of like all my friends were worried about April and May getting in college, I'm in, with money by Christmas basically. Speaker 2: Now, did you get any assistance from the Danforth Foundation [St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, not at that point. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: That came later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had applied for a Danforth Foundation grant for that but, but it was, it was interesting because the first time that I even saw Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] was I, they had, you know, what they call, we'd call it today a diversity weekend, they call it minority weekend where they brought in all the students who had been accepted, minorities, trying to encourage them to make this as their choice. So this was the first time I went to Boston [Massachusetts], first time I'd ever been in Massachusetts. So I got there, I looked around, I say, oh, yeah, this wouldn't be a bad place to be. I just didn't know it was so isolated from, from Boston, even though Worcester [Massachusetts] is only forty miles away, you know, forty miles for us here in St. Louis [Missouri] is, you know, it's a f- you know, a drive, easy drive; from there it's a whole different community. Story_ID: 543492 Speaker 1: But it was a good experience and, y- and as, you know, and we can talk about college in a little while, I mean, they were very aware of the need for diversity even though they didn't call it that. But I remember being a sophomore, there were three of us, one graduate student, one senior, and a sophomore who were sent to Africa to study African history and culture to come back to teach as TAs [teacher's assistant] in our history department at Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] so, you know, I would never had experienced to, to go to Ghana and Ivory Coast without having that opportunity to have been able to study in Africa, and Clark provided that. Probably if I had been at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Wesleyan [Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut] or some other place they probably wouldn't have given--because I couldn't afford to go on my own, so-- Speaker 2: Now, you were a sophomore when you? Speaker 1: I was a sophomore going into junior year. Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that's amazing. Speaker 1: It was amazing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was amazing, you know seeing. And it was, you know, again a lot of things happened, if you're in the right place at the right time in history. Kwame Nkrumah, was, had been obviously president, first independent president of Ghana and he had died. And when we were there they had his funeral and it was the most amazing sight I've ever seen. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause, 'cause he was living in exile in, in Guinea, right? Speaker 1: In Guinea, right. Speaker 2: And when he, when he passed away and-- Speaker 1: When he passed away. Speaker 2: --so did they bring his body back to Ghana? Speaker 1: They brought his body back, and it was when we were there studying. And, I mean, I remember being there in Accra [Ghana] when it happened. And, and it was, it was a state funeral obviously and he, the lines were probably three and four miles long for a week. And we, because we were, you know, involved with the university and some other things, they allowed us to, I remember we felt kind of funny about it but we were in line for a couple of hours and then they said, "Well, well, you're students, you're guests from America," and they moved us up so we didn't have to be there all night. And it was pretty amazing because I have never seen a state funeral like that. And remember, you know, this wasn't a lot of fanfare, this were people who loved this man, you know, from all over Ghana who came to give their respects. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: Now, it was quite a moving experience. You know, the other moving experiences obviously would, would be, you know, at, at Cape Coast [Ghana] going through the slave castles as they called them because, you know, when you walk through this door, you know, to board a boat this is the last that you were gonna ever be on your, on your homeland basically because you never, you know, you as a slave never saw it again. Speaker 2: So that was, so, so you were there like over a summer? Speaker 1: Over a summer. And I think we were there probably eight or nine weeks as I recall. Speaker 2: And did one of the professors go, go with you or-- Speaker 1: No, it was kind of interesting because a guy named Bill Ward [HistoryMaker William E. Ward] who ended up being the mayor of Chesapeake, Virginia, Bill was a graduate student in history at the time and Bill was, I guess, a part of--. You know, it was a, it was a planned tripped and we, so, so we were kind of shepherd around to a degree. In other words we were in Kumasi [Ghana] for X number of days and then we were in Cape Coast for a number of days, Elmina [Ghana], and, and, and Accra. So, I mean, they, we would basically go from college to college. So it was a college at Cape Coast, university at Kumasi or, or University of Ghana at Legon, which is Accra. Speaker 2: Now, who was your teacher at, at Clark that--who was your-- Speaker 1: Well, well, we had several. But I think the main guy who, it was a guy is Dr. Richard Ford, he was the main, he was a historian by background but he was very, he had been to Africa many times, white guy, but had been to Africa many times, many times. He had brought professors from over there to help him teach. So it was kind of he who said, you know, we need to send some of our students over there because we, we need to in a, in a sense establish our own corps of, of experts to teach from a firsthand point of view the experience of, of Africa and living in Africa. And, you know, we obviously studied history and the slave trade issues but we also talked about contemporary issues in, in Africa too. Story_ID: 543493 Speaker 1: What was your major at Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I had a double major in economics and sociology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If, if they would have let me do a third it probably would have been history but, you know, economics took up a lot of time. Speaker 1: Now was there a black studies program there or--? Speaker 2: No, no, we, we were just kind of beginning it. There was courses that we, that, that would be considered as black studies, but we didn't really call 'em black studies, we called it more African history and cultural courses and stuff, yeah. Now there are but, but at that time, and there were courses so, so history you would have, you know, African history, African cultural courses, then sociology you would have courses related to, you know, what's happening in, in, in, in communities around the United States. So it could be sociology and racism in the '70s [1970s], or it could be if, if, you were dealing with, you know, geography, for instance, because Clark had a huge geography department, but it was, geography wasn't just maps, it, it talked about, you know, economic conditions and how it affected a particular region and things like that. Phil- philosophy we would talk about, you know, the, the religious component to the Civil Rights Movement, so you had it but it was scattered in different departments because that, I know what it was, they didn't have really a faculty to say we're gonna be devoted to black studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Was there any particular professors or, or people on campus that made a big impression on you when you went to Clark? Speaker 2: No, I mean, I think that they were a number of, of professors who I liked. We didn't have a lot of African American professors, most of the African American professors or people who became professors were, were graduate students who were TAs [teacher's assistant]. And a lot of these folks were people who were in their early thirties who had gotten a college degree, were probably teaching somewhere, maybe even at a college where they would be, you know, an associate or they may have had a master's [degree]. So there was a federal program at that time that provided scholarships for people who were interested in going into teaching higher education so this guy Bill Ward [HistoryMaker William E. Ward] and there were a few other, Bill came out of Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. There was a guy, another guy who came out of Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], there was probably about a dozen of these very bright guys who didn't have the wherewithal or started families and didn't, never got their Ph.D.'s. Well, at Clark they got their Ph.D.'s. So these were folks who then went out and taught all over the country. So a lot of these guys, and it was mostly guys, I got to know well because I remember, you know, this is pretty cool, I'm a freshman, or a sophomore, a junior, and, you know, they say, "Hey, we're gonna have a discussion about Malcolm X today over at the house." So we'd go over to one of their apartments and sit there. And I'd be amazed because I'd be sitting there listening to these guys who, not only had the book knowledge but they also had the experience because they were not typical graduate students who were 24, 25, or 26 years old, they were 31, 32, 34, some of 'em had families that they had to leave to come here to get their Ph.D.'s, so there weren't, those I would say were the most influential. There were some people who, who I think were very good professors there. But in terms of lasting impressions, I would say that it was these, these younger guys who were, you know, gonna be, become doctors of their particular fields. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were there to, from '70 [1970] to '74 [1974]? Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] to '74 [1974]. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was, you know, the time of you know Vietnam War was coming to an end basically, Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was coming to an end. Speaker 1: Right. Busing crisis in Boston [Massachusetts] too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah B- yeah, well, you know, we were told because I'd go into Boston a lot, I pledged for my fraternity Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] because there was no chapter in Worcester [Massachusetts] obviously, so I'd have to go in there every weekend. And I was told by my friends who were either at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Boston, Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], they would say, "Well, you know, don't go over here to South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]." And I said, "Well why? You know, I'll go wherever, you know, you're (unclear) you can go wherever you wanna go." They said, "No, you don't wanna go over there because yeah, you know, they'll, they'll get you if you go over there," basically. And so, you know, when you're in college you, you really go from campus to campus, so I really didn't see much of that but I was in at Clark with kids from Boston and they would tell me about, you know, their experiences of trying to figure out how they were gonna get to school safely, you know, so it was tough. Story_ID: 543494 Speaker 1: So when you, when you were on the verge of graduating from Clark University [Worcester, Massachusetts] did, did you, did you, had you already decided to go to law school? Speaker 2: It was kind of interesting because one of the influences that, you know, hopefully in a positive way your siblings have upon you is that Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and some of his friends because of the activism of the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], one of their thoughts were to go to divinity school because all of the leaders in the, in the bus- in the Civil Rights Movement were primarily people who were ministers or reverends or bishops or whomever. And, and his thought was that you know, maybe I might go to like ETS, Episcopal theological seminary at, at Harvard [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and do that kind of thing. And a couple of his other friends were looking at, at the same, the same direction because they said if these are clearly our moral leaders today that's where we wanna be. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was, now this is interesting because I think now, you all have a, like a small business empire going here [with The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And most people would think, well, they probably always wanted to be businessmen, they were entrepreneurs at heart, you know, but he's, he's really coming out of a moral leadership position in those days, he was thinking more about that, how he could be a better leader, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, because he, and I don't think he ever saw himself as, as, you know, working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] or being a teacher or any of the other quote good jobs that one could get and you could raise a family and do very well, live very comfortably. I think, his view was, you know, how can I make a difference in this world? And, and I think that's part of what my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] taught us but it's certainly what, what I picked up from that experience growing up with Mike is that he, he really saw, you know, if, if, I can't be some radical gun toting, you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] type activist then what else can I do. And then what you're looking at because politics clearly was one way and, and he was dabbling in that. But I think he thought that to continue in school that the, the natural activism would have been to, to go into the seminary and then come back out and maybe run for office. Story_ID: 543495 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you I, I guess, I didn't ask you this either but were, did, did you all have a very religious upbringing, was it real religious or did, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think, I mean, I think it was, it was mod- moderately religious. My mother [Delores Talley Roberts] was raised Baptist and all of our relatives for the most part were Baptist. But her view was that she--on Sundays as, as a youngster she was kind of forced to be in church all day and, and she felt that when she would have children that she would look in a different direction. Now, in the case of my father [Victor Roberts], he was Methodist because, you know, he, he came out of the J- the Jackson [Tennessee], Lane College, Methodist side of the family. Speaker 1: C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] church, yeah. Speaker 2: C.M.E. because that's where his mother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] went to school, college and, of course, so he was really raised as more Methodist than anything else. And my mom was Baptist so they kind of, I think agreed to a middle of the road church which at that time, you know, was the Anglican church. It wasn't Catholic, but it wasn't Baptist, you know. And, and, and I don't know if there was a particular person who influenced them to look at going to the Episcopal church. But it, but we did have a very strong, a very bright educator slash activist minister at the time, a guy his name was Father Nicholson [Joseph W. Nicholson]. And I think they liked him so that was part of the reason why they, they, they raised their children, we were all baptized at All Saints Episcopal Church [St. Louis, Missouri] in the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the Anglican faith. Speaker 1: Now, now were you a acolyte and all that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and I were both, well, all of us were acolytes. We're all in the choir. You know, remember this is all part of Mom's activism she would make sure that we fully were engaged in different parts of the church. And, and in this case we were acolytes for a long time, as were my boys [Steven Roberts, Jr. and Christian Roberts]. The choir because, you know, they wanted us to do stuff, you know, Saturday morning you go to choir practice or Tuesday evening or whatever, but they didn't want us just kind of being around. Those were, was also a Cub Scout group that met there too that we would be active in. So later in life as I came back after being away in college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] and, and kind of started my professional career, I went back to the church and, and was active on the vestry. In fact, the last two pastors, the last two ministers that we have selected I was a chair of the search committee for both of them. So I'm still active. And then those kind of come in spurts because you, you know, you're on the vestry for four or five years and then you rotate off a few years. So I expect at some point I'll, I'll be back involved with our church deacon or vestry board. Story_ID: 543496 Speaker 1: There's one more thing before we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we get off to law school. You and your brother, well, a lot of brothers don't have what seems to be like an ideal relationship that you all have. You, you all seem to have a very close working relationship-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and a personal relationship, friendship. What, what accounts for this? I mean, how, how do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I think the most important, and when you have a friend, you know, a friend is usually someone who you have some like interest in, I think to a degree, you kind of see the world the same way. Or it's the opposite, you know, one is wild and the other one's conservative and there's the, the meeting ground. In our case I think that that because, you know, we were raised together, not too far apart in years, but listening to our parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] kind of at the same time, we were able to kind of figure out what direction we were gonna go in our lives and that the direction was similar quite frankly. Because, you know, my younger brother and my younger sister [Lori Roberts], their views were a little bit different than ours. And I think because there was a lot of stuff we just did together that that kind of formed how we would see the world basically. So, and, you know, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], was the guy I always admired because he was always, well, one thing he would, even though I was much younger, he would always include me in some of the, the, you know, the older boy stuff and which I thought was so cool. The other thing is he always talked about business and wanting to be great in business and, and, you know, you know, I'd sit there and, say, "Yeah, sure, Mike, uh-huh, right," you know, I didn't believe it. But I had my own kind of goals and directions of what, what I wanted to do too. And it just seems that, you know, they kind of ended up being in the same place, both of us being elected to the St. Louis Board of Aldermen in the city council, in the same timeframe, he was two years ahead of me but we're both young, both under thirty, so that automatically kind of, you know, even after going to different law schools and different colleges, that kind of forced you to be together. And that's when Mike said, you know, we really need to kick our business really off in full gear because before that I had worked at the Board of Aldermen as assistant clerk and the assistant to the president of the council for two years. So, you know, I kind of had a nine to five [o'clock] job, there wasn't a lot of flexibility I could do but once I became a city council person then my schedule was more mine. And so, and Mike was obviously out there already. So we were then able to kind of gel our interests and say okay, let's look at what opportunities are out there, you know, like the case of the TV station [WRBJ-TV, Jackson, Mississippi], early application 1981, starting to buy a two family or four family flat real estate using our own sweat equity to bring those back up. And, you know, those were kind of the formative years in the sense that we didn't have any money so we had to be creative in terms of what we could do to get our business kicked off (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But do you think there's anything in particular that your parents did to facilitate like a friendship amongst the, the, the children? Because there, there are some families where the, the offspring are always in competition, they really can't stand each other. Speaker 2: Well, that's true, that's true. I think that maybe by, well, first off, my parents wouldn't have that, I mean, I mean, their view was you all gotta take care of each other and look out for each other. And remember there's always a gap in between, you know, Mike and I and then Mark [Mark Roberts] and myself and my sister, there's always four to five years gap, so, you know, those are almost like different groups, different, I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we weren't close enough to be competitive because, you know, Mike was always bigger than me for the most part. So it was, it was, it wasn't as if I could really change or influence, I mean, we had our fights like all siblings do phy- physically, as well as yelling and screaming, we still do, not physically, I can run faster than he can now. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But we, but we, we still, I mean, I still believe that that that that it's up to the parents to guide. Now, if, if, if a, if a child has such a disparate personality, they don't get along with anybody, there's nothing you can do about it but I think parents can guide the nature of relationships, you know, by eating together, having meals together, doing events together, talking to the children as a group, versus, you know, you're my favorite and you're not my favorite and things like that. So, no, I think clearly parents have a great deal of influence, but part of it too is, is we would look at their generation to see how close say my [maternal] grandmother's [Selma Bell Talley] siblings were. I mean, you know, even though they lived in different places but they would come to St. Louis [Missouri] or during holidays they would all get together. So I think, I think, having, you know, that extra generational influence upon you showed that, you know, we, we should stay close. Story_ID: 543497 Speaker 1: You know, Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] for me was an interesting experience because I'm a midwestern boy basically, born and raised, you know, in an urban environment. I'm in a, I wouldn't say Worcester [Massachusetts] was a semi-urban but it was a, it was an older kind of dilapidated industrial town, it's much better today. But, you know, it, it had had its peak forty years before I got there. And the other interesting thing for me was not only being in a different environment, physical environment, but the nature of the people who I were attending college with were completely different. I mean, most of these kids were from the Northeast, they were from New York [New York], or Washington, D.C., or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And East Coast people particularly when you get up to the New England area, including New York, they have a different view of the world, very harsh, very fast moving, very short, very distant to a degree. So for, for me, you know, I'm one of those guys that if I tell you something I do it basically and, you know, I, you have to learn how to toughen up a little bit when you're in that kind of environment. So for me it was, it was an eye opening exper- . My first year I was not real happy because, you know, I didn't know a lot of people up there and, and the people that I did meet I didn't like a lot. So when I got to go into Boston [Massachusetts] the second semester to pledge Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] with my friend, Charles Wilson [ph.] from St. Louis [Missouri], he, you know, that that allowed me to kind of reconnect. So the question was do you transfer or not and I had looked at transferring, and was accepted to transfer to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And there was a friend of mine from Camp Miniwanca [Shelby, Michigan], the guy's name was Jet Thomas, he was head of one of the residential colleges, he said, "Look, why don't you just transfer if you're not happy, and I, you know, I'll help you do it, you got the grades to do it." And, and looked at it real hard and then I think I ultimately decided that, you know, this is not a bad place, these people are really trying to give me a good education, I've got a great scholarship. Got, started getting involved with student politics, I could go into Boston on the weekend because I now had that social connection there being in the fraternity. And so I kind of became more introspective in who I was basically that sophomore and junior year and said I'm, I'll make this work. The good news is, you know, I would have never been sent to Africa which I was. I ended up being very active with the city coun- the student council, I ended up being president of the student council, president of student body. I was the first African American to, to be president of the student body. My grades did very well. And one of the fun things was that they, they would allow me, I had to, because I was on scholarship, I had to do work study, my work study was working in the admissions office as kind of a clerk but when some of the admissions officers could not go to some of these high school conferences, you know, where they would go around the country recruiting kids, they sent me because they were, they clearly wanted to get more kids of color at this school, so having a student to go out really sent a very positive message. For me it gave me a chance to visit places I had not seen before that, like Philadelphia and San Antonio, Texas, and Memphis [Tennessee] and some other places that, you know, later in life I would visit more than once but for me it was a pretty unique opportunity to kind of see the country, you know, and learn how to do expense accounts and all of those kind of things so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, so Clark, Clark was good in, in the long run. It was a, you, you know, it was a, a, a, in the early '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] it was one of those schools that, you know, for the war [Vietnam War], would go out, I mean, they'd close down classes, man, and hit the streets. So it was, you know, heavy duty activism, you know, a lot of, as folks used to say, sex, drugs, and rock and roll, you know. Long hair, I mean, it was, it was as radical, I mean, which is kind of interesting because in the '60s [1960s], you know, before I got there, it was probably a good solid, you know, semi-Ivy League school. Then in the late '60s [1960s] it became radicalized because of Civil Rights Movement and things like that. And then by the early '70s [1970s] when I got there, the anti-war stuff was gone so a school that had been, you know, a good solid school, became, you know, a radical, very far thinking and maybe a little leftist school, which, which ended up being a great experience for me because then I met all kind of people there. Story_ID: 543498 Speaker 1: You were saying your, your brother now and his friends were thinking about going to theological school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and, and, now how did that influence your decision? Speaker 2: Well, you know, because see they were coming up on graduation from college and, of course, I'm off now in Worcester [Massachusetts], in Boston [Massachusetts] area in college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] and, and, you know, I'm asking well, what are you gone do after college because remember as you well know the draft was still going on at that time too and even though the Vietnam War was ending or, or at least coming down we were still having U.S. citizens being killed in Vietnam even though we were, you know, we didn't know at the time there were activity behind the scenes to, for the U.S. to pull out, but kids, boys, particularly were still being sent over there. So, you know, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and, and his friends were saying, "Well, you know, we're getting ready to graduate, I better look to do something else." One of 'em, one of his very close friends did go to seminary, ended up going to law school too. Mike decided to just go on and he applied to, to law school because he did know that law could be helpful in terms of going into politics too. So when Mike kind of gave up the, the the- the theology and he, and he gave me some good reasons for, for not doing it, I said, "Well, fine, I'll, I'll check out law too, I always wanted to be an advocate, I don't wanna sit in an office somewhere anyway." So, so, you know, and, and then part of it was too, was one of our friends, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith was a, you know, Howard law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] graduate. He, he was back in St. Louis [Missouri], he was clearly being a, one of our up and rising stars in St. Louis. And so we had a lot of admiration for Wayman, Wayman went to law school, so, so that kind of influenced us. He said he ultimately was going to get into politics which he did do. He was very active on the state level, he was on the state equal rights commission [Missouri Commission on Human Rights]. So, so those kind of influences I'm sure on Mike happened because these were people we admired and so he said, "Well, ma- you know, maybe I'll look at, at law school then." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 543499 Speaker 1: So where did you end up going to law school? Speaker 2: I went to Washington U-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --University law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]. So in my case, you know, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] was at Lindenwood College [Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University] in St. Charles [Missouri], so he was close and so Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] had the right scholarship package, the Danforth, he had received a Danforth Foundation grant for law school. So for Mike it was a, it was kind of an easy, easy selection because they had offered him room and board and a lot of things too. And they were really trying to increase the number of African American students there. Now in my case, I applied everywhere because remember by then, after my college admission visits to high schools I, you know, I had a chance to really have a feel of, of different cities and so I pled--I, I applied to schools in, in, in Washington [D.C.] like Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center]. And, and University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] and, of course, I did St. Louis U because Mike was there and Washington U because of St. Louis [Missouri]. Some of the Boston [Massachusetts] schools too. I, you know, it's just typical you apply seven, eight different law schools. But what I was finding was as I was getting accepted to these schools, they were not offering quite frankly enough money for me to go there, and I couldn't go to my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] for a law school loan. So it was of all the schools it was very interesting because Washington University offered me more scholarships than any place, and a job that allowed me to be a dorm director as a, as a graduate student on campus. So room and board, tuition, you know, and a job. So, so I, I chose Wash U. Again, they were like St. Louis U, they felt, you know, a need to get more, have a more diversant [ph.] student body, and they did. We, we also, Mike had encouraged me during my last year of college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] to apply for the Danforth Foundation grant too that could help underwrite some of my summer school work as well as graduate school and, and I did that my junior year and was successful. So I had a chance to intern in a law firm during both summers before law school and then it also helped with law school tuition. And it's funny, of course, you know, it's Danforth Foundation [St. Louis, Missouri], and, and by then Bill Danforth [William H. Danforth], became the chancellor of Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] so it was kind of a nice reason to all come back to St. Louis. But the good news is I was on campus. Story_ID: 543500 Speaker 1: How was law school for you? I mean, did, did you, were there any teachers there, any special teachers (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there were a couple, particularly. When, when I went to law school, we probably had the largest group of, of African American folks, men and women ever, in, in, in the class. Now, when I say largest, that's probably twenty-one, twenty-two out of two hundred students. But it was, it was, it, it sent a strong message to, to us that they're really trying. And they knew that some of the students were smart but were on the edge a little bit in terms of probably preparation for law school. So we would even have our own seminar that could just help us with our writing abilities and stuff. And we, I mean, you know, we laughed at it then, we still laugh at it because, you know, it was kind of like, it was a class just for the brothers and sisters, you know. But it was, it was just, but it was, it was legal writing and things like that. And I think ultimately it probably helped us all. But the important thing was that it was hard. I mean, we're, we're, now trying to think differently, look at the world differently because that's what law school does, law school kind of burns out of, I think, any creativity in your, in, in your spirit and says this is how you think today, and it was very hard. And I'd say, you know 80 percent of the students ultimately graduated, some transferred, some just did not want do law. So it was very, very difficult because even though I came from a very good college and had, you know, strong, strong academic credentials, it was still, it was the hardest I ever worked because, you know, I thought I was a smart guy but it was a difficult, difficult time. Now, the, the good news about that law school, Wash U [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], was that you had some faculty people who believed in this whole issue of ensuring that the, the practice of law needed to be more diverse. And there was one gentleman, Peter Mutharika who became a very good friend, and Peter was fairly young then. Peter was actually out of, he was an expatriate out of what is now Malawi. His father [Ryson Thom Mutharika] was very active in independence activities and he and his brother [Bingu wa Mutharika] had to leave. His brother later became just about two years ago, the president of Malawi. He had been a undersecretary for African relief and a number of other things. Peter came to the U.S. and ended up being obviously a law professor at a couple of different schools but he also became a full professor at Wash U, and was one of the ones responsible for making sure that we were able to get more students there. Now, Peter, and he's still on faculty now there, Peter alone could not do it because, you know, without having established tenured law professors who believed in the program and they believed--important--it was never happen, so there were two or three professors there. One was Professor Becker [David M. Becker], another was a Professor Switehart [ph.] who were hard, tough professors but when it came down to the issues of diversity in the practice of law they were there, and if it wasn't for senior members of the faculty saying, "We have to do this," it would have never happened because the dean alone could not do it. The, and the dean we had was a great dean, he was, he ended up, Tad Foote [Edward T. Foote II], he was an associate general counsel of the university, became dean of the law school and was ultimately in my second year selected as president of the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] and was there for over twenty years and really turned that school around from being a party school to a, to a serious academic institution. Speaker 1: What, what's his name? Speaker 2: Tad Foote, Edward Tad Foote. Speaker 1: Tad Foote, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the president of the University of Miami. Speaker 1: And, and what's Peter's last name? Speaker 2: Mutha- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that? Speaker 2: --Mutharika is spelled, M-U-T-H-A-R-I-K-A. And like I said his, his brother is still president of Malawi now. In fact, Peter, we were talking during the election a couple of years ago, Peter was actually looking at going over there to be the attorney general for the country. Story_ID: 543501 Speaker 1: Well, was there any aspect of the law more interesting than another to you? I mean did you focus on one aspect of the law (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I think that, you know, the, the first couple of years, you're so involved with those elements of law that, that you've gotta know so that ultimately if you practice you've gotta know pretty cold and they're mandatory courses. But I made an effort to, to study some advanced constitutional law, civil rights law, because I was kind of, remember I'm, I'm still semi-involved with local politics even though I'm in law school. And Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] is now out, he's active in politics thinking about running for office so, so and, you know, I'm looking at, let me look at some of the other legal areas that I can find my niche. But at the same time I was still very, very active with a number of, you know, I was head of our local legal fraternity which exposed me to some different interesting people in the practice of law because I wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do in law at that point. So I, active in campus, remember I'm still a dorm director because, you know, I've gotta take care of room and board. So I'm involved with campus politics a little bit but not too much. And then, you know, part of our entrepreneurship thing that we loved to do, the school was looking at creating a, a campus pub to a degree. And since I was a graduate student they asked if I'd come and work because I was over, over twenty-one and could kind of help card. And I did that for about two months and then they said, "Well, we want you to be the manager," you know. I said, "I can't be the manager full time, but I can manage it on the weekends and stuff," which was, you know, pretty cool because it allowed some of my friends to come by and we'd stay after I'd close and have pizza, or beer, or whatever. But more importantly it gave me more experience on the side of, of the, side of business basically and how to manage people because even though most of the kids were students you still had to learn how to manage them. So that was a lot of fun. Also what I was finding too particularly as my third year came about I had a real interest in, in, in urban law and urban development. Remember this is out of the political activism and, and interest that I had. So I was looking at how do you rebuild cities, how do you make 'em, how do you make the zoning more friendly so that you can do some interesting development projects, either commercial, retail, or residential. And so I, I, I studied in summer school, I would, I would, because I had the Danforth [Danforth Foundation] grant so I had a job always working with the law firm but they would allow me to take a couple of courses. So I was starting to take courses, courses that would guide me more in the direction of urban law, urban redevelopment, housing law, things like that. So by the time my senior year came around, I was actually ahead in hours but because I took courses at other law schools the requirement is you have to have certain number of, of, of credits at your home university which I didn't so what I did was I met with the dean [Edward T. Foote II] and, and my faculty advisor and said look, I've got more than enough hours to graduate now but I don't want to, to, you know, spend the next six months, or next three months waiting for graduation and not be able to take the bar or, or do anything else. How about if I continue--because remember my tuition is paid for for the whole year, how about if I go into the master's program? There was a program called masters of law which is like getting an advanced degree after your doctorate degree in law. And, but, but you have to specialize. At Wash U [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] they had either tax LL.M, or they had a urban development LL.M. And the only reason why we had the urban development because one of the leading authors of zoning legislation and housing legislation in the United States a guy named Mandelker [Daniel R. Mandelker] was based at Wash U. So he created his, his own LL.M. program there. So, so I decided, I stayed there and started working on my masters in law, then the January of the year of my graduation. So I'm there working at the Board of Aldermen part time, you know, being an assistant clerk, I'm doing my master's degree, and I'm a, still a dorm director basically. So it was a very interesting time in my life because I had to learn how to then juggle many things, you know, being a student, being, working as well as being, you know, being a resident advisor. So, so you had those things going on in my life which was fun. Then I had--then had to figure out, I, I had to stay another semester in order to finish my master's degree plus take the bar that summer. So it was like a very busy time for me. Story_ID: 543502 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about Clarence Thomas but I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --he spent his summers in St. Louis [Missouri], but you said you met him in Worcester [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I didn't realize, Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross] is in Worcester, Massachusetts, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Holy Cross (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's where he was-- Speaker 2: --College, at the time it was an all-boys college, all-men's college. And there were probably about six colleges in, in Worcester: the UMass med school [University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts], Worcester Poly Tech [Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, Massachusetts], Anna Maria College [Paxton, Massachusetts] was a Catholic college, and one other one, I guess, something college. These schools were very, very small. So it was Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] and Holy Cross, we were kind of competitors to a degree in terms of attracting students. But in the case of Holy Cross because it was a larger institution and, and boys, they did a very good job recruiting some talented African American athletes as well as students from around the country. And there were a number of people who we were talking about who were there but one that sticks out in my mind was Clarence Thomas. And I remember Clarence because he was a senior, I was a freshman. And, and when the guys, the black guys would come over to Clark because we had, you know, black girls over there for the most part, they'd come over and, and take 'em to parties and stuff like that. But also we would be invited to parties over at Holy Cross because they always had great concerts. Like I remember the first time I saw [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick it was at Holy Cross, or Earth, Wind and Fire because they had the money to bring the big acts. So Clarence years later would, he would see my brother, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] more than me and he says, "Well, how's--," because they call me Stevie [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] up there, "How is Stevie doing?" Because Clarence after he left Holy Cross he went to law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], then was hired by Jack Danforth [John Danforth], see the connection again-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the Danforth family. Jack, at that time was attorney general of U.S. [sic. Missouri], he brought in Clarence as one of his assistant attorney generals and Clarence was, you know, spent time in Missouri so he got to know St. Louis well and then obviously when the senator went back, Clarence went up to Washington [D.C.] during the, the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, and then ultimately was appointed to the [U.S.] Supreme Court. But it was interesting because it's a small world because, you know, I knew Clarence before my brother, Mike, did even though they're more contemporaries. And, and they'd see each other out at social events in Washington and he'd always ask, ask, ask about me and stuff. So it's, it's just kind of a strangely small world because like I said, you know, I'm in school with him, he goes to work for the Danforths, you know, I've known the Danforths all my life but, but we never had those kind of connections we just understood them ultimately. Speaker 1: Yeah, Missouri, Boston [Massachusetts] in com- I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Worcester, Massachusetts, Clar- I mean it's really--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah I mean, how, how narrow could, could that be. Story_ID: 543503 Speaker 1: And, you know, I mean, I, I remember, I mean, Clarence [Clarence Thomas] was just like the rest of us. I mean, he was, you know, a bright college kid but, you know, he liked girls like the rest of us and he would, he would be out there partying and socialize like everyone else. So, you know, to kind of see this regal [U.S.] Supreme Court justice, I, this isn't the guy I know (laughter) because you're, you know, just we all kind of change, I guess, in our roles. But it's kind of interesting because not only that, but one of my best friends at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who I'd stay with sometimes when I would go into Boston [Massachusetts], a guy named Jimmy Harmon [James C. Harmon, Jr.] who is a judge in Washington, D.C. today, one of his roommates was, well, well, several folks that he was in school with, ended up being very prominent figures in, in, in Washington politics. And one guy who like I said, he like Clarence, he just like anybody else, was, ran for the--senator as a Republican, conservative Republican, talk show host, in Maryland came out, ran against Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because they couldn't find anybody else to run against him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you're talking about, I know who you're talking about-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you're talking about, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Help me, I just forget his name-- Speaker 2: I can't-- Speaker 1: --a mind block. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who you're talking about he's a, he ran, he's a, he was a perpetual, I mean, well, well, annual, well, every--regular candidate for the Republican nomination-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Alan Keyes. Speaker 1: Yeah, Alan Keyes. Speaker 2: Alan Keyes, yeah. Speaker 1: And I mean, I knew Alan. Alan was a, a roommate of Jimmy's they were all in the same, they had a quad, and, and they were all, it was four of 'em in that room. I remember spending the night and Alan, you know, he wasn't an outwardly conservative guy, nor was Clarence, I mean, they were just guys basically who, who had a good time and were, were active on their campuses, but, and there was, there wasn't anything unusual about these folks. So, so what, what I'm saying is that of that generation, if it was Alan or if it was, you know, the justice, or me, you know, we came out of a generation of, of family and it could be your parents or your grandparents who said you need to go get a college education basically. And, and even if you're a conservative Republican or a liberal Democrat, the reality is that without the assistance of what we term today as affirmative action, but it's, you know, it's, I say more diversity, I would not have been at Clark University [Worcester, Massachusetts]. I'm sure Clarence Thomas would not have been at Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts]. And probably Alan Keyes probably wouldn't have been at Harvard. I know my friend Jimmy Harmon would not have been because he was a kid from Kansas who wanted to be premed and they said we need diversity of geography and diversity of color at Harvard. He's a smart kid, but still he wouldn't have been able to do unless there had been a push. So when people argue, well, you know, I would have done it on my own, that's not true because, I mean, I, I saw admission, I, I saw admission standards, I saw how the selection process from the inside went being on the admissions committee both at law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] and in undergraduate. I saw how the processes worked and if, if there wasn't a little help and a little push, diversity would have meant nothing on these college campuses-- Speaker 2: So, so, so-- Speaker 1: --in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Is it surprising then that Alan Keyes and Clarence Thomas would be so vocal against affirmative action-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --now? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I mean, it, it, it is surprising but, I mean, I, I know what part of it is, is as, as people mature, and, and some of it's politics, you know, it's finding your niche in the world so sometimes you wear a different face or a different hat in, in order to, to find a way to be successful in what you wanna do. And, you know, if, if, if, if Alan had been a U.S. senator, if he had been elected to that for Maryland or Illinois he would have said, well, it's because, you know, I, I touched the heart of those conservatives who wanted somebody like me in office. You know, the reality is it never happened but still I think that it was, it was a, a, a means to a, a means to an end that they were trying to seek in terms of their success. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so, so is it like Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] said, you know, was it, you know, did he sin in his heart? For these guys, yeah, they probably sinned and, and they probably gave a part of their soul to get where they got but they'd never tell you that but if you just look at their legacy from where they came, it was, you know, they became almost the antithesis of what they were before they took these new positions on so. Speaker 2: That's interesting that you knew, knew both of these fellows, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Yep. Story_ID: 543504 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there were some other folks I'm sure as we go through the interview there are some other interesting people who you just meet along the way. You know, there was a, a young lady [Kathryn Cassell Chenault] who I dated when I was in college, she was at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], I was at Clark [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts], and, you, you know, because I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and you're in Boston [Massachusetts], you go to parties, you meet all kind of folks and we, we, we really became good friends and dated for a couple of years. And it turns out her mother's [Elaine Hancock] second marriage was to a, a prominent dentist [Victor L. Hancock] in Washington, D.C., but who had roots here in St. Louis [Missouri] and I knew, I grew up with, would have been her, you know, her cousins but it was second marriage and I, because this was his brother's kids basically in St. Louis and I knew his other brother and kids and yet, and yet I'm, you know, I'm halfway across the United States and I'm dating somebody who is, you know, married to good close friends in St. Louis. She ultimately ended up marrying the guy who is chairman of American Express [American Express Company], the first African American [Kenneth Chenault]. So it's a small world, it's a small world. But again I think it tells you that in the African American society in the second half of the 20th century was that there were very few I'm talking about when you, when you look globally, there are very few African American males and females going to colleges and law schools and graduate schools and becoming doctors, who were in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or a fraternity or a sorority or Links [The Links, Incorporated] or something, and that they met and that that, I think that phenomena with the Xers and Y generations it's not gonna be there just because of the large number of people. But they've benefited from it because you and I can talk about people we know in Boston, New York [New York], or Washington, they won't be able to do that but we can help them along the way in their abilities to grow and make contacts and to network. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 543505 Speaker 1: Here you're working at the Board of Aldermen-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you're, you're, you're on the cusp of graduating with an LL.M. in urban development-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --too. So what are your prospects? What do you, what do you think you're gonna do? Speaker 2: Well, it's real exciting for me because one, is remember I'm still getting room and board paid for which is great, so I'm still living on campus, so it's a, it's a great experience but I'm working now because I'm getting a salary from the Board of Aldermen. I'm about to get in May my J.D., my doctorate degree in law. And then in December I was gonna get my Masters of Law. So that's interesting. In, in '74 [1974] I'm gonna get two law degrees from the same institution [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], the same year, no one has ever done it since, no one has ever done it before. So that was exciting. Speaker 1: Now, this is seventy-- Speaker 2: Seventy-- Speaker 1: --it's not '74 [1974] it's seventy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, '77 [1977], yes. And so it's a, it's a great time because, you know, I'm excited because I know I'm gonna graduate which is important but more importantly, I know even graduating I had a job because I was gonna, I'm, I was working at the Board of Aldermen starting in January so I had a position. And I figured I could do that for a couple of years and then see what would happen. For me it was exciting particularly because now, you know, this is the late '70s [1970s] when people are beginning to understand that urban renewal of downtown areas is important because, you know, there had been a lot of white flight to the suburbs and the cities were falling apart. So I'm now studying, I'm becoming an expert in urban law and urban development which is significant for me because I'm, every day I'm sitting, writing legislation for the St. Louis city council. I'm listening, I'm sitting in meetings where everybody is talking about what can we do for housing, or downtown development, or retail development in neighborhoods? How do we improve, you know, trimming trees along major arterials, or fixing parks? So I'm right there in the cut, and, and I'm even listening to all the new law, I mean, I'm studying all the new law, all the new legislation that's coming from around the country (simultaneous). Story_ID: 543506 Speaker 1: Let me ask you just a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --structural que- now, how many people, how many aldermen are in, are in-- Speaker 2: In the City of St. Louis [Missouri]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, ci- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there are twenty-eight aldermen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Plus the president of the Board of Aldermen. The president of the Board of Aldermen is elected citywide, the comptroller, chief fiscal officer is elected citywide, and the mayor is elected citywide. They serve on what they call a Board of Adjustment. And, and that board, that Board of Estimate and Apportionment, that board is the board that basically signs contracts, make--they're, they're basically the operating entity of city government, like the executive branch. And the mayor, of course, being a little bit above 'em but it's a weak mayor system. And then you have the Board of Aldermen, twenty-eight are elected by districts basically. So the district I was elected from is the district that my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] live because that's where I was registered to vote and ultimately bought my home. Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], for instance, when he came out of law school bought a home in the district that he ran for the 19th [Ward 19, St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 1: It's 19th, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 19th, I was the 20th Ward [Ward 20, St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you, you were 20th, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and but different parts of town. Mike was what we call Midtown [St. Louis, Missouri], kind of around the Fox Theatre [Fabulous Fox Theatre, St. Louis, Missouri], Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], and I was in kind of northwest St. Louis, which has been a historically middle-class area, okay. So for me running for office, of course, was like going to see all of the parents of my friends who I was, I was in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or, or elementary school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] because, you know, I grew up in the neighborhood. So, so, so, so it's twenty-eight aldermen, the, the president is elected citywide, is the chief officer of that. Story_ID: 543507 Speaker 1: So my job that last year of law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] and then the year after that was I was, what they call the fiscal, well, first I was the assistant clerk, which basically I helped prepare legislation for our weekly meetings and committee meetings. So for me still being in school, I could do what I needed to do and not miss classes. And then the next year I was asked to serve as the executive to the president of the board, so I basically ran his office for the most part because he was a practicing attorney and it wasn't a full-time job. And also the, the fiscal analyst, so I was the one who would help prepare the budgets for the Board of Aldermen, but, but I would also review the board, the budgets of all the other city departments because remember, you had the mayor, the comptroller and the president of the board would all sit on a weekly basis determining which contracts to sign and they ultimately was the body that approved the city budget. So for me, now remember I am one year out of law school, I'm sitting there with the mayor, the comptroller, and the president of the Board of Aldermen, you know. I'm, I'm holding hearings on, for my boss, for the, the director of streets, community development, parks, so I got to know all these people, you know, for those two years. So by the time I ran for the Board of Aldermen in 1979, two years later, I then knew everybody. So, so when I'd come in and, you know, Mrs. Smith in the 4900 block of Wabada [Avenue] is complaining because her tree limbs were falling out on the street and they couldn't get out, or, or, or there are potholes in their alley or whatever, I just would pick up the phone--. Now, of course, I'm an aldermen now so they're gonna respond anyway but I'd call directly to the director of streets and say, you know, this guy is named Jim Shay at the time, I'd say, "Jim, I've got a problem here and such and such--." He said, "Okay," you know, "alderman, I'll take care of that tomorrow," 'cause I knew him and, you know, it wasn't like having to submit a request in writing to them and hopefully they put it on a list and got it done. So I will tell you that those two years of experience were probably as valu- in city government were as valuable as certainly my three and a half years of law school because with the master's degree it usually takes four years, I did it in three and a half years, was more valuable than anything I've done in, in, in all of my multiple careers here because it taught me, one, how bureaucracy worked basically. It also taught me how important it is to have interpersonal relationships with folks. I mean, you can go tell people what to do all the time, the question is will they do it. When you're in city government it's gotta be a cooperative effort or you never get anything done. Story_ID: 543508 Speaker 1: Now would you say at that time that you, the working relationship that you developed with people in various aspects of city government was equal to years and years of being an alderman (laughter) maybe in some cases? Speaker 2: Oh, no, question about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do people spend-- Speaker 2: I mean, I mean, I know, because I, you know, people who either came in with my class, when I was elected on the Board of Aldermen or people who came four years after me or six or eight years, I mean, you know, you can, you can watch how effective they can be or not. And, and I will tell you for many of those folks over the years, it took 'em a long, long time to get where I was in my first year. I mean, look, I was handling because of my urban expertise, I was the chief sponsor of our first convention center legislation because I heard it coming down the road, I knew what it meant, and, and I got on it because the other aldermen, particularly the, the, the more senior folks did not want to do it because they didn't understand it for the most part because there were tax bonds and all that kind of, and that's stuff I knew because I had just studied it. I mean, I got more housing money in my district [Ward 20, St. Louis, Missouri] in my first five years than probably most of 'em did and some of 'em who were there in twenty years. I was able to do a very organized approach to re-landscaping to do public improvements in my area. I knew where to go find economic development grants, encourage businesses to come into my area or stay in my area. I mean, these were things that, that I learned from the books, you know, studying obviously, and from being in city hall [St. Louis City Hall, St. Louis, Missouri]. Because, you know, if you know that you need to have trees replanted along your major arterial roads in your ward and that it's only twice a year you can do it, a certain time in November, a certain time in April; that's the only time they do it. Now, you (unclear) alderman you can send a request in screaming and yelling and saying that "I want it done July 1st," but that don't mean it'll get done. So, so what I mean, I knew that stuff because remember I had worked through the budgets and all that, so I mean I knew that okay, I, I need to get Kingshighway [Boulevard] done, I need to get Laclede [Avenue] done, I need to get Natural Bridge [Avenue] done, the major roads in my area, so I knew I couldn't do 'em all at once because they, there's never enough money to do that. But I'd say, "Okay, look guys, you know, fall of '0--of '0--of '81 [1981], I want this whole street, can we do it, is there enough money?" "Oh, yeah, there's enough money to do it." And then, you know, fall of '0--of, of 1982 I wanted to do X, Y, and Z. So you had to learn, and that's what I'm saying bureaucracy, you have to understand how bureaucracy works. And, and I became in a sense an expert at it. But plus I had the technical skills, the educational skills, to do it. So when we did our urban, our Union Station [St. Louis Union Station, St. Louis, Missouri] development, I was the lead sponsor of that, worked with the developers, knew them all, I mean, you know, the city people, their economic development people did the kind of nuts and bolts things, but I sat on those committees that had to review who we were gonna select. I mean, I, I will tell you that I did more housing, more new housing, not just renovated, I brought businesses to my area because I knew how to do it. So, so then, you know, and Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] was right, we started, we were doing, we again are both so effective in serving our wards and, and it took a lot of time because we were committed, you know, being an alderman in those days, maybe it was twenty hours a week, but we were probably putting sixty hours in between community meetings we're going to and, and our committee meetings and just stuff going on, we were spending a lot of time. So, you know, after a couple of years, you know, we, I think we both realized separately that if we took some of this same energy that we're putting into public service, which wasn't paying a lot of money, and, and, and in those days Mike was making 7500 [dollars] a year, I was making twelve five [12,500 dollars], and that's just because I was elected two years after him. So, so, so we said well, maybe if we could take some of those skills and, and we're--wanna develop these businesses, let's see how we can use these skills to develop our business. So, so, I think he will tell you that in terms of understanding how to work with people, politics was, was wonderful because, you know, when somebody calls you in the middle of the night and their kid is in jail or, you know, their house is on fire or something, it's always the local city council or aldermen who they call first and so you learn how to be humble in terms of serving people. Story_ID: 543509 Speaker 1: Did you have a good working relationship with the mayor in those days? Speaker 2: Yes and no. The one, the first mayor I worked with wasn't there a very long time because he was defeated by a member of our city council [Board of Aldermen]. And, and that city council member we knew well because he's not much older than, than we were but, you know, it's kind of, you know, when you, when you go from council to mayor everything changes, you know, you're a different guy and stuff, so we had our fights with him and stuff but, you know, when, when, when you kind of learn how to outsmart people from time to time or, or get your votes lined up that there's something that that that they want and something we think is more important for our community then you learn how to compromise. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I mean, all the mayors of, originally, I mean, I had the, the Mayor Conway [James F. Conway] who was, that was there in the beginning and Schoemehl [Vincent C. Schoemehl]. You know, I, I, you see 'em all, we invite 'em to our parties, they come, they've come over the last twenty-five years so. Speaker 1: Okay. So how, how long were you an alderman? From (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. From-- Speaker 1: --from '79 [1979] to-- Speaker 2: Yes, to '91 [1991]. I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --there for twelve years, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] was there for eight years. Story_ID: 543510 Speaker 1: Now in, in the meantime, now, the exciting, I guess, one of the most exciting things was the development of the broadcasting business [Roberts Broadcasting Company] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And that started, I mean, you started working on it in '81 [1981] and finally got your stations up off the ground in '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], a long time. Speaker 1: So, so what's the story of that and what, how did-- Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's interesting. And Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], I'm sure Mike has probably shared with you the story. It's, it's kind of being, as I told you, you know, you can be prepared, but you've gotta have a certain skillset and, and part of it is, is, is luck, part of it is divine intervention, call it what you may, if it happens, it happens, right. We, I, I remember it very well. Mike and I had--my dad [Victor Roberts] had retired from the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] after thirty-nine years, and he was gonna go home, you know, do chores around the house and stuff. And, and we said, "Dad, you know, you don't play golf and you don't go fishing that much and, you know, Mom's [Delores Talley Roberts] still working so you don't wanna go, you won't be traveling a lot, what, you know, what are you gonna do?" And he says, "Well, I'm just gonna go home and rest." "Well, you know, Dad, you've never rested your whole life." So we encouraged him to--. In fact, at his, at his retirement party at the post office we presented him with like a key to the office and said, "Well, you're retiring today," which was Friday, "but Monday you start working with us." And he came because, you know, he was complaining, "I'm not gonna come, I'm not gonna come." But he did. And, and been with us ever since, that was 1981. And so-- Speaker 1: Now, what was the extent of your business in '81 [1981]? What were you all doing? Speaker 2: Oh, there, there wasn't much. I mean-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we were doing a little consulting. Mike had kind of developed a practice with [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith in the EEO area, employment--equal employment opportunity law. And then we changed, we, we modified that, Mike and I, 'cause Wayman then went to work for Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] as the vice president. We modified that approach because EEO was being more taken into the embodiment of, of, of corporations basically, so they had people to do that. But one of the things that was getting new attention was doing business with black owned and minority and women owned businesses. So we developed our own consulting practice of showing corporations, local governments, state governments, federal government, how you can diversify your, your contracting base. So for instance they would have, get guidelines for instance with the federal [U.S.] Department of Transportation, 10 percent of all jobs had to go to minority women, well, that's fine, they said that in law but they didn't know how to do it. So what our responsibility was for a lot of our corporate and governmental clients was to show them how to do it basically. So we were developing the nature of that business at that point. We didn't have any money so, you know, every time, because we were trying to buy buildings and renovate buildings, so every time we would, we would do a project, a consult- we would always put a little money to the side so in case something came down the road that we'd wanna invest in we could. So we had only been in a very small office space less, about the size of, a third of the size of this room, it was my dad, Mike, and I, and it was our first official office so it was pretty cool. And it was a major table in the middle, a conference room table, and my dad sat outside by the front desk, and we were sharing a space with a law firm. And that's really how we kind of started the Roberts-Roberts [Roberts-Roberts and Associates, LLC] part of the business. Story_ID: 543511 Speaker 1: And it just, like I said, there was sometimes good things come to you, you don't know it. There was a, a young attorney, he was about my age, who was practicing with this firm, it was only about six attorneys, and I was walking to the elevator one day in the hallway and he said, he said, "You know, there's a client of ours who, out of Texas who goes around and encourages women and minorities to go in the TV and radio business. And, you know, they like, there's a license opening in St. Louis [Missouri], a TV license, full power license and he thinks that, you know, there might be a good shot for somebody to get that license. And he wanted to know if I knew any good minority, well respected candidates for it. And I thought of you guys," 'cause he didn't know a lot of other folks, "and, and would you be interested?" I said, "Yeah, well, have him come up and we'll talk to him." So he came up, and we talked and we were intrigued. 'Cause, you know, remember we're, we're thinking we wanna be entrepreneurs one day and this guy is saying, "Look, you know, if you can raise ten thousand dollars we can put an application in to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], we can get engineers retained, lawyers retained, and you can pay me for putting the, the application to the FCC," because we didn't know how to do it, we were lawyers but we didn't know how to do that. And so he, he, and we said, why not. Now, today we would have been more skeptical if somebody had come to you and say, you know, "I can help you get a TV license, just fill out this form here." We would have said, "What?" You know, "You're crazy." But, but the guy we kind of checked him out a little bit and, and he seemed to know what he was talking about, so we did it. And it took a long time because you've gotta put a lot of community data together in order to apply for an FCC license. And the good news was that we were the first to apply, which then, what they do, they, it opens a window basically so anyone who wants to challenge you or to apply for this same license, Channel 46 [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri], they could do it. Now this license has never been built before and there were a number of those around the country and we eventually picked up some of those because we learned how to do the process. But so we applied and, you know, we thought we were gonna slip through without anybody else applying, but six other people applied so it just took a long drawn out process for us to ultimately win the license. We were the best applicant. Clearly we hit all of the right points: community, local, there was a real emphasis on diversity of license ownership so we hit that. Speaker 2: So, so when did you actually get the, get, get your license? This was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, we didn't get the, we didn't really get the license-license until '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and even then there was still one more challenge that could have been made so we were told, don't do too much for another year. So then during that year '86 [1986], '87 [1987], we were saying, okay, now, how are we gonna finance this thing, where is our programming gonna come from, how are we gonna build it? And we didn't know. We really didn't know even though we had spent several years learning to become very good FCC attorneys, because we couldn't pay our Washington, D.C. attorneys all the time, so we had to do some of the work. Story_ID: 543512 Speaker 1: This is obviously my first baby picture. I am probably about six months old. So this would have been, fall of 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Next. Speaker 1: Okay. This picture is, you know, what we call the 'Leave It to Beaver' all American look. I am a senior in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: Okay. The next picture is four years later with a lot more hair and hopefully a little more matured look. I am a senior in college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: You look more like Eddie Haskell-- Speaker 1: Eddie Haskell, right (laughter) that's right, that's right, that's right, with my hair. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Well, of course, of course, everybody, every-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, you know, everybody says you look like with those fros, you look like a pop- a lollipop, you know, you're skinny with this big you know, big amount of hair on top. Speaker 2: Everyone had the big one. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. And they were work too, man. They were, they was a lot of work to do those things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Those Afros saved a lot of people, there were a lot of people with funny looking heads that the Afros saved. Speaker 1: That's right (laughter). Speaker 2: They looked good then but then in the '80s [1980s] when they got their hair cut, they say, "Hey, man, you got a head like a torpedo." Speaker 1: (Laughter) That is funny. That's funny. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's funny, the torpedo head. Speaker 2: (Unclear) said he had a head, head like an aircraft gunner, you know, but he (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: The Afro saved him while it was out. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. This is kind of right in the middle of my college years. This was kind of the typical on campus look here. So I would say I was probably about sophomore in college. Speaker 2: I had the same kind of sweater, same kind of shirt. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, please. Speaker 2: Yeah. With the wide lapels. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Okay. This is my first year, it's 1979, my first year as a member of the St. Louis Board of Aldermen. I had just been elected in April and this is probably the summer or fall of 1979. Alderman from the 20th Ward [Ward 20, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Those were the days of young politicians, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Jerry Springer was a, the youngest mayor of Cincinnati [Ohio] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but he was on the council [Cincinnati City Council] first. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: And, and then he, he-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. It was a bunch, it was a bunch of--. And, you know, it's funny just seeing these folks around because, you know, they all have different roles in life now but they still, they still, you have, see the same twinkle in their eyes. Now, this one, this is actually taken from one of my first public debates on the Board of Aldermen and you can see the microphone that I'm at the podium speaking. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. This one is, I am a sophomore in high school. And as you can see I'm still having that nice conservative tie, a button down collar look basically. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is, I'm now finished with law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], kind of in the working world, got a little bit of a job, so I'm trying to have the model, cool, look basically here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. This picture is graduation day, 19--May of 1977 from law school. That's one of my best friends, Byron Thompson [Byron C. Thompson], he's a practicing attorney in the Oakland [California], Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area]. And I have more hair than he does today let me put it like that (laughter). Speaker 2: His was short lived. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's that Bay Area look. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do the one on the left first. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Then the one on the right. Speaker 1: The one on the left, this is my first visit with brother Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] to see Santa [Santa Claus]. It was in December of 1952. Yep. Speaker 2: He had the same picture yesterday (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Then this picture is six years later so I'm obviously six. It's December of 1958 with my brother, Mike, and my youngest brother, my, my younger brother, Mark [Mark Roberts], who must be, he was born in January so he's probably about ten months old, so he's not a happy camper to be with Santa there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: In fact, look at me look at Santa in the upper picture, like, hey. Like, get--who is this man, Mom [Delores Talley Roberts]? Get him--. Let me just, just share this with you guys. You, you see that vel- ? Yeah, that velvet suit that I have on in the upper picture, you know, that was typical for me, I got hand me downs from my big brother so he wore that same outfit when he was-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you what, Scott [Scott Stearns], one more. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: There's one in the hallway I need to get. I wanted to shoot it yesterday I couldn't shoot it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's a great shot of you too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah-- Speaker 1: That was fun. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. This was from the cover of one of our local weeklies called the Riverfront Times. It was done in March of '04 [2004] because Mike and I had been so very active in the north part of St. Louis [Missouri], they call north St. Louis, which is a very large area. And our corporation headquarters [for The Roberts Companies] were here on Kingshighway Boulevard, which is the major north-south interior road, it's the largest, longest road in the City of St. Louis. So they came up with this very interesting concept to talk about our redevelopment opportunity, the redevelopment that we've done in, in North St. Louis. And, and they put crowns on our head and, and made it a caricature and call- and called us the Kings of Kingshighway, so it's a pretty interesting story about how we're the primary and only developer in, in, in this northern part of the City of St. Louis to ensure, ensure a, a--to ensure economic growth and to prevent further economic deterioration. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is there, Larry [Larry Crowe], anywhere on there an illustration credit for the artist? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): If there is we should just note it because it may be that he, he or she owns the rights to the illustration and the-- Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --and it would be useful to people in the future to know where to look to get that licensing. Speaker 1: It's RFT magazine though. Speaker 2: Yeah, RFT. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This--because of our redevelopment of parts of north St. Louis, the mayor of the City of St. Louis gave us the award for--the Spirit of St. Louis Award. It was given in December of oh, what is that, '02 [2002] it looks like. And this was very important because this is the first retail development called Roberts Village [The Shops at Roberts Village] that has been built in north St. Louis in probably, at this point, probably about forty years. And so in this picture it's Mike and I and my dad, Victor Roberts, and the mayor, Francis Slay of St. Louis, who came in to do the ribbon cutting of this Roberts Village commercial development. And it was a big day because, in fact, there has not been another Spirit of St. Louis Award given for any developers in north city since then, unfortunately...