 Story_ID: 658572 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Emma Rodgers, E-M-M-A, Rodgers, R-O-D-G-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And you do have a middle name, right? Speaker 2: I use S for Scruggs or Simmons, it's two S's, Emma S.S. Rodgers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 16th, 1944, Niagara Falls, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a full time community volunteer. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were I guess I just want--just for the sake of--not to get into it in detail, but just for identification's sake, you operated a black bookstore here in Dallas for thirty years, plus years, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Black Images Book Bazaar. First we said Black Images and then people didn't know what that was, so we added the Book Bazaar. Speaker 1: And you also founded something called the Romance-- Speaker 2: Romance Slam Jam, right. We started that in 1995. And we started it because the romance--there were a lot of romance authors being pub- black romance authors being published. But the publishers weren't marketing and promoting them like we thought they should be. So that's why we launched it, so that they could get recognition. Speaker 1: Yes, and you've been a city official. But we're gonna get into this in detail. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But I just wanted to establish that up front so whoever's listening to this in the future knows, okay, I can look forward to hearing about those things. So and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 13, 2017. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the Dallas Civil Rights Museum, which is housed in the Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center in Dallas, Texas. Story_ID: 658573 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, collard greens, cream peas, jalapeno cornbread and tabbouleh. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Teal. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Three, or two, Suriname, South America and Ghana, West Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Well I like to quote Marcus Garvey, "A people without knowledge of their history is like a tree without roots." Story_ID: 658574 Speaker 1: So, well I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Alvilda, A-L-V-I-L-D-A, in quotation marks Frankie, maiden name is Simmons, married name is Scruggs [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 21, no, no, no. September 13th, 1921, Newton, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. And what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: We can go back about four generations. My grandparents, Jim [James Simmons] and Cora Simmons, eloped and married on Cow Creek in Newton, Texas. So like, that area a lot of people were called Simmons. So she was a Simmons before she got married and a Simmons afterwards. And then I can go back two generations, both of their parents and grandparents on their side. And they were farmers, my grandfather was a farmer and he became a minister later. Speaker 1: Now, Newton, Texas, was this a black town? And the reason why I ask 'cause it was, there were so many in those days. Speaker 2: Right. Well Newton is not far from Jasper, Texas and we know about Jasper, Texas because of the man [James Byrd, Jr.] who was dragged. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. That was just in the two, early 2000s [sic. 1998]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: When a man was dragged behind a truck in Jasper, Texas, horrible (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. So that's why we know about Newton. Newton is about fourteen miles from there and they lived in a community called Cedar Grove [Texas], which is another fourteen miles away from the city center. Speaker 1: Okay, but it wasn't a black town. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a black town. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but there's a black community there 'cause of course the-- Speaker 2: Cedar Grove, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And we still go there for the fam- the community homecoming. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story behind this elopement? 'Cause any time there's an elopement, there's a story, right? Speaker 2: Well, young and I guess--I, I don't know the story. Speaker 1: This is your grandparents. Speaker 2: These are my grandparents. And they married there on Cow--they eloped and got married. Speaker 1: Somebody didn't want them to be married, apparently right? Speaker 2: And they were in their twenties too. But yeah. They had thirteen children; my mother was the youngest girl. There are two more children after her. Story_ID: 658575 Speaker 1: So, so did they, they live out, so--so they raised your mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] there in Newton (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Newton, Texas. And my mother was a defiant one. She played basketball and my grandfather [James Simmons] did not want her to, but she would slip off and do it and he, he'd beat her when she'd come back, but she would slip off anyway and do it anyway. Speaker 1: Basketball, it comes up a lot and surprisingly to me 'cause I didn't imagine that, that women of that era, you know played (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they played half court at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You would just go to half court and then the, the opposition would be on the other side and the, the other, your other teammates would be on the other side. Speaker 1: Yeah, they had one I guess group that played offense and the other group played defense-- Speaker 2: Played defense, right. Speaker 1: --on the other end, right. Yeah I think they call that captain basketball I think. But yeah, but it--I'm surprised that so many women we interview that--during that era they played basketball, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, and it was a, seemed to be a popular thing. Speaker 2: Well my mother grew up there in Cedar Grove [Texas] and I asked her if she would--ever went hungry and she said no because they had the farm. They never went hungry and for Christmas they got an orange and an apple and peppermints. And so at church my husband [Mederick Rodgers] and I, that's what we do; put it in a brown bag and give them orange, apple and peppermints to keep that tradition going. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you give them more than that, though? Speaker 2: Maybe some nuts, you know. Speaker 1: Is that all they get for Christmas? Speaker 2: That's it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so all right so, so your mother grew up during the Depression [Great Depression] basically, she was ten I guess or so, when it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --nine or ten when it started. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she talk about what it was like growing up? Speaker 2: I just really--my grandfather was a stern disciplinarian. He believed in everybody working, and so when my mother retired and came to live with us, she said, "I feel like I'm at papa's house 'cause it's always something to do. You just don't sit around and do nothing." So he was a strong--he, he encouraged a good, strong work ethic. And so they all have a good, strong work ethic. Story_ID: 658576 Speaker 1: Now what were your mother's aspirations when she grew up? What did she wanna-- Speaker 2: Well she left there and moved to Niagara Falls [New York] because my grandfather's brother got into it with a white person. Don't know what happened, but he had to leave Texas. And so she just left and moved to Niagara Falls. She worked for the aircraft industry there because you know the men were at war [World War II, WWII] during that era. So-- Speaker 1: So did she go by herself? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather's brother moved there and then my uncles were there. And then she moved there. So she had family there; she just didn't go independently. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She just didn't strike on her own and go independently. There was a family network there, uncle, brothers and then sister, a sister moved there. Speaker 1: So this is--we hear this story a lot too, where somebody's relative gets in trouble with white people around something and the best alternative is to get out of there. Speaker 2: Get out of dodge. Speaker 1: If they can, you know. And so they apparently had the means. Now did they own their own land in Texas? Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: So what happened to the land when-- Speaker 2: We still, it's still in the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we still own the land. Speaker 1: But the family just left it. Speaker 2: Well my uncle manages it. My grandfather [Rodger's maternal grandfather, James Simmons], you know my grandfather still was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right Speaker 1: So it was just-- Speaker 2: It's still there. And my uncle who's the last of the thir- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) An uncle had to leave you're saying. Speaker 2: My grandfather's uncle. Speaker 1: Okay, grand- okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather's uncle. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And so now the land is still in the family and my mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] has--there's one surviving brother [Marscine Simmons], the youngest of the thirteen children, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So she goes to Buffalo [New York]-- Speaker 2: Niagara Falls. Speaker 1: Niagara Falls, I'm sorry, around--which is close by. It's like 1940, '41 [1941]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 1940, '41 [1941], 'cause I was born in '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay so she's working a government job, and. Speaker 2: Right, and working in the plant, doing the labor, being on the line. Speaker 1: Right, and that's something that happened then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Union, Union Carbide [Union Carbide Corporation] or something like that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 658577 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side and I'll try to get them together. So what is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's the side I don't know because my parents divorced, my parents were not, pardon me. My parents were not married. And it was a domestic violence situation and my mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] had to leave Niagara Falls [New York] and move to--come back home, come back to Texas. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: I'm gonna say it's Robert Burney [ph.], but family folklore said that's really his name, it was a family member's name, a brother's name that he assumed. So I really don't know. I do remember seeing him. I remember one time I was sick and I stayed in Niagara Falls with my mother's brother, Napoleon Simmons and his wife Everlena [Everlena Brackens Simmons]. So I remember one time my aunt had to leave to go to the grocery store and she said, "Do not open this door." And sure enough I opened the door and it was my dad. He came by and I opened it. And fortunately my aunt came home and it was one of those situations where the relatives, he was no good and the relatives did not want to have us--wanted me to have anything to do with him. So all I know about him is just folklore and I have not tried to research because of the, the domestic violence situation. Speaker 1: And it--he said his name was Robert-- Speaker 2: Burney. Speaker 1: Burney, B-- Speaker 2: B-U-R-N-E-Y. But I don't know if that's fact or fiction or, or what. Because the family says that wasn't really his name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. And what I--the scar--I went through his pocket one time and it was a razorblade in it and I cut my wrist, my right wrist. So when I was growing up--to know my left from my right I will always look at my right wrist, so that's all I know about him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my mother moved to Texas, she married. So I was raised by my stepfather Arthur Scruggs [ph.]. Story_ID: 658578 Speaker 1: Okay stepfather is Arthur Scruggs [ph.]. And, and was he from Texas? Speaker 2: Yes, he was from Texas, Coldsprings [Coldspring, Texas], kind of north and east of Houston [Texas], and they met in Houston. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they both worked as domestics. By this time my mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] had come back to Texas and the job opportunities were limited, so they both worked as domestics. He worked for a prominent family that owned a grocery store chain, he was the chauffeur and butler. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then later my mother worked in a home for children; she was a cook and house mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: I think they were working in the same Jewish neighborhood in Houston. Speaker 1: Okay. So they both worked for the--a Jewish family? Speaker 2: Yes. Two different families, but they both worked for Jewish families. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you think about--so you did meet your father that one time, your biological father [Robert Burney (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and lived with him. Speaker 1: Did you? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they, they were not married, so we lived together. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in--this is-- Speaker 2: In Niagara Falls [New York]. All this is in Niagara Falls. Speaker 1: Okay. So how old were you when they--when your mother left? Speaker 2: My mother left I think about four or five, somewhere in there. Then I came to Texas. But I did not want to stay. So I came back and I lived with my mother's brother, Napoleon Simmons and his wife Everlena Simmons [Everlena Brackens Simmons]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, so she sent you away first. Is that what-- Speaker 2: I went with her. Speaker 1: You went with her, okay. So you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I came back. Speaker 1: This is 1949 I guess or so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: About four, you were about four or five years old? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 658579 Speaker 1: All right back to Texas, okay, all right. So well when you think about your mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs], your biological father [Robert Burney (ph.)], your stepfather [Arthur Scruggs (ph.)], and you think about their attitudes, their sense of humor, what they were interested in. Personality, what they looked like, walked and talked like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I look like my mother and her family. And when you see pictures of me with my cousins, we all look just alike. So of course I gravitated to the maternal side because that's the only side I know. Story_ID: 658580 Speaker 1: Now do you have siblings? Speaker 2: No. My mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] miscarried, but no siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right. Well can you tell us--now you grew up in-- Speaker 2: I stayed, lived in Niagara Falls [New York] until I was ten. Moved to Texas at age ten. Speaker 1: I thought you moved at four or five, but they, they split up when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When my mother escaped the domestic violence, we came to Texas but I didn't like it so I came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: You went back. Did you stay by yourself? I mean with, with your father [Rodgers' biological father, Robert Burney (ph.)]? Speaker 2: When I came back, a relative brought me back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, a relative came to get me because my uncle married a woman from Silsbee, Texas which is not too far from Newton, Texas. So her sister brought me back. Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived with your uncle in, in Niagara-- Speaker 2: In Niagara Falls, Uncle Nate, Uncle N-A-T-E, Napoleon Simmons, right Uncle Nate and his wife Everlena [Everlena Brackens Simmons]. So they're--and actually growing up we lived right across the street from them. So growing up I was at--they were my babysitters. I was there. I spent more time with them than I did in my home because my mother was working. So I spent more time with my aunt and uncle. Story_ID: 658581 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest, yes I had this other uncle in Niagara Falls [New York], Uncle Alcie, spelled like Alice [Alcie Simmons]. And my uncles worked at the theater, the Strand [Strand Theatre, Niagara Falls, New York] and the Cataract [Cataract Theatre, Niagara Falls, New York]. And they were like two theaters and there was just a hallway that you would go through. And so I would go to--my uncle was off on Tuesday. He would pick me up and we would go fishing, we would go to Buffalo [New York], we would do another, a number of things. And then also because--and the theater, the Strand and the Cataract were my babysitters. It was like a projection room that you would walk from one theater to the other. And so I remember seeing Marilyn Monroe when she did a test screen for the movie 'Niagara.' I remember seeing 'From Here to Eternity' not knowing the storyline, but of course I remember those things. Then I was named after my Uncle Alcie's wife. Her name was Emma [ph.] and she worked there in the lounge. So the movie theater was my babysitter and to this day I love popcorn, I'm a popcorn-aholic because you know I was just raised there in the theater. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So, so I guess you saw a lot of movies. Speaker 2: Yeah and I still--I watch movies. I, I love movies. So yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And do you remember Niagara Falls itself? Did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah because I go back. I used to go back up until my uncle passed away. And the story I was telling you about when we had--when we moved to our larger location, Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] moved to its larger location at 230 Wynnewood [Village], we were having--we had the opportunity to have [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan. Well they wanted to send her there that Saturday the day before Father's Day and I always spent Father's Day with my uncle in Niagara Falls at that time. So I talked to my friend in Houston [Texas] who had a bookstore into hosting her on a Saturday and let me have Terry on a Tuesday. And so yeah, yeah my child's been there, my husband [Mederick Rodgers], both of my children [Candace Rodgers and Derrick Rodgers] have been there, so yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you have strong ties in Niagara. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah in our old home there, exactly. And we lived about a mile from the Canadian bor- from the whirlpool side of the Canadian border. So we could walk from our house to Canada. But of course the pretty side, we would have to take the bus downtown to go to that. But we could walk and I often--on holidays, my uncle and I would walk across the border. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah for those who've never been to Niagara Falls, the Canadian side is the picturesque side. 'Cause the American side you're looking--as the water's running away from you towards the--over the falls. And the Canadian side, you can see them coming ov- the falls coming down. Speaker 2: Right. But you wanna enter it from the American side because that's where all the real touristy attractions. Of course there are things on the whirlpool side. You can wear--ride the cable, the basket across and what have you. But all the action is on the other side, rainbow side. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And rainbow because you know when the haze--when the mist comes up it makes a rainbow. Ride the Maid of the Mist and all that good-- Speaker 1: Right, right, right, yeah. Was there a, like a good size black community in Niagara Falls? Speaker 2: Yes, and we were members of New Hope Baptist Church [Niagara Falls, New York] and I was baptized there with my good friend, Gloria Jean Anderson [ph.]. And during that era, my uncle didn't drive so we took taxis. But we were very close friends with the Anderson family. And Mr. Anderson had a vegetable station wagon that he would bring around and sell vegetables. And then on Juneteenth continuing that tradition in Niagara Falls, we would go to St. Catharines Island [sic. St. Catharines] in Canada to celebrate, observe Juneteenth. 'Course I really didn't know what was happening, but that's what we did. Story_ID: 658582 Speaker 1: That's interesting. So you do Juneteenth. Now did you do June- Juneteenth is a Texas kind of a holiday (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and everywhere where Texans move, they observe Juneteenth. California, Denver [Colorado], wherever Texans move they observed Juneteenth, even in--it's observed in Ghana, West Africa. I've been there, I just happened to be there one time for Juneteenth, and not necessarily the person who organized it, the American who organized it was from Texas. But we take our traditions wherever we move. Speaker 1: Yes. Now this is--it's interesting 'cause there was a time, and I've had to do some research to find this out. There was a time when African American communities all over the United States celebrated emancipation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They did it, and they did it in my hometown of Dayton [Ohio]. I've seen old papers where the Emancipation Day celebrations. And why we stopped doing that, I have no idea (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I've been to Buffalo. Like when I would go, Juneteenth happened to fall during Father's Day weekend. So I've been to Juneteenth celebration in Buffalo, New York many times because we would fly into Buffalo and then rent a car and drive to Niagara Falls [New York]. Speaker 1: But it just seems like Texas has kept--the Texans have kept this tradition alive of celebrating the emancipation. Speaker 2: Right. And it is a state holiday as well. So yes we have kept it alive. Speaker 1: But other places for some reason they dropped-- Speaker 2: Now you know in Florida it's May 20th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But yes, wherever Texans are, they tend to cel- I've been to. Speaker 1: I know they--it's celebrated again in Ohio and it's just celebrated in Illinois now again. But at some point people stopped doing--they stopped--they didn't call it Juneteenth way back in the day in these other places, but they stopped celebrating Emancipation Day and I don't under- it's one of the puzzles. You know I have to do more research to find out why we would abandon such an obvious cause to celebrate. Speaker 2: Well you know perhaps we're not passing it on. Things continue if we pass it on from one generation to the next. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And we have to do that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the reason for it though, I, I still don't get why we would stop passing that on, of all things, you know. That meant so much at the time. Story_ID: 658583 Speaker 1: So here we are. So St. Catharines Island [sic.], though, now this is the place where Harriet Tubman would bring people that she brought out of slavery out of Maryland. She'd go all the way up to New York. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And she'd take them to St. Catharines, Canada. Speaker 2: Right, but see as a child I didn't know that. But I just know that that's where we went. Speaker 1: Okay. So is there a, is there a black community in St. Cath- I guess I, well I know there is actually. Speaker 2: Right. And then in other parts of Canada, you know Toronto [Canada] and what have you because that's part of that migration north. Speaker 1: So when you were young going there, nobody mentioned Harriet Tubman? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They didn't? Speaker 2: If they did you know, I was ten and so if they did you know that just went over my head. Speaker 1: Well they, they weren't mentioning it 'cause we mention these things for children, for the sake of children so they can pass it along, you know. I mean just think if you were going, you would tell somebody now 'cause you know. Speaker 2: Right, and my daughter [Candace Rodgers] lives in Dover, Delaware now. So last year--well she went to school on the Eastern Shore. She got her master's degree there. So leaving from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] traveling to--she went to University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Eastern Shore, yeah that's where Harriet Tubman-- Speaker 2: So you see I would always see the road signs, Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad. So last year I had an opportunity to actually go to the museum [Harriet Tubman Museum and Educational Center] in Cambridge, Maryland I think it is. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Douglass [Frederick Douglass] and Tubman, Eastern Shore. Speaker 2: Right, and there, there are a lot of landmarks. So when I go back to Dover, I plan to visit those sites because I go to museums everywhere I go and try to get more information to enhance what we're doing here at the Dallas Civil Rights Museum [Dallas, Texas]. Story_ID: 658584 Speaker 1: So what school did you start at in Can- in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Niagara Falls [New York]? Speaker 1: Niagara Falls, yeah. Speaker 2: 13th Street elementary school [13th Street School, Niagara Falls, New York], and I would walk to school. And then we moved to another side of town and then I went to Central, Center Street Elementary School [sic. Center Avenue School, Niagara Falls, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you like school? Speaker 2: I did. But you know school really didn't come together for me 'til I moved to Texas and to this day I remember my first fifth grade teacher, Ruby Carbon [ph.], and my first principal there at Piney Point Elementary School [Houston, Texas], Frankie Anderson. Because they were the first black teachers I ever had. Speaker 1: Oh, so you didn't have black teachers in Niagara Falls. Speaker 2: Niagara Falls, right. And we were very close friends with families there. For example, we know the first fire, black firefighter, the, the Danny Thomas [Daniel Thomas] family, somebody in his family. And the very first black operator, his wife Dorothy Thomas [Dorothy Johns Thomas]. So and then we knew the first bus driver, black female bus driver. So no, we did not. I mean it was an integrated situation, and I honestly can't remember having a black teacher in elementary school in Niagara Falls. Speaker 1: So the, the school in Niagara Falls was integrated. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. It was--everything was totally integrated. Speaker 1: So the majority white students-- Speaker 2: Yes, mostly Italians, Polish, what have you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then of course the center of our community was the church [New Hope Baptist Church, Niagara Falls, New York]. And then there was Center Avenue community center. And I'd go there for dance classes or different activities. Story_ID: 658585 Speaker 1: So now what prompted the move back to Texas? Speaker 2: Well my mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] married and she wanted me to come and, you know, the children had the decision. And every child wants to live with her mother. So that's what brought me back to Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. So you come and you're in the fifth grade, ten. And now what was the name of that school again? I mean the one in Texas that you came-- Speaker 2: Piney Point Elementary [Piney Point Elementary School, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 1: Piney Point. Speaker 2: Frankie Anderson was the principal and Ruby Carbon [ph.] was my fifth grade teacher. And talking about emancipation, we had this radio show. And we weren't--our, our school was portables. And so she put up this butcher block paper around and we had this radio program. And I was to say Emancipation Proclamation. I could not say Emancipation Proclamation to save my life. But that inspired me and so I collected a lot of memorabilia, books and what have you about Emancipation Proclamation. And then the Reconstruction era is one of my favorite eras. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get this kind of history in Niagara Falls [New York]? Speaker 2: No, not really. I got here at--it started with Ruby Carbon, my fifth grade teacher talking about the Emancipation Proclamation. We had a--I don't know what the occasion was, but we had this radio program. It was a--for the elementary students; it wasn't a live radio. But it was a facsimile. Speaker 1: Over the PA system. Speaker 2: Right, right. And so that got me started. And then I would say my freshman year at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] I had a Dr. Lynd [Staughton Lynd], and I was put in a special study group, I guess, class and that just prompted me and you know being there in Atlanta [Georgia] during the civil rights era and living in the dormitory with Ruby Doris Smith [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson]. And she would, she would go away because she was very active in the Civil Rights Movement. I was in a group that was kind of known as hit and run. My daughter [Candace Rodgers] said it should be called sit and run because we would go to the hotels or the cafes and sit and ask to be served; we weren't served. But we would have to leave if they asked us to leave in front of law enforcement. Speaker 1: Okay, now we're gonna get to that. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: I just wanna-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: So we're giving people a preview of what's coming. But go back to the fifth grade, Piney Point. And so you had a favorite teacher there and, and so you, you took a more--more of an interest in school at Piney Point. Speaker 2: Right. Having those role models. You know seeing someone who looks like me, and in Niagara Falls I was sick a lot too. I had pneumonia. I, I missed a lot of school because of my health. Speaker 1: Now that, that's probably the snowiest city in the United States, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean I have pictures of me standing with, you know, maybe the snow fifteen feet high or higher, easily. And then you know we would get the coal for the furnace. That was during the era that we had coal and put the coal in the furnace in the basement, yeah, yeah. Loved playing in the snow. Snowman, making snowmen and what have you, loved it. Speaker 1: Yeah I think there are studies now that coal, burning coal is not really good for you, for you know--but everybody was burning coal then. That coal dust and then the snow and the cold weather and that's probably responsible for a lot of respiratory problems. So now, now where'd you go to high school, was that-- Speaker 2: Worthing in Houston [Texas] from there, Evan E. Worthing High School. Speaker 1: Ebony? Speaker 2: Evan (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Evan, okay. Speaker 2: Evan E. Worthing, W-O-R-T-H-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay, and who was he, was he-- Speaker 2: He was a white philanthropist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he gave scholarships to students all over Houston for sure. During that era I think a full scholarship was like four thousand dollars. But he was a white philanthropist. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 658586 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about domestic abuse as a topic and that people don't--I know they've--a lot of people we've interviewed have seen it and they have not said anything about it, but mostly people have had good, you know, really have fortunate upbringing to tell the truth. So they had like people are willing to helping them and you know. But you were talking about Joe Louis fights and-- Speaker 2: Right. Growing up I remember sitting around the radio listening to Joe Louis fights. It was--growing up in Niagara Falls [New York] was wonderful, good foundation with my aunt [Everlena Brackens Simmons] and uncle [Napoleon Simmons]. Remember walking to the corner drugstore to buy the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], keeping up with the latest news in the black community nationwide. So-- Speaker 1: They had a nationwide distribution. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I walked up to the gro- I walked up to the drugstore every week to get the Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 1: Now were you reading--considering conversation we had earlier, were you reading 'Your History' ['Your History: From the Beginning of Time to the Present'] by J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] in the Courier? Speaker 2: No. I was, you know I was too young to pay any attention to that. But my family wanted the Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about Rogers and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658587 Speaker 1: This--Evan E. Worthing High School [Houston, Texas]. Now did you--were you active in high school, did you run for class office and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I was active. I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I was in the honor society [National Honor Society], I was in the Latin club. That's all I can really recall. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so did you graduate--were you the valedictorian? Speaker 2: Y- I was among the top 10 percent of my class. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and were there any--now this is a all black school, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And who were some of your, your classmates that you remember that-- Speaker 2: Otis Taylor was ahead of me. I think he played for the Kansas City Chiefs. Speaker 1: Yeah, Otis Taylor, the Denver Broncos. I think--no, no the Kansas City Chiefs, you're right. He was with the-- Speaker 2: Kansas City Chiefs. I remember Otis-- Speaker 1: Super--Chiefs that won the Super Bowl [Super Bowl IV]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He was a wide receiver for the Kansas City-- Speaker 2: Right, Otis Taylor. And then Audrey White [ph.] was there. She was I think the valedictorian of her class and she went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so that's--Spelman came and recruited at our school I guess because of her. And that's how I got to Spelman, one reason why I got to Spelman. Speaker 1: Yeah. Otis Taylor was on the first, yeah one of the first American Football League teams to win the Super Bowl. Speaker 2: And then Susan Simmons [ph.], Gwen [ph.], I can't remember her name, Gwen--I can't remember her last name, was our valedictorian I think and Susan Simmons was our salutatorian and we had a very good class. Speaker 1: Okay. So any high school teachers that you remember that were mentors or-- Speaker 2: Barbara Smith [ph.] I think was my homeroom teacher and French teacher. Because when we had our fortieth anniversary, I walked in and she said, "Emma Scruggs [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers]." I mean I think that's amazing with all the students you have to come through. And then I had a couple biology teachers, Mr. Bell [ph.], and they remembered that we were bused from Piney Point [Piney Point Elementary School, Houston, Texas] to Worthing. My family later moved from the southwest of town to the southeast side of town, to Sunnyside [Houston, Texas]. Moved from Piney Point to Sunnyside. But they remembered us. I mean I think it's just amazing that they could recall us. Speaker 1: Okay. Now so what were your aspirations in high school? What did you want to be? Speaker 2: Well I wanted to be a psychiatrist because I had a cousin who was a psychiatrist. My oldest psychiatrist, Dr. Zelda Bowie Elder. In fact she taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. But I remember her coming to Niagara Falls [New York] one time and she w- rented--she was in a convertible. I don't know if she rented it or whatever. But I just was impressed with her, so I wanted to be a psychiatrist like her. Then when I moved to Texas, I was around my other cousins and they wanted to be social workers. So I wanted to go and be a social worker and I wanted to go to AU, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Well you have to be in graduate school. I didn't know that. And that's really how I got to Spelman, because I was trying to get to AU to go to graduate schooling--of social work [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 658588 Speaker 1: So I mean so did you apply to AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well when I applied to, yes and they told me that you know, I would have to go to undergraduate school; that AU was a graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you came out in what, '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1962, all right. And so were there any counselors or other teachers trying to help you find a college? Speaker 2: Yes, we really did have good counseling [at Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas]. Mrs. Cobb [ph.] was her name. We really did have good counselors. People who tried to steer you in the right direction, made sure you were there when all the recruiters, college recruiters came to campus. Speaker 1: Okay. So well tell us how, how, how you end--wound up at Spelman. Now you wanted to go to Atlanta U, but-- Speaker 2: Right, and then they--I think I wrote them and I think they said, "Well you need to go to undergraduate," and Spelman was the school that they recommended. They could have recommended others, but I just remembered Spelman. That's why I attended, my freshman year. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So Spelman College in Atlanta [Georgia]. So you started fall of '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: And I had a good experience there. I was enrolled in Dr. Lynd's class, I can't think of his first name. But let me tell you who was my RA. They didn't call them that, resident assistant, Alice Walker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We lived in Packard Hall and she was very focused, like most college students should be, and I was not as focused as she was. But I did enjoy it, had a very good experience there. I was enrolled in history class, I guess, I wouldn't say advanced placement, but it was not--I don't know if it was something they were trying out, but I really learned a lot about history in that class and then being in Atlanta with the Civil Rights Movement going on and all I got involved in it. Speaker 1: So who were your history instructors? Speaker 2: It was a Dr. Lynd [Staughton Lynd]. I was just in my freshman year, a Dr. Lynd. I can't remember-- Speaker 1: L-Y-N. Speaker 2: I think L-I-N-D [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I need to look through my yearbook. Speaker 1: Okay, L-I-N-D. This-- Speaker 2: And not, and don't get him confused with Howard Zinn. Howard Zinn was a professor there and Alice Walker was studying under Howard Zinn. So Zinn and Lynd not to get confused. Speaker 1: Okay. So the great Howard Zinn was there. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And then my sophomore year I was gonna live in a dormitory that didn't have a house mother, but I didn't go back. Speaker 1: So you're taking American history. And were you involved in, in civil rights at all in Texas? Speaker 2: Well, yes. I, I campaigned for LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson]. And I can remember to this day walking up apartments campaigning for LBJ. I cannot really recall doing any sit-ins, I honestly can't recall. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty- that's '64 [1964]. Now you were already at Spelman when LBJ runs. Speaker 2: No, I was at TSU then, Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. I was just at Spelman '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so just that brief period of time-- Speaker 2: One year, my freshman year. Speaker 1: Okay well let's talk about that year 'cause it's something that--your roommate, was it your roommate was Ruby Doris? Speaker 2: No, we lived in the same dormitory. And Packard Hall was a dormitory that had all class- from freshman to seniors there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so I had a chance to meet Ruby Doris Smith [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson]. She was very involved in the Civil Rights Movement. Sometimes she would be away protesting in other cities. Sometimes she would be in jail. But we really did enjoy her and she would relax. We would play bid whist and talk about the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was very important in the Civil Rights Movement. And when people read about--she's one of the hidden gems in-- Speaker 2: Right and I always mention her. I always mention Ruby Doris Smith. Speaker 1: Right. She's somebody that doesn't get enough--I don't think she gets enough credit for what she did. Speaker 2: She was very devoted to the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Now she became the person in charge of logistics for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in Atlanta and would make sure that they had a fleet of cars prepared that would go down south delivering supplies to people (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was definitely an organizer. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah now she had most of the business aspect of it, you know. What, what was she like? Did you--I mean-- Speaker 2: She was very personable, very outgoing, a vibrant personality. She enjoyed--she was very focused when she was working on civil rights and she knew how to relax. She had--she knew how to balance her live. And I just enjoyed being in her company and being in her presence. Speaker 1: Okay. Now she married somebody named Robinson [Clifford Robinson]. Is that true, was she? Speaker 2: Right, but I don't know about that part. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I just know her, I think she was an upperclassman, I'm not sure. And our interaction was by living in Packard Hall at Spelman that's no longer there. Story_ID: 658589 Speaker 1: All right, so you were there [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] just a, just a year. Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Why didn't you stay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I came back at--during that era. It was expensive. So I decided to come back home. It was a little bit expensive for my par- par- parents [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs and Rodgers' stepfather, Arthur Scruggs (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Okay. So but while you were there now you were a part of the--you said the hit and run group? Speaker 2: Right. We would-- Speaker 1: Sit and run, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. We--it was called hit and run. My daughter [Candace Rodgers] said it should be called sit and run. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what we would do, we would go to restaurants, cafes and sit down, ask for service and they would tell us they could not serve us. And we would just stay there. And then when the--they asked us to leave in front of the policeman, we would leave. So that meant they had to shut down. And we did that in several cafes. We did it at hotels and what have you there. And then of course we marched. And then we would be--we would go to different church services and they say, "Well Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is gonna be here." And that was just to get us there to help fill the congregation. But he was gone somewhere else. But that was a good way to get people there to listen to whatever message. It may not have been delivered by him, but it was delivered by some other civil rights activist. Story_ID: 658590 Speaker 1: You're there one year [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you came back to--and went to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Right and then my family--we have three generations thus far that had attended Texas Southern. My uncle David [David Simmons] attended, it was called something else during that era. But then he got drafted and went to Korea. Then my generation, and then we have a couple following us and we're working on getting a fourth generation there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well tell us about Texas Southern. This is in Houston [Texas], Third Ward is it? Speaker 2: It is in Third Ward. At that time the address was Wheeler Street [sic. Wheeler Avenue]. Texas Southern was just great. Got a--had really good professors and I started taking German. Well I'm the only person in the Texas Southern University history to graduate with a minor in German. I had to go see the dean, Dean Hartshorn [H. Hadley Hartshorn] at the time, to get permission to do that because I had taken all these classes. And I lobbied and got it. I was a psychology major, but I was able to lobby successfully to have German as my minor. And my professor was working on his Ph.D. and you know how your students do all the work. So I would go to Rice University [Houston, Texas] to do research. I used all the libraries around--he said, "Well where did you come up with this?" And so I was able to do the research for him to help him with his thesis, his doctoral thesis he was working on. Speaker 1: Well I know in the early part of the century the, the early--well the early psychiatrist Sigmund Freud of course was German, and then Carl Jung later on, and so. Did this have anything to do with--'cause you took psychology, right, rather than psychiatry? Speaker 2: Right, psychology right, right. I, I needed a foreign language, German was there and it was easy. It was so close to, to me, my experience with reading English. So that's why I took German. It was just something easy to master for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so there wasn't any other reason why. Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: You weren't trying to read documents in German. Speaker 2: Oh, I did for my professor, but it was just that it was easy to comprehend for me. And then I took German all the way through, even took comprehensive German and scientific German. And I met my husband [Mederick Rodgers] there our senior year and we were in German 333 and I had never taken a class in that part of the university. It was like in the basement of the auditorium and he was the first one there, mister on time for everything. And I was the second person to arrive. And I said, "Well are you in here for German 333?" And he said, "Yes." And so then when he worked on his master's [degree], he had to take a language test. And he just used my scientific German books to study for it and that's how he passed it. So I guess it was made in heaven. Speaker 1: I guess so. Now did you have any World War II [WWII] vets in your family that went to--that spent time in Germany at all? Speaker 2: No. My uncle was in Korea and he would always send us souvenirs, the carving knives, thong sandals and I wear thongs to this day because Uncle David [David Simmons] always sent those souvenirs home to us. Story_ID: 658591 Speaker 1: You said you worked on the LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson] campaign in, in-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And I wasn't twenty-one at the time, but I do remember going to apartments campaigning for LBJ. Speaker 1: Now LBJ won the '64 [1964] election by a landslide. One of the most lopsided elections in U.S. history. Barry Goldwater barely got, you know votes to be respectable. Speaker 2: He was such a conservative. Speaker 1: Well look at now (laughter). As we sit here today it seems like conservatives have a lot more political power. In those days yeah, people were afraid that he would, you know, create a nuclear war or something. So was it hard to sell LBJ? Speaker 2: Not at all. I walked to many apartments in Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. And many of them you had to go up corridors, up stairs to them, but I do remember working his campaign as a student. I don't know how I got connected with the campaign. I don't know if it was through the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] or what, but I do remember that. Story_ID: 658592 Speaker 1: Were there any memorable professors or fellow students there? Speaker 2: At Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: During my era? Oh, oh, Kirby Kirksey. I didn't have any classes with him but he was brilliant and he was--I'm not sure where he was from, but he was just brilliant. He had opportunities to go study at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and what have you. Speaker 1: Now what did he teach? Speaker 2: That was a student, he was a fellow student. Speaker 1: Fellow student, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then Dr. Peter Thornton. He was my psychology teacher and he wanted me to go on a fellowship to Germany. But when he found out about it and we applied, we had missed the deadline. But he really did try to encourage me to do that. Then I had a Dr. Bell [ph.] in psychology and he said--he would explain different philosophies or different things and he would say, "Like taking candy away from a baby." That was his tag line all the time. I had a lot of good psychology professors, and those are the ones I remember. Speaker 1: Now were you in school with [HistoryMaker] Alvia Wardlaw, when she's? Speaker 2: No, I'm older than Alvia Wardlaw. But Dr. Wardlaw, Alvin Wardlaw was my husband's [Mederick Rodgers] math teacher and he got both of his math degrees from Texas Southern. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right so-- Speaker 2: But of course I remember John Biggers [John T. Biggers]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now you can't go to TSU and not remember John Biggers or Carroll Simms [Carroll Harris Simms]. Dr. Biggers founded the art department at Texas Southern University. And then Carroll Simms came along later. And the thing about Dr. Biggers, and I think that's why I like art so much, is that the students had to do murals. And they were murals not only in the art department, but in the main buildings. And you would see all this artwork and all these murals and you would become engaged with it. And he had a--I can't think of his student--he had a real good student, but at any rate, and that student's still living. But Dr. Biggers--and then Carroll Simms threw the pots, you know the--he did all the terra cotta and what have you. So as a student at Texas Southern, of course you became engaged with the arts. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right so did--so you lived on campus? Speaker 2: I did not; I lived at home. And then Virgil Kenney was over the testing and counseling department. And I started working in that department as a student. And let me tell you about that. When I was at--I went up there to apply for a job. She said, "Well we don't have any openings." I said, "Well I'll volunteer." So I volunteered for a semester and then when an opening became available, I was hired. But I was just determined to work in that department. And so we did a lot of test--we administered the ACT, the LSAT and other national standardized tests. So you would work as a proctor and then you would get additional pay by doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so did you graduate in what would be '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Six [1966], I graduated in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had a degree in psychology. Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 658593 Speaker 1: What were you gonna do after graduation? Were you gonna--you planned to get a job in psy- as a counselor or something, or? Speaker 2: I did, and I started off in early childhood education. I became an early childhood education teacher and director. And that's why when I go out, I love working with children. So that was my first job after graduation. Then my son [Derrick Rodgers] was born in '68 [1968] and then I went back to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and worked in the counseling and guidance, in the testing office, pardon me, and became the university psychia- psychiatrist, administering tests and what have you. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you did that and so, that was your career then I guess for--I mean that was what-- Speaker 2: Right, and then we moved to Dallas [Texas] in 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So why did you move to Dallas? Speaker 2: My husband [Mederick Rodgers] took a job--at that time it was Southwestern Bell [Southwestern Bell Telephone Company], which later became AT&T [AT&T Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you get another teaching job here in Dallas? Speaker 2: No. When I moved to Texas, I started working at a day center for girls who were adjudicated delinquent. And I was a counselor there. Then I left there and became a social worker for a daycare center in Rhoads Terrace, which is a housing project here in Dallas. And at first it was a half day program that women from Temple Emanu-El [Dallas, Texas] provided childcare services. And then they decided to go full time and when they became full time, they hired a full time director, full time social worker and I did that. And then following that I left and went to graduate school in 1973 and our graduate program was a two year program. So I beca- got a master's of science and social work from the University of Texas at Arlington [Arlington, Texas]. Story_ID: 658594 Speaker 1: Any special teachers or experiences, or, or fellow students or experiences from that? Speaker 2: From UTA [University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas]? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Well my business partner, that's where we met. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas], she was Shirley Woodson [ph.] then. She changed her name to Ashira Tosihwe, but that's where we met. And our program was a two year program. We lived near together and we would go out and hit balls on the tennis court, we were not playing tennis. And then we-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you weren't really playing tennis, but you were hitting the-- Speaker 2: Hitting the balls, right. We were not tennis players. I don't wanna misrepresent. Speaker 1: Now this is the time, sorry to interrupt, but this is when Arthur Ashe beat--he won a major championship during this time. I remember a lot of black people started playing tennis, they got their rackets and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we just lived near tennis courts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were tennis courts in our neighborhood, so it was just a convenient meeting place after she--I would drop off my son [Derrick Rodgers] and she would drop off her daughter. And we knew that we wanted to do something together and it--we both read. And we were members of the National Association of Black Social Workers. And we just knew that we wanted to do something together and so we decided to do books. She would go to conference and bring back books and so that's how Black Images was born. Black Images was really born because I always give books as party favors. And it was my son's ninth birthday, July 9th, 1977. And so I had to go to several stores in what was NorthPark shopping center [NorthPark Center, Dallas, Texas] to come up with ten books for his birthday. And so that was the straw that broke the camel's back. I said this is what we're gonna do. We agreed that this--we, we would do this, launch Black Images bookstore. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you--so I guess you had a way to finance it and, and to get--I mean was it-- Speaker 2: Self-financed. We put our monies where our mouths were and we launched Black Images. Speaker 1: How, how ambitious a project was it and well, what did it take to do it? Speaker 2: Well of course we bought from Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 658595 Speaker 1: I mean well how did you get started? I mean you--so you're gonna start a bookstore. Walk us through how, how you did it-- Speaker 2: Okay. Well by going to the National Association of Black Social Work [sic. National Association of Black Social Workers] convention, we would see books there and books that we liked. And so we started collecting titles, we made a list. We had a mailing list because when we first started, we started off as a mail order book firm. So we had an 8.5 by 11 [inches] that you would fold three times, on the outside was a place to put your address and what have you. We got a post office box, mailing address. And then we did the research, going to the libraries, using the books in print looking for publishers. And then contacting the publishers. Even met with publishers in public places. I can remember meeting with the Random House publisher [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] at, at, at that time Lancaster-Kiest library [Paul Laurence Dunbar Lancaster-Kiest Branch Library, Dallas, Texas]. So getting--writing the publishers, calling the publishers. And then they would have their sales reps to contact us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when we would travel going to Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] and how I really got immersed into it--[HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett was here speaking at a Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] fundraiser. I said, "Well I'm gonna be in Chicago [Illinois]." He said, "Well come by my office," and I did. I went by there, met Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], met him. And I told him about my interest in books. He said, "Well you need to see Basil Phillips." And Basil Phillips was the photo editor and represented the books there, the book division for Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. And then Basil talked me, in two minutes or less, to attending my first American Booksellers [American Booksellers Association] conference which was in Los Angeles [California]. And I registered for it. [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and James Baldwin were the breakfast speakers for the breakfast I attended. I met Tom Feelings' literary agent. Speaker 1: Yeah, Tom Feelings is a great artist. Speaker 2: Great artist. 'Moja Means One' ['Moja Means One: Swahili Counting Book,' Muriel Feelings], 'Jambo Means Hello' ['Jambo Means Hello: A Swahili Alphabet Book,' Muriel Feelings]. Speaker 1: 'Middle Passage' ['The Middle Passage: White Ships/Black Cargo'], his last one. Speaker 2: Right. And so met them and I was sold. And then by going to the convention, I met other publishers. So that was '78 [1978]; we started in '77 [1977], so that was in '78 [1978]. And that's how we got connected with the publishers. Speaker 1: So when you had the mail order business, you just-- Speaker 2: Had a limited number of titles that we carried. Third World Press and some other presses. Speaker 1: And did you like, keep them in a certain room and just in a boxes or something? Speaker 2: In my living room, in my living room at home and then in the--sold books out of the trunk of my car. And by being in Dallas [Texas], Dallas is a great convention city. So there were a number of national black conventions that came here. For example, one year there was a National Medical Association, National Dental [National Dental Association], National Hygienist [National Dental Hygienists' Association], National Nurse Association [National Black Nurses Association], and I forget the other medical. But there were a number of medical conventions here. So we elected to exhibit at the National Medical, then they--I remember one year Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] met here. Oh, and then the Sleeping Car Porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] met here. That was just really great. And a number of sororities met here and fraternities met here. So we would exhibit there. So that's how we were able to grow our business. We both were still (unclear). By this time I was director of human resources for the Visiting Nurse Association [Visiting Nurse Associations of America], and then became a vice president. So this is how we nurtured our business. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is you-- Speaker 2: And grew our business. And then moved it--we opened a flea market in '84 [1984]. And then became full time in 1986. Speaker 1: Okay, so you and Ashira Tosihwe. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So you became full time in '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: Right, in '86 [1986] we started our hours open Tuesday through Sunday. Needed one day off. Speaker 1: Now when did you, when did you acquire the space? I mean the bookstore space [for Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: Well let me back up. We started in the flea market in Wynnewood Village shopping center [Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Opened on Saturday and Sunday. And then in September of 1996 we opened up into about, little less than twelve hundred square feet in Wynnewood Village shopping center. And then in '92 [1992] we moved to about three thousand square feet. Speaker 1: Okay so the first permanent store was in '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In Wynnewood and then in '92 [1992] you moved to a bigger space. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 658596 Speaker 1: Talking off camera about the culture in those days and I remember the in- the interest in black books declining in the late '70s [1970s]. It didn't disappear but it started declining. You said it started to grow here. Speaker 2: I think it grew here simply because we had these people published. [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan, Alice Walker, Walter Mosley. I mean they started, their work started being published. It wasn't that black people didn't read. It's that they were finally being published and the publishers were beginning to recognize that there was an audience. So I think was it. I recall Terry McMillan calling me when 'Mama' came out in 1986 [sic. 1987], and we had just moved there. And she just--she wanted a small stipend to come here. And I said, "Well look, we just moved here. We just don't have the money, you know, to bring you here." So--but she was being published, Walter Mosley, Alice Walker. Of course Toni Morrison. So-- Speaker 1: Now Toni Morrison I guess was kind of leading the pack in those days. Speaker 2: Right, because she was an editor at Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House]. Speaker 1: And now Alice Walker with 'The Color Purple' sold a lot of books. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now these are mass market, I mean publishers, I mean these are black books (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Major publishers, right, right. Speaker 1: Major publishers, yeah. These are white publishes, say that too 'cause a lot of the books in the early '70s [1970s]--at one time we had like forty black publishers publishing mostly poetry, history and stuff. Speaker 2: Right. We ordered from Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois], Black Classic Press [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: That's Paul Coates [W. Paul Coates]. Speaker 2: Paul Coates, and-- Speaker 1: Did you use Mass Incorporated [ph.] out of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Then there was United Brothers and Sisters [United Brothers and United Sisters Communications Systems, Inc.] in Virginia [Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we ordered from them. Speaker 1: Africa World Press [Trenton, New Jersey], Casa Hoon [ph.] up in-- Speaker 2: Yeah of course Casa Hoon (Unclear), yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So I mean there were certain. Speaker 2: And Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] out of New Jersey [East Orange, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Just Us, yes, yes ma'am. So we had like maybe-- Speaker 2: And then we ordered J.A. Rogers' [Joel Augustus Rogers] books from his wife in Florida. Speaker 1: Helga M. Rogers, yes. Speaker 2: Yes, so we ordered those. And, and that would--Third World and Helga M. Rogers books were the major publishers that we ordered from, and Black Classic, those three. Speaker 1: Now did you carry Dr. Ben's [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] books? Speaker 2: We carried Doc Ben's books and we later got them through when Black Classic Press started printing them. We didn't carry-- Speaker 1: They were expensive to get, I know. Speaker 2: Yeah, so we started carrying them. And of course we--remember Ishakamusa Barashango? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: We carried his books and we had him here in the store many times. We did a lot of self-publishing--I think that was our strong suit. For example, J. California Cooper's book was published by Alice Walker's press called Wild Trees Press [Anderson Valley, California] and that was 'A Piece of Mine.' And so we carried that. And then California, she was born in California but she moved to Texas to adjust her lifestyle and to write. So when she came here, she came here in '87 [1987] and we connected. And then I had a friend who was a trade rep with Random House, Evelyn Cotton Hubbard. And so she, through our connection, she was able to get Random House to start carrying, publishing J. California Cooper. So that was in '87 [1987] 'cause I was very much pregnant then. Story_ID: 658597 Speaker 1: Now how--at this point, say in 1987, how was your store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] doing? Were you making a profit? Speaker 2: Not quite, we weren't there; we were moving in that direction. But the thing is being a independent bookseller, you could hand sell books. So I was able to develop so many fans for J. California Cooper by hand selling that very first book 'A Piece of Mine,' so that when she got picked up by the other publishers, people had an appetite for everything that she wrote. Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by hand selling? Speaker 2: You walk into the bookstore and say, "Oh, I'm looking for something to read." I say, "Bam, here, I suggest that you read this book." And so I'll recall, "The last time you came in, you read J. California Cooper's book, 'A Piece of Mine.' She has a new book out. Or you may like something else written by Tina Ansa McElroy [sic. Tina McElroy Ansa]." So that's what I'm talking about with hand selling. And then I recall what you bought the last time and make other recommendations. And then people would come in and say, "Well I don't read romance." I would move them over to mysteries, "Well try Walter Mosley." You know these people say, "I don't read fiction." And I say, "Well you know real good fiction writers talk about history," like Alice Walker's 'Meridian,' you know it discusses the whole Civil Rights Movement. Two books I would always recommend, 'Autobiography of Malcolm X' ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and 'Coming of Age in Mississippi' by Anne Moody for autobiographies. So try to broaden your horizon. And for the longest though, do you know that I did not carry Iceberg Slim and Donald Goines. People would open the door, they'd say, "Well do you have it?" I said, "No," they would make a U turn. Later I found out those same people read Toni Morrison and other people. They had a diverse reading. Speaker 1: Now did you think--now those are the titles printed by Holloway House [Holloway House Publishing Company] out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Yes, we carried those. Speaker 1: And Iceberg Slim was a pimp. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Donald Goines. And they're the precursors to this urban fiction that's out, Vickie Stringer and other artists that are out. Speaker 1: Now did you just feel it was just something that was--would drag the community down or was that your--why you didn't carry it, or-- Speaker 2: I didn't it was--I just thought that you needed to read something different, you know, on a little higher level. Speaker 1: That's what I'm referring--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I just thought you needed to read something different and I was being biased. My biases were showing. And like I said, people who read Iceberg Slim and Donald Goines also read Toni Morrison and I love Toni Morrison. So I said, "Okay." Speaker 1: So this is often, correct me if I'm wrong here. But I think it's often the case that people that founded black bookstores have an ideological reason for it. They wanna educate the community. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: It's not just about making money, so-- Speaker 2: Right. It's informative because my favorite quote is by Marcus Garvey, "People without knowledge of their history is like a tree without roots." So we can really learn so much from history. And I tell you something else I didn't carry. I didn't carry Bibles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I finally said, "Okay Emma [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers], you missing a dollar here, so get some Bibles in here." Speaker 1: Did that have an ideological base too? I mean you didn't--you thought maybe there was just too much into-- Speaker 2: Another bias, yeah. There's more--everybody has a Bible in their home. You--so I just wanted you to broaden your horizon, but if I needed to start there, that's where I was gonna start. And of course we carried that--the Bible that was edited by Cain Hope Felder. So we carried that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you--let's see, did you carry periodicals? Speaker 2: We did, but that--the margin for periodicals is super slim. So we did, Jet, Ebony, all the major magazines. Speaker 1: Black-- Speaker 2: Yeah, all the major, but the margin for that was very slim, so-- Speaker 1: Essence, Encore. There are quite a few that came out in those days. Speaker 2: Upscale. Speaker 1: Upscale, yeah that-- Speaker 2: Emerge. Speaker 1: They emerged and now they're gone. Speaker 2: They're all gone, yeah. So we carried all of those. But the margin is so slim on that. But I'll tell you what else we--and back to self-publish, we also carried Neely Fuller's book. Remember Neely Fuller [Neely Fuller, Jr.]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: 'Course we sold Frances Cress Welsing, 'The Isis Papers' ['The Isis Papers: The Keys to the Colors']. Speaker 1: Yeah Neely Fuller's book is called 'The Code' ['The United Independent Compensatory Code/System/Concept: A Compensatory Counter-Racist Code'], right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It was a black code of conduct. And he was-- Speaker 2: For independent thought or something like that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He was a security guard and wrote this great book, so yeah we carried it. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was discovered by Frances Cress Welsing, right, and (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 658598 Speaker 1: So we carried a lot. And then again with self-published authors moving up to more modern times, we carried Kimberla Lawson Roby's book 'Behind Closed Doors.' And then I think Paul Coates [W. Paul Coates] published that book later and then she got picked up by a major publisher. We carried Victoria Christopher Murray's book 'Temptation.' And her classic story is that she had never been to Arkansas. She was living in California at the time. She had never been to Arkansas and she went to Arkansas for a signing. And she went there and she went to the bookstore and saw her book there and she said, "Well how did you get this book?" And so Garbo [Garbo Watson Hearne] with Pyramid Books [Pyramid Art, Books and Custom Framing] in Little Rock [Arkansas] said, "Well Emma [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers] told me to carry this book." And so she said, "It's a great book." So I really liked discovering authors before they went national, before they were picked up by a major publisher, like Parry EbonySatin Brown wrote 'The Shirt off His Back.' That's another self-published book. But I like hand selling books and--even books that are published by major publishers, like Derrick Bell's 'Faces at the Bottom of a Well' ['Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Permanence of Racism']. You could not walk in the store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] and I knew you were a good customer--you, you--I wouldn't let you out of the store unless you bought that book and everybody really loved it. It's a good book because he has a number of essays in it. And I like the essay about the spaceship where you make the bargain, where they make the bargain to move African Americans to space. Speaker 2: That's 'Space Traders' ['The Space Traders']. Speaker 1: 'Space Traders,' that's it. I loved that story. So-- Speaker 2: Did you ever see the little movie they made of it ['Cosmic Slop']? Speaker 1: I did see it, I did see it. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume was in it and some other people, but. Speaker 1: They did a good job with it. Speaker 2: Yeah, so this is the kind of--yeah, did you ever have Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Yes, let me tell you. The first time we had Derrick Bell, his plane was late, everybody came and said, "Okay well we'll leave." They came back for him. We had Derrick Bell several times because Geneva [Geneva Crenshaw] who is his alter ego, is the alter ego in his books, is really one of his students, Bernestine Singley who was--went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and was here at the time and so, oh, yeah, we garnered a lot of business for Derrick Bell. Lot of--big audience. Story_ID: 658599 Speaker 1: So the--there was--and, I guess it was true down here too. There was a re-, kind of a re- a bookstore golden age I guess around, around 1990. It parallelled the rap age for some reason. Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that was a peak period and really I think in '92 [1992] even though we continued, I could kind of see a transition. Because at this point, black history and black books had become--taken on by Corporate America. So they had given their stamp of approval. So this--and plus there was more marketing and promotion so people could find out about all of these writers out here. And so they, then they started coming into the bookstore and then other stores like Barnes and Nobles [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.], started gradually carrying the books. Speaker 1: They had a whole section African American interest or whatever it was, all the books. Speaker 2: Right, right. And I really liked them having that section. I like it to be integrated, but I like it both ways because if you're coming there and you're just focused and you wanna get a book by Alice Walker, Walter Mosley, Terry [HistoryMaker Terry McMillan], Toni Morrison, you can go there and find it. And then I like it integrated in the rest of the literature as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you--the 'Malcolm X' film came out in '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. That was--had a tremendous impact on black bookstores, at least where I--'cause of the republication of the autobiography then at least ten or twelve other books about Malcolm X from various people that knew him. Speaker 2: We--I tell you who published those books. Britt--I forget, it's--they carried--they had the rights to all of Malcolm X books, so we started ordering from them. I can't remember the name of that press, South End Press or some press like that; I really can't remember. But we did carry all--you're right. But we always had 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley]. And when we were in the small space, we had Malcolm X all the way in the back of the store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] and then we would have the nationalists come in and say, "Why you have him all the way in the back?" "That's to get you through the store. You need to see what else we have in the store besides books by Malcolm X." Story_ID: 658600 Speaker 1: Also another observation I had from those days, I used to manage a bookstore at one time, was that there was a gender difference. The men would go towards history and political science, and women would go to fiction. It was almost 90 percent true. Somebody came in they'd go one, one would go one way and one group would go the other way. Speaker 2: And that's pretty much true, I think that's still true today. But like I said, all good fiction writers will have history in it, in their works. Speaker 1: And there are men that read fiction too, but it seemed like that was the--just as soon as they came in you knew where they were gonna go. This side of the store or the other side of the store. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And we would win men over with some of the works by J. California Cooper 'cause she's just a great writer. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan's 'Disappearing Acts,' a number of men I know read that book before 'Waiting to Exhale' [Terry McMillan] came out. Speaker 2: Yeah, and wasn't there some repercussion about that, showing men in a negative light or something like that? And what I wanted to tell them is that you talking about balance. This book is published, but there are a lot of other books out there, so don't, you know just don't attack this particular author. Speaker 1: Well I know 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple,' Alice Walker] was attacked for bashing men. Speaker 2: Right, right. And that's one book out of the hundreds of books that have been written by African American women. So that gave us an opportunity to expose them to other authors. Speaker 1: And then there was a book ['The Blackman's Guide to Understanding the Blackwoman'], remember Shahrazad Ali? Speaker 2: We had Shahrazad Ali in the store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. Oh god, that was an experience. And one time when we had her, our space wasn't large enough to accommodate her, so I had her in a vacant space in the shopping center and she tried to read me the riot act about that. But you know we got press for her and everything, oh yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a sensation for-- Speaker 2: Well you know she was on Donahue ['The Phil Donahue Show'], you can't beat television. And I-- Speaker 1: Oprah's show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. Speaker 2: And we had--oh, she lives--[HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage here and she said, she was invited to be on 'Sally Jessy Raphael' show and she had to decide if she was gonna do that or not, because those shows tend to sensationalize everything. And she decided to go on and do it just so that people would know about her works, and you can reach a larger audience that way. So she did do it but during that era, everything was sensationalized. Generally negative things were brought out, like it is now, about black books that were out, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah Shahrazad Ali's book basically bashed black women from what I understand. It may be somebody that disagrees with that, but it--as kind of cunning, you know, manipulators of situations-- Speaker 2: It was the answer to 'The Color Purple.' It was the opposite of 'The Color Purple.' A chance to market it--here's a black female author who's written a book that talks about men from a positive view and says--tells you how women should cater to men and what have you. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if it was that positive about men as it was negative about black women, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 658601 Speaker 1: Some of that--but that was a sensation at one time in the, that same '90s [1990s] period when rap came out and it seemed like young people were reading more, than, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well the thing is, it was being published. That's what we have to think about like for [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers was a young adult, that's what we called it, young readers' authors. We had Virginia Hamilton. And then Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc., East Orange, New Jersey] started publishing books for that age group as well. Trying to recall the author's name. I have them pic- I have the books pictured and where they were in the store, but I just can't remember all the authors' names. Speaker 1: People like John Steptoe and there were just a lot of people, Carol Baird [ph.] and I don't know. But there were a lot of children's literature. Speaker 2: Right, and then Jacqueline Woodson, we started carrying her works for children. And then we carried everything; we just didn't carry fiction. Speaker 1: Now did you have a children's section? Speaker 2: Oh yes, a strong children's section. And then I recall I had one customer who moved here from--we had one customer who moved here from New York [New York], and she was a copy editor, and she was a Muslim. And she loved--and she home schooled her children. She loved our store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] because she said when she lived in New York she would have to go to this store for the--buy her Muslim literature, she had to go to this store to buy her children's literature, and this store to buy fiction. And, and coming to a black bookstore where she could have everything under one roof, she really did like that. Story_ID: 658602 Speaker 1: Now did you have a roomy kind of store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]? I mean-- Speaker 2: A kind, a what? Speaker 1: A roomy--was it--was it spacious? Speaker 2: Yes, but we filled it almost to the brim. But we believed in keeping you involved in the inventory. So you step here and you say, "Oh, okay I discovered this," this section of the store. Speaker 1: Did you serve coffee and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. Because I'm not a coffee drinker and everybody wanted us to serve coffee, but you know liquids and paper really don't mix. So that's why. But people really wanted us to, but I'm not a coffee drinker and I think Ashira [Ashira Tosihwe] did, but no. Speaker 1: Okay. I know that in the early '90s [1990s] there was discussion already in the press about large booksellers gobbling up the independent, smaller bookstores, even white independent smaller bookstores. Speaker 2: Actually because all the--many of the fixtures we had in our stores, we bought from independent bookstores that went out of business. House of Books in North Dallas [Dallas, Texas], Shakespeare's [Shakespeare Books, Dallas, Texas] on lower Greenville [Avenue]. Her dad built her shelves and I used to go over there and tell her--and the minute she decided to close she called me. So we had a number of fixtures that we brought from other stores. And in fact when we closed, Pan African, we gave our fixtures to Pan African Connection [Dallas, Texas] that's still operational. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, 'cause it was a general alarm 'cause at that time you had like even the bookstores were buying each other. B. Dalton [B. Dalton Bookseller] is out of business now. Speaker 2: Or they would open up across the street from each other to drive each other out of business, which is crazy. And you had pockets of Dallas [Texas] where there were no bookstores. So you needed to have them, rather than directing them diagonally across the street from each other. And then the chains--like Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] started carrying the books. And so that kind of affected our business. I'll never forget we--I also sold books for required reading in public schools and colleges and community colleges. And this young man came in to buy a book that was required for school. And this was during the time when gasoline was high. He said, "Well you mind if I go to Barnes and Nobles [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] in Cedar Hill [Texas] to buy it?" I said, "You got gas?" He made a U turn and came back and bought the book. Speaker 1: Now where were you, you were located in a shopping center. Speaker 2: Wynnewood Village shopping center [Dallas, Texas], which is just five miles south of downtown Dallas. And that would make it, it was a great location because you could take the bus there, take a taxi there if you were visiting from out of town. We had a number of people who would come and shop on their lunch hours, judges, attorneys, people working at city hall, people working at the county building. Anybody working downtown, so it was a convenient location. Just five miles south of downtown Dallas, right off of the interstate, I-35 [Interstate 35]. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have like convenient parking and that sort? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were head in parking. This was not a mall, this was a village where you could park right in front of the store and keep going and then get back on the freeway. Speaker 1: So it was a place where you could just--yeah, convenient and the neighborhood was okay in terms of-- Speaker 2: Right, it's, it's one of the oldest shopping centers in Dallas and it's that village motif which is--shopping centers are going to now where you can park right in front. And there's other ancillary parking, but it was very convenient for shoppers. Story_ID: 658603 Speaker 1: You were open until 2006, right? You opened in '77 [1977] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, we closed on December 31st, 2006. And I really should have made at least January 1, 2007 and that way we could have said we were open for thirty years. We really had thirty--we opened in October or November of '77 [1977]. So we really did have thirty, October--falls, okay. But if I just--we just didn't think to just carry it over one more day and then the thirty years would have computed that it was from '77 [1977] to 2007. Speaker 1: Well people recognize that anyway, for thirty years. It's--what would be the--well, I guess, what would be some of the--what would you consider the highlights of the bookstore? Speaker 2: One highlight-- Speaker 1: Black Images bookstore [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: When we had Connie Briscoe who is deaf, who was deaf at the time. We had her in the store and she traveled with an interpreter. But we hired our own interpreter for our audience, and that was just so moving to have the talking and the non-talking audience there. And of course highlights like with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones. Speaker 1: What's Connie Briscoe's book? Speaker 2: 'Big Girls Don't Cry.' Speaker 1: And she's deaf? Speaker 2: She's deaf, yeah. She's deaf at the time. She inherited something from her father's side of the family. She could kind of talk, but she spoke through an interpreter. And she talked, you know she would talk, but it was that sound but I think since then she's had the surgery and she's adopted a child and had the surgery for the child as well. But 'Big Girls Don't Cry' is one that I think of off the top of my head. Story_ID: 658604 Speaker 1: And then another event that I recall was when Black Classic Press [Baltimore, Maryland], Paul Coates [W. Paul Coates] published Walter Mosley's-- Speaker 2: 'Gone Fishin'.' Speaker 1: 'Gone Fishin'.' And he launched the tour at Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. And so he said, "Well," and he did it because when he was getting ready to buy this big equipment, this IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] equipment for to publish, I sent him a check. It was a small check, maybe $100. But that was from me and my husband [Mederick Rodgers]. He never cashed it. He framed that check because it encouraged him. It showed that I had faith in him and hope. He never cashed that check. And we're good friends now. So that was a moment for him to bring Walter's first tour for 'Gone Fishin'' here. Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul Coates was one of the legendary black booksellers and publishers and people know his son Ta-Nehisi Coates who works for The Atlantic monthly. But yeah, somebody's been around. He was a Black Panther [Black Panther Party] and more (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right and let me tell you when I had David Hilliard, we had the local people, Panthers here. But there was one who came in and he was not disruptive, but he was causing some confusion. I got on the phone, I called Paul Coates. He put David Hilliard on the line and that squashed that right then and there. But this Panther here, he was a--late to the Panther Party and I guess trying to show his authority or whatever. David Hilliard coming to this territory and what have you. I got on the phone with Paul and the rep who brought him around said, "Oh, you're marvelous." But he was just causing some contention unnecessarily. So I called Paul. Paul talked and we handled that, so it moved forward. Speaker 2: Was that somebody from the New Black Panther Party? Speaker 1: Yeah, from the New Black Panther Party, yeah. So I-- Speaker 2: I've seen that. They challenged the congressman from Chicago [Illinois] in the same way. Speaker 1: And you know Paul and I have been friends from the beginning because he started Black Classic like right after we started Black Images. And I've had to call him for consultation for example when the publisher of Black Enterprise came out with a book. He wanted Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] and it was an event at the Fairmont Hotel [Dallas, Texas] and he wanted Barnes and Noble to handle the event for him. I had ordered the books and he was gonna cancel on me. And I wrote this terse letter and I had Paul read it. "Is that okay?" "Emma [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers], we need to tone this down a little bit." So then I toned it down and got it, and then we were able to have, what's his name, the publisher of Black Enterprise with the pork chop sideburns? You know who I'm talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah. Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Earl Graves. So Paul told me, he said, "Emma, we need to tone it down, tone the letter down." So I was successful in hosting that event. But you know as a black business you have to fight for these things. Same thing happened with me with Kirbyjon Caldwell. He was coming for an event I had been asked to do, then they decided to change. Well I've ordered all these books. Again I, I dealt with it and I was able to be the vendor when he did books at Friendship West Baptist Church [Dallas, Texas] and Hamilton Park United Methodist Church [Dallas, Texas]. But you know I had to fight to be the black book vendor for the black bookstore. Story_ID: 658605 Speaker 1: Now this is--especially when authors started being published by mainstream press and got a lot of attention like for instance [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan. But you never had to fight to get her to come back to your store. Speaker 2: No. In fact we had her in '92 [1992] and then we had her in 2006; never had to fight for her. Speaker 1: 'Cause there have been stories I know, you know. Speaker 2: But you know what? You have to--the thing is you have to get your request in early. Like for [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell, I put my request in early. I lobbied for her. Iyanla Vanzant, I asked her for when she was unknown and she was very faithful in coming to Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. I tried to get these people early, and it's a process. And it's a cumbersome process and you have to be persistent. But we were fortunate--oh and let me tell you another thing. [HistoryMaker] E. Lynn Harris, we had him several times. We sold his book when he was self-published. And then one time the national gay and lesbian, black gay and lesbians [National Coalition of Black Lesbians and Gays] were meeting here and his book was gonna be published, but it was gonna--it was scheduled for publishing later that year. I wrote the publisher and asked him to release it early so we could have it for the event and we were able to get it from Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] early. So we had an early release date, but I called and requested that. I wrote and requested that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you stayed on the case with the publishers. Speaker 2: Right, and the thing is with us being a major bookst- independent bookstore here, the publisher sent trade reps here. So we met with the trade reps. The independent reps and then reps who represented fifty publishers or more. Then we rep--met with single individual reps who just represented one house, Random House, Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], what have you. Story_ID: 658606 Speaker 1: Now you were involved in other activities while the bookstore was going on and one of the ones that you were involved in was shortly after you moved to your biggest site. And that's the ROPP, right, R-O-P-P. Speaker 2: ROPP, Rites of Passage Program for Girls [ROPP for Girls, Inc., Dallas, Texas]. And that was started by Miss Rheta Norman. And I went to their very first graduation service back in 1996. And then my daugh- you have to be entering the sixth grade to enter the program. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] you mean instead of '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: No, '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], okay. Speaker 2: Because yeah, you had to be entering the sixth grade to enter it. And then the second year my daughter [Candace Rodgers] was in that class and she had a graduation service every year. So from sixth through the twelfth grade. So it was a seven year program, yeah it was a seven year program. So I went to the first one and there were a lot of girls. And then my daughter entered the second class, entering it in two thousand--in 1996, '97 [1997], and then graduating, completing when she finished high school in 2006. So it must have been later than that because it's a seven year program. So maybe 2000, maybe 2000; 1999 I think that's when she started it. Story_ID: 658607 Speaker 1: So your daughter [Candace Rodgers] started in 1999 and that's when you got involved with ROPP, right? Speaker 2: Right, '99 [1999] or 2000. And so she was in that class. Speaker 1: And ROPP is R-O-P-P, Rites of Passage project. Speaker 2: There's ROPP for Girls, Inc. [Dallas, Texas], but it stands for Rites of Passage Program for Girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so every year at the conclusion of each year they have a rites of passage ceremony. So the director, the founder, Ms. Rheta Norman, wanted to have a service in an African country since it's based on the rites of passage program that happens in our motherland. So I said, "Well let's make it Ghana," because I had been to Ghana. I went with Congresswoman Barbara Lee [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee] in '92 [1992] and '93 [1993]. And then your tax dollars sent me there in 1996 with the Musta Marketplace [ph.]. So it's an Anglophone country, which means they speak English, and would be easy for our girls to adjust to that. We see the Adinkra symbols all over town. So to me it was a easy, it was the best country to visit, to have a ceremony there. So I was the tour leader. First group went in 2005, then '7 [2007], '9 [2009], '11 [2011]. 'Cause I was a tour leader for those for years for the rites of passage ceremony in Ghana, West Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened with the--over there? What does the group do in Ghana when they get there? Speaker 2: Okay we do a community service project. That's one thing. We've painted schools, we take school supplies, we've done different things in the communities. And then the ceremony--we use several symbols. We use drums because that's how you--that's one gift that we give to the girls to let them know about, you know, this is a talking drum. This is how you continue your culture. We give them a comb because your hair is beautiful and we give them--and the comb is also an Adinkra symbol, a symbol for beauty. We give them literature so they can become acquainted with the Adinkra symbols. Kente cloth of course. So we take them through a ceremony. We give them about seven symbols that signify something in their transition because we're always--have rites of passage from one age to another or from one part of our lives to another. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so at--so it takes like seven years to go through it? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Sixth grade through the twelfth. Speaker 1: Okay, sixth through the twelfth. And so you have the--so you have like alumni now, right? Speaker 2: Right, and I still teach the cultural--when we were getting our--when we were coming back from Ghana in 2009, Miss Rheta said, "You know my cultural history teacher has quit," and I volunteered to be the cultural history teacher for the seventh grade. So every year I do the cultural history class for the seventh graders. Then I recruited a friend to be the genealogy instructor, so, still involved. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And so this has been going on since--I think we have a note that it started in 1988, the organization. Does that sound right? Speaker 2: I think more like '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998], okay, all right. Speaker 2: I think more like '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause they would have had their graduation in '99 [1999]. More like '98 [1998] and just using my daughter as a timeline. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Being in it for seven years. Story_ID: 658608 Speaker 1: Now you were part of a group that established a literary book fair in downtown Dallas [Texas], right? Or, or did you participate in it or help establish it? Speaker 2: Probably participated in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so much has gone on. But I tell you one thing that I was, I was a founding member of The Third Eye. And The Third Eye is a group of enlightenment. And that was in 1996. Remember we were talking about the heyday of black literature? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And we brought in Dr. Na'im Akbar [HistoryMaker Na'im Akbar], Ivan Van Sertima, Ishakamusa Barashango, the man who's currently the director of the history department at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I see him on TV One every morning. Speaker 1: Greg Kimathi Carr. Speaker 2: Greg Carr, yeah. So I was a founding member of that enlightenment group. And so we would have Amos Wilson [Amos N. Wilson], Doc Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan], you just name it; all the classical, Jacob Caruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], all the classical members of ASCAC, the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is The Third Eye, I've heard of that, here. Speaker 2: Yeah, The Third Eye. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about, Tulisoma [Tulisoma South Dallas Book Fair], now I, I participated in it. Tulisoma is a South African word that means, we read, and it's founded by the African American Museum [African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas]. But I did participate with that, helping them to get authors here and what have you. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-U-L-I-S-O-M-A. Speaker 1: Okay, Tulisoma, yeah. Yeah, to read, yeah. Okay, all right, all right. So there's a--now did--did you interact at all with the--with [HistoryMaker] Curtis King's group, the--Junior Black Academy [Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters]? Speaker 2: I did in the early--it's, and it's The Black Academy of Arts and Letters [Dallas, Texas] now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: TBAAL. I did in the early days. We would--in fact the last time we had Iyanla Vanzant, we leased the space down at TBAAL for that. We've had author events there. Speaker 1: They have-- Speaker 2: And my sixtieth birthday was celebrated there. And I have an envelope with the information on the outside. They were celebrating some--maybe their twenty-eighth season, and they cel- they kicked it off with the observance of my sixtieth birthday. Speaker 1: Okay, and you know now they occupy the old Dallas Convention Center [Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center Dallas, Dallas, Texas], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which is really not that old. Speaker 2: The arena section of it and the theater section of it. And it's still used; it's very viable. People lease it for everything. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And there are plays there. They have art, they have lectures there. Story_ID: 658609 Speaker 1: All right. So it's still going. Now--and there are other activities. I mean you've been pretty busy here so I'm just--now tell us about TeCo Theatrical Productions [TeCo Theatrical Productions, Inc., Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: Right. TeCo Theatrical Productions, I joined that board just prior to my sixty-fifth birthday and used that as a fundraiser for the organization. It's a theatrical company. They do local work and works that are not well known. They don't produce the tried and true that you see traveling to other cities. A lot of original work. They have a theater festival where they produce plays and the winner wins airline tickets like on Southwest Airlines [Southwest Airlines Co.]. They do that. And I suggested we had--I was--and I read the pap- the plays to determine which six plays or X number of plays will be in it. So one year I was reading and Teresa [Teresa Coleman Wash], who is the executive, founding executive director, called and she said, "Well Emma [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers], you graded this high." I said, "Yes, but it's not appropriate for this particular season." It was gay and lesbian themes. But it was so good. So I encouraged us to launch a lesbian gay theater festival [PlayPride LGBT Festival]. And so we do a reading with that now. And then we also started a lecture series. We've had [HistoryMaker] Ellis Cose there. We've had a number of--Ellis Cose, we've had a number of authors there. Speaker 1: Now throughout everything you do, I mean really it's apparent that you are a reader yourself. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And you know about books. Speaker 2: And the arts. And I attend the National Black Theatre Festival. It's on my bucket list, so I started going I think '09 [2009], '11 [2011], '13 [2013], '15 [2015]. So-- Speaker 1: Now that's in like Winston-Salem? Speaker 2: Winston-Salem, North Carolina, right. So I, I like the arts. I like to incorporate everything in the arts and getting people to know about works. For example, we have a playwright here Camika Spencer. She--I can always remember one play of hers that's called 'Blind Seven' [ph.]. Young woman, she's in her forties now. Young woman, very good writer. And she wrote a book about cubicles ['Cubicles'] and it's set here in Dallas [Texas], sat in the Deep Ellum [Dallas, Texas], person works for the telephone company. But very good storywriter. And when she graduated from college, East Texas State, which is now the University of Texas [East Texas State University; Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University at Commerce, Commerce, Texas], wherever they are, she didn't have a job. I said, "Well you wanna come in here and just you know, work here until you can get, get a full time job?" And she did and she wrote her first book working there and connected with authors and I talked her into going to the booksellers convention [American Booksellers Association] and she, she was terrific. She had guerrilla marketing like you wouldn't believe. But, and just encouraging young people, so yeah. Story_ID: 658610 Speaker 1: At--at the height of your store's [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] activity, how many employees did you have? Speaker 2: We were very creative. We had four full time, but we used a lot of volunteers. We would ask book clubs to host the authors when they would come. So we had a lot of volunteers. Speaker 1: Were there many book clubs here in Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: Yes. I would say easy during that era, fifty to seventy-five, yeah, a ton. So--and we always tried to match the book club with the author. Speaker 1: Well what was some of the names--you remember some of the names of the book clubs and what were they focused on? I mean were they-- Speaker 2: Okay, there's Black Pearls Keepin it REAL. They read a variety of work. They read books by black authors, one, maybe one white person who's written about a black author. Sisters With Books read a vari- they only read black authors. There was the Sistah Circle Book Club [Sistah Circle Book Club, Inc.], and spelled differently, S-I-S-T-A-H. And that was an intergenerational book club. I liked that. They had all ages, mothers, daughters. And then my daughter [Candace Rodgers] and I started Just Us Book Club [ph.]. We started when she was in the fourth grade and I think we probably ended in the twelfth grade. So-- Speaker 1: So typically, how many people were in these book clubs? Speaker 2: Anywhere I would say from ten to twenty to more. But I think the quality of your book discussion diminishes when you move into double digits. You can't--I can remember one time we were discussing a [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan book at the store and we had about twenty-five people. We were able to work everybody in, but keep it focused. So I think the smaller, the better. Up to twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because you want everybody to participate. You don't want anybody to dominate. So you try to bring it in and I facilitate a book club for a Methodist Charlton Hospital [Methodist Charlton Medical Center, Dallas, Texas], so we have a discussion. And then at the--near the end, maybe thirty minutes before we're done, I do the round robin, go around and let everybody tell what they liked about the book and what it reminded them of and, and read passages from the book that they like. Because you want everybody to be involved. Speaker 1: Okay, so one person would be responsible for-- Speaker 2: Leading. Speaker 1: --leading, and then everybody would get a chance to participate and read a passage. Speaker 2: Right, so you wanna make sure that nobody dominates, and you wanna bring in the quiet people as well. Speaker 1: Now a lot of readers are quiet. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But you, you draw them in by saying, "Well what did you like about the book, you have a favorite passage?" And I have one woman in the book club, she always has new words. So say, "Okay Jacqueline [ph.], what's our new word that we found in this book?" Story_ID: 658611 Speaker 1: I think--do you have a sense that, that we have like almost like a submerged subculture of readers in the black community that really don't--that most black people don't really know exist? Speaker 2: When you say submerged-- Speaker 1: Some--I mean they're not, you know, people don't talk about book clubs hardly. You don't hear--I mean if you're--unless you're in a certain circle, you don't hear about it. And I know, well I met lots of black folks that are just astonished that there are any book clubs or people doing that kind of thing, you know, readers' theaters and book clubs and study groups. Speaker 2: Exactly. Study groups, 'cause that's what The Third Eye morphed into as well. Well I think because I always try to keep engaged. And the first thing I ask a person when I meet them--I say, "Well what are you reading now?" And I often here when I'm out--, "Well we missed your bookstore [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]," I say, "Well what are you reading now?" And I always have a book to recommend. So I always ask them about what are they doing now. Speaker 1: But you, you hardly ever see that, that aspect of our community displayed in popular culture. As if we just listen to music and-- Speaker 2: Well you know on some of the, on some of the television shows you had some. I can remember a Cosby ['The Cosby Show'] episode where Clair [Clair Huxtable] was having a book club and he was there and pretending like he read it and he had, you know. So there are some, yeah you're right. You gotta control, control the media for it to really reflect what we're doing in the community. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I think I've seen something recent but I can't recall what it is. So we (air quotes), we're presented that stereotypical fashion. Story_ID: 658612 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite author? Speaker 2: Toni Morrison, hands down, absolutely. I've read, I had read 'Song of Solomon' so many times until I went to this--the Dallas Institute [Dallas Institute of Humanities and Culture, Dallas, Texas] and they had a class on her. And so now 'The Bluest Eye.' So it's a toss up between 'Song of Solomon' and 'The Bluest Eye.' Yeah I really like her, her works. Speaker 1: What do you like the most about her work? Speaker 2: I like the history, and the--what conditions were like. For example, in 'Beloved' she talks about how it felt to have that bit in your mouth when you were enslaved. Just all the history, what people were really feeling and thinking; what was happening in the world during that particular era, whatever era she's writing about, the black neighborhood. And I like Raymond Andrews, 'Rosiebelle Lee Wildcat Tennessee.' Just a--I, I think I like an era from--in addition to Reconstruction, an era from the '40s [1940s] forward because that's when my mother [Alvilda Simmons Scruggs] was a young woman. And that's when blacks were trying to achieve, you know. Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois] being founded, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. I just like that, that history component that I find in books. Alice Walker's 'Meridian,' the whole thing about the Civil Rights Movement that's in there. I like to look, you know, below the surface to see what message is being delivered. Marita Golden's works. Speaker 1: Who are some of the upcoming writers I guess that, that you see these days? I mean 'cause you're still-- Speaker 2: Well of course in nonfiction would be Ta-Nehisi Coates. 'Between the World and Me,' I gave so many of those books away. Colson Whitehead, 'The Underground' ['The Underground Railroad'] was very difficult to read, but it was, it's a good book. I'm trying to think of who else I'm reading. Of course 'Hidden Figures' ['Hidden Figures: The American Dream and the Untold Story of the Black Women Mathematicians who Helped Win the Space Race'] by Margot Lee Shetterly. I think she will be producing more. Have to think what's--what I'm reading. Oh. Should have looked at my iPad before you came. Story_ID: 658613 Speaker 1: Before I we leave, we're at least close to the theater discussion. Tell us about [HistoryMaker] Irma P. Hall. Now she's-- Speaker 2: She's a friend. Let me tell you when we were in the flea market in '86 [1986] in Wynnewood Village [Dallas, Texas], Irma maybe lived two or three miles from the shopping center. So she would come up on Sunday. And so she wrote this book about, a coloring book. And she would--and we sold her poetry, 'Black and Blue' ['I Can Deal with Black and Blue'] and all--we sold everything that she's ever written, and we just became friends. So when I had my Emma at sixty-five, she was one of the presenters there. And we maintained a relationship; I just went to her--I emceed her birthday party, one milestone birthday you know a couple of years ago. So we remain friends, talk, drop stuff off at her house, what have you. We live near each other. So she--and she's another one who lives her culture and her history because she went to Wiley [sic.], her aunts, her dad [Samuel Player V], mom [Josephine Thomas Player] went there. So that, that, that staying connected to our heritage and culture. Speaker 1: Wiley College [Marshall, Texas], that's the college that's featured in a movie 'Great Debaters'--now, wait a minute (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh but she didn't go--she went to Texas College [Tyler, Texas]. She didn't go to Wiley, she went to Texas College. Speaker 1: Texas College, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Great Debaters,' yeah that's Wiley. She went to Texas College, yeah. So that whole--I think we, we both like our culture. When you come to our homes you see it, it's art and books everywhere. Go to the theater and just supported, nurtured it, nurture the people who are in the profession so that they can stay encouraged and grow and keep producing works because we want to pass it on our next generation, my grandchildren and whenever they grow up, pass it on to their children. Speaker 1: Yeah, and she used to live in Chicago [Illinois] and been a number of films. I think the one I remember the most is 'Ladykillers' ['The Ladykillers'], which was, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Ladykillers'. Speaker 1: She really had a big role in that. Speaker 2: And she was in a film that was produced here by Raymond St. Jacques, 'Book of Numbers.' It was produced here in the black community called State Thomas [Dallas, Texas], or Thomas [Avenue] and Hall [Street]. And that was produced here. [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne was in it, so you know that was a long time ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in the '70s [1970s] I think. Speaker 2: In the 70s [1970s], right. Speaker 1: 'Book of Numbers,' yeah. And 'Ladykillers,' Tom Hanks was in that, yeah. Speaker 2: And of course 'Soul Food.' You gotta mention-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She's not in it, but she's the inspiration for it. She starts off in it but they always make reference to her character Big Mama [Josephine Joseph]. Story_ID: 658614 Speaker 1: I haven't asked you about the Romance Slam Jam. Speaker 2: Oh yes, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Francis Ray, so. Speaker 2: Yes, Francis Ray and my business partner Ashira Tosihwe and I founded it in 1995. There was some kind of major romance conference in Fort Worth [Texas]. And so Francis came and she said, "Ms. Rodgers [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers], can we do something?" Because when we go to those conferences, all the white people just walk by and we're just sitting there. But let me back up. Francis Ray was the pediatric nurse at the early childhood center that my child attended. So how I connected with her at first, she sent this note with Candace [Candace Rodgers] being the second child, she sent this note pinned on Candace saying that she needed an immunization. So of course I took her to the pediatrician. But that was when Francis Ray was being published by Ms. Latisha Peeples [ph.]. It was only like three or four books out. So that's how we started it. The black authors go to the convention, and this is a convention for romance readers. But the--nobody would stop by and talk to them. So we had something at Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. We did it in '95 [1995] and '96 [1996], and then we toured in '97 [1997]. And then '98 [1998] we did a, we did a cruise. We cruised in '97 [1997], cruised in '98 [1998]. Didn't do anything in '99 [1999] and then 2000 we had it back here. And that was when we found the model of a book club, bookstore and an author hosting it. Anna Laurence was the host for that. And Beverly Jenkins was our keynote speaker. She was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--as I remember, a friend of mine had a bookstore in the early '70s [1970s]. Used to carry Harlequin romances. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He had a black bookstore, but he had, he had other things in there. Speaker 2: And the problem with Harlequin during that era was that they would have--the characters didn't look right to fit the copy inside the book. That changed later. So we had those conferences and then in 2001 Romance Slam Jam left home. My baby grew up, left home. Brenda Woodbury was here and she said, "Emma, I think I can take this to Orlando [Florida]." And that was our first one in Orlando. Shaq's mother [Lucille O'Neal] was one of the underwriters, they had several underwriters. Brenda Jackson who's a now a New York Times [The New York Times] bestseller was the author, and a book club hosted it. We had a live band and Montsho [Montsho Books, Orlando, Florida] was the bookstore that was part of the planning team. And so they was sitting around and they said, "Well you know we need to have an award." And they all said, "Emma," immediately. And, because of my lead in helping to market and promote what they did and I can remember Jackie [Jackie Perkins] presenting the award to me because of my dedication and commitment to the romance writers. And it was purely be--out of marketing. They were just not marketing and promoting and making all this money for the publishers. Speaker 1: Yeah, let me just backtrack again. What I was trying to say back there was that there was--people were buying these Harlequin romances, but none of them were about black people or very few. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so there was a group of--I know there were a couple of women in Chicago [Illinois] that were poets, started writing black romance novels, and self-publishing them and other people started doing it around the country. So what you're saying is that you kind of gathered this little--this movement of women who were writing these romance novels and focused it. Speaker 2: Exactly. Because Harlequin was publishing them and they published them under different imprints, Pinnacle [Pinnacle Books, Inc.], changed names and what have you. But it was to get the word out because romance period in all publishing, sells more books than any other genre, romance. And so all these authors were coming out with all this great work and they were not being marketed and promoted. So then at our booksellers convention [American Booksellers Association], some of these house--Kensington [Kensington Publishing Corporation] started hosting receptions for them because their business had grown so due to these romance authors. So anything that they would do, they could do to help grow the audience, grow their bottom line, they did. And so last--it was in Detroit [Michigan] in 2016. And it was--we keep growing; quite successful. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the Romance Slam Jam. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and organiza- I mean the slam jam presents the Emma Award for the best writer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and that's a, that's the closing ceremony. Story_ID: 658615 Speaker 1: The store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas], did we say the store closed in 2006. But what was the lead up to it? I mean, I mean we talked about the early '90s [1990s] being kind of a golden age, looked like things are gonna be all right. And then all of a sudden these book stores start gobbling up everybody. And were you--was it that kind of pressure? Speaker 2: It was the pressure that the big stores were selling the books; selling them at the discount. We bought books--in the books industry it's a 60/40 margin. We make 40 percent. And so they were selling the books at 40 percent off. Especially the new books, books coming out by Eric Dickey [Eric Jerome Dickey] or [HistoryMaker] E. Lynn Harris, especially when they first came out. So it was hard to have people commit their budgets to buying the book at full price. And we did offer some discounts to faithful customers, people who were in book clubs and what have you. But it was very difficult to sustain that. And them being able to get it cheaper. That's what we came under pressure with having to make that decision. Now in 2004 we kind of thought we were, then we had this big rally, everybody coming and supporting like anything else. But then it began to wane and so we had to make that hard decision. Speaker 1: Now do you think that people were just buying the books else--cheaper elsewhere or did they-- Speaker 2: We had a, we had a couple of factors. That, gas was going up, and people--we catered to Dallas-Fort Worth [Texas] and so people were coming from all over. So those were economic factors, economics, it was all about economics. You could go to Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] and get it cheaper and what have you. Speaker 1: But I know, I know one thing I miss about black bookstores that we used to have in my hometown and what people say in Chicago [Illinois] too is that they miss the culture of the store. Speaker 2: Yeah, you meet friends there. We had someone who would come from Arkansas. We had people to come in from Missouri just to shop at our store because we carried such a wealth--and they would make friends. And like the woman who came from Arkansas, she met a, a man there and they'd become friends, they've been friends ever since. And you network there. So it, it's, it's a good place, and you learn about things happening in the community, different lectures, different speakers, different conferences. You're encouraged to go to conference in town or out of town. You learn about films coming out. You learn about productions that--plays that are coming out, art exhibits. So you learn a lot about what's happening culturally. Speaker 1: And one feature most bookstores, the big bulletin board where people have information about all these activities, these cultural activates you mentioned. Speaker 2: We had a rack, we had a revolving rack where people could put literature on it about college tours or historical tours, tutoring, whatever it was, we had it there. And the people would sometimes people would just come by and pick up the local free newspapers, The Dallas Examiner, The Post Tribune [The Dallas Post Tribune], the Dallas Weekly and get the literature to see what's going on in the community. Story_ID: 658616 Speaker 1: So it was a center for information. I know people talk about the barbershop and the beauty shop, but the black bookstore was a place where people could go and check into the culture and the community activities. Speaker 2: Right, find out about Juneteenth activities, Kwanzaa activities, just anything that's going on in the community; we were the place to come to. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was more than just a store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: Yeah, a cultural center I guess you could say. Cultural center, literature and beyond; we encompassed everything. We even sold--in the early days we sold art, we sold fabric, we sold artifacts. And thankfully other stores opened up so we could--did not have to--we didn't continue that. We would make referrals to Ebony Fine Art Gallery [Ebony Fine Art Gallery and Custom Framing, Dallas, Texas] or to Frank Frazier's Visions in Black [Visions in Black Gallery, Dallas, Texas]. Or to Pan African Connection [Dallas, Texas] that was really good in bringing a lot of the African artifacts. Speaker 1: So did you like selling the artifacts and the art? Speaker 2: Yeah, we sold them from Haiti and what have you. Enjoyed it, but I really like--and we still continued--they were sidelines. We carried incense and oils, we carried a lot of things that, that complimented our culture. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what about consignments? I know that was always an interesting-- Speaker 2: Oh god, yes, and especially people who published poetry. Poetry does not sell. It has to be--people have to hear it. But we would, we would be gracious and carry some but let them know it's strictly on consignment. And it worked out okay. Speaker 1: Yeah I've had many discussions with consignment people about-- Speaker 2: And they're, they're upset that the book didn't sell. "Well you don't have it prominently displayed." Well this is not why people are coming in here, but if they have a good poem, I'll be happy to. I say, "Well tell me what's really, what page should I turn to in your book to make them read it? Suggest that they read it and then that will grab their attention and they will want to get it?" But yeah, consignment was quite, was a challenge at times. We had to keep up the book and then when they would come, it would often be at an inopportune time; wasn't a convenient time for us to reconcile what we were doing. Speaker 1: There's never an appointment, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: No, they just show up, they just show up to ask you to sell their work and because they think it's so wonderful, and we sold games and what have you. Story_ID: 658617 Speaker 1: So okay so the, the 2006--was there any one thing that was just, was just a war of attrition (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Economics, and it's time for me to renew the lease. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then we got all this media coverage, CNN, C-SPAN, people were flying in here from everywhere covering, covering us, our closing. And then the landlord had the nerve to say, "Well, do we wanna revisit this?" I had appealed to them early on and they did not respond. It wasn't until we were in every newspaper, on every radio station, both locally and nationally that they were ready to talk shop. It's too late then. We had made the decision. Speaker 1: Okay. But your store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] wasn't the only one, I mean on national level I mean going back to the, I guess '70s [1970s] when Lewis Michaux's National Memorial African Bookstore [sic. African National Memorial Bookstore] closed in Harlem [New York, New York] to the Liberation Bookstore that just closed about five years ago in Harlem, Vaughn's Bookstore closes in Detroit [Michigan], Marcus bookstore [Marcus Books] in San Francisco [California]. You can go--I mean there's so many of them. The African American Book Center in Chicago [Illinois], Ellis' Bookstore [Chicago, Illinois] closed. I mean just you know, a lot of stores just can't, you know, take it, you know, today. Speaker 2: Right. It's, it's a labor intensive work and you enter the bookstore business because you are committed. You do wanna make a profit. But it is a challenge. But it's like being in education, like people who are teachers and what have you. It's a--we fall in that same kind of vein for bookstores who came around during the '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s]. It's all about enlightening and informing the community, giving them something that they're not getting in their traditional schools or if they do, it's just a little bit about Phyllis Wheatley, Langston Hughes, Booker T. Washington, the classic people, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. But to expose them to other people who've made contributions, Claudette Colvin, Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], just so many other people. Speaker 1: Now what happens now to the independent published black authors? What do you see happening with them? Speaker 2: Well they're online and that's good, that helps. Online and then when they visit book clubs and book clubs read them. They're able to--it's a grapevine, online is our grapevine these days. And one author can I mention that--who was initially self published? [HistoryMaker] ReShonda Tate Billingsley. She was a reporter working in Oklahoma and she wrote a book about her--called something with brothers in the title ['My Brother's Keeper']. So then she moved to Houston [Texas] and she was a reporter there, working and writing, but we always carried her literature. Well she wrote the book 'The Secret She Kept,' which is about bipolar, mental health issues. And I went to the launch of the film, TV One has now made it into a movie. But with my work on TeCo [TeCo Theatrical Productions, Inc., Dallas, Texas], with our lecture series, we brought her to Dallas [Texas] this year, 2017, to talk about bipolar mental health issues because that's one issue that we sweep under the cover. We don't wanna talk about in public. So we've continued our relationship with her even though we're closed. Met her as a self published author. She's had success being published, she's published maybe nearly thirty books now. But because of my work with TeCo with our lecture series, we're still about to connect people with books and her book 'The Secret She Kept' is one that we did. Speaker 1: Right. We were able to interview her two months ago in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Okay. We just had her here in January and we partnered with the wellness community to bring her here. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah ReShonda Tate Billingsley, yeah Speaker 2: And in fact I have a picture of her in our pictures we're gonna take, look at. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her with [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell who also wrote '72 Hour Hold' which is also about bipolar, schizophrenia and mental health. Story_ID: 658618 Speaker 1: As we sit here today, now you were, oh, you were a commissioner. We haven't talked about that. We haven't talked about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the Da- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: On the Dallas City Plan Commission, appointed by Councilwoman Vonciel Jones Hill. And so when she got ready to run, she said, "Well can I put some literature over here on the literature rack?" I said, "Yes, you of all people because you are at least a customer [at Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]." Anyway--and that's the only way I know her. We--that was just as a customer, period. And so she appointed me to be the commissioner. I was able to serve four two year terms and I termed out. Speaker 1: What year was that, that you-- Speaker 2: I served from 2007 through 2015. The end of, about October 2015. Speaker 1: Okay stories from that period of time that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember a case we had near my neighborhood. Some landowners wanted to--the University of North Texas now has a Dallas campus [University of North Texas at Dallas, Dallas, Texas]. And so they were just trying to be part of the planning and what have you, process, wanted to know where it was going. And we had a little heated discussion there because you know any time you're talking about money and land, it becomes quite, quite personal. But the development is slowly coming there and now that we have the university there, we had started off with one building, now there's another building. So pretty soon there will be housing and commercial real estate. In one case we had--it's the zoning where you have to be so far away and then you do slope zoning. I forget what that's called. But you have lower level and then you can gradually go up in the neighborhood. So work, live, play is, is a model, you know, for that. What is it--form based zoning, that's what it was called. And getting to sell that to our councilmen, to adopt form based zoning, that's what it was and that's what was happening in that particular area near our--my neighborhood. And then we also had one case, it was downtown. And this real exclusive hotel wanted to come in, but the streets were not wide enough to accommodate all the traffic. And we all voted against it, but you know we can live with our conscience. And another one, the fracking. That was really contentious. And I had a conference to attend in Louisiana, but I stayed to cast my vote. And the minute I cast my vote, my husband [Mederick Rodgers] was waiting for me downstairs to take me to the airport. But we voted against that, that fracking. And that was very contentious, so I remember that. Story_ID: 658619 Speaker 1: There's a wing at the--there's, there's something called the Bishop Arts Theatre that has a Emma Rodgers Learning Lab, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and TeCo, TeCo [TeCo Theatrical Productions, Inc., Dallas, Texas] was founded that, but now they, the theater center is called the Bishop Arts Theatre Center [Dallas, Texas]. And I didn't know it at the time, but they dedicated the learning laboratory and they have receptions up there and it's a--when they have their enrichment programs during the summer for students, that's where the art class--different classes occur, acting classes occur in there. And so I didn't even know they were gonna do that, so that was a total surprise. So they host receptions and when they have jazz artists there and everything there. Speaker 1: Everything's at the Emma Rodgers Learning Laboratory. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it's quite an honor. Speaker 1: Okay and now you-- Speaker 2: And I volunteer there during the summer. I do a one week--green team, we call it the green team and we work with the children on environmental issues, helping them to become environmentally conscious. And then we also give them books because we say, readers are leaders, so those are two components of that camp that we run during the summer. Just for one, the first week of the camp. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I recruit my friends to help me run that just for--we do it for about an hour, hour and a half. Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw a hat once, red, black and green hat that said, readers are leaders, with Africa on it. Was that produced by this group? Speaker 2: No. It's just a catchy thing. I think you'll see it throughout other organizations. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you, you host discussions, book discussions here all the time, right, I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I tell you a highlight about here was in two thous- a couple highlights. In 2015 after the Sandra Bland murder and all those, I had this huge poster I did, Oscar Grant, various people who had been murdered by law enforcement. And we had this panel because it was the sixtieth anniversary of the murder of Emmett Till. So Marvin Dulaney [W. Marvin Dulaney], who was a professor at the University of Texas at Arlington [Arlington, Texas], coordinated the panel for us. We had another professor there, we had a retired police chief from Arlington police force [Arlington Police Department], and we had a mother whose son had been murdered. And that attracted a large crowd, but we would--and we had a lot of people who collaborated with us to host it, the Holocaust Museum [Dallas Holocaust Museum, Dallas, Texas], the North Texas--Northern Louisiana synod of the Lutheran church [Northern Texas Northern Louisiana Synod Evangelical Lutheran Church in America], Mothers Against Police Brutality, to help market and promote the event. And we attracted a large number of people because of the milestone of Emmett Till's murder. We also launched the Dr. Jerry G. Chambers [sic. Jerry B. Chambers] lecture series, and Cheryl Wattley [Cheryl Brown Wattley] who has now returned to Dallas [Texas], is a professor at the University of Texas law school [University of North Texas Dallas College of Law] in downtown Dallas. And she wrote this book about a woman who's responsible for the Oklahoma university law school [University of Oklahoma College of Law, Norman, Oklahoma] being integrated. So we launched it with that in honor of Dr. Chambers, who took students on this Freedom Ride tour in 2013 and then did it again in '15 [2015] for the fiftieth anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery March. And he passed away right after he returned from that. So we keep book discussions going on. Here we've done one recently on Colson Whitehead's book ['The Underground Railroad'] at the library here. So it's always what are you reading? Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 658620 Speaker 1: Twenty thirteen [2013] Francis Ray passed. Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She passed away. And being--she was one of--the three of us founded the Romance Slam Jam. So our conference that year was in New Orleans [Louisiana] I believe. And so we--nope, in 2014, she passed away in 2013. And in 2014 our conference was dedi- Romance Slam Jam conference was dedicated to her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's the one who--you know she brought the authors to us. We didn't know about--she was in touch with Donna Hill, Gwynne Forster, Sandra Kitt and all these authors. So she, she brought that to us even though we were carrying the books, we didn't really have a connection. So she was the link that made it all happen. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, J. California Cooper passed too. Now did--did she live in Dallas [Texas]? Speaker 2: She lived in Marshall, Texas. She moved to Texas because it was more economical for her to work on her craft. And then after she start--got picked up, she was able to move back to California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she moved here in '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I was very much pregnant then. I know that milestone. Speaker 1: Okay and you, she was, you were very much--you know, she was instrumental-- Speaker 2: Right, and we had a Literary Lions organization here that was sponsored by the Dallas Times Herald. We only have one paper now, but that was a paper. And we as bookstores got together, we would publish bestsellers in the Dallas Times Herald, and we hosted this literary lion event. So I recommended J. California Cooper when I first got involved with them, [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange was (unclear). At that time you know she was living in Houston [Texas], her dad, somebody's from Fort Worth [Texas], an uncle or cousin or something like that was in Fort Worth. So I bought that black component to that particular organization of identifying authors who could be recognized. Story_ID: 658621 Speaker 1: Tell us about the museum here. Now you were--you were, you played a significant role here. Speaker 2: There are three of us who founded the museum, Lois Lilly, Ann Ervin, who's passed away, and myself. And we started it because of Dr. Chambers who had taken the children on the Freedom Ride tour in '13 (2013). Speaker 1: Now this is Doc--what's her first name, Dr.? Speaker 2: Dr. Jerry Chambers [Jerry B. Chambers]. He was a high school teacher here. Very committed in this community, in South Dallas, think he taught at Lincoln High School [Dallas, Texas], but he was very committed to helping the children know about history and using that as a platform to help them become involved in the community here. So he took them on a--the Freedom Ride tour in 2013. They visited some colleges and what have you, and then for the sixti- for the fiftieth anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery [Selma to Montgomery March], he took them on that tour. So what we do here, it's called the Dallas Civil Rights Museum [Dallas, Texas]. We don't have a lot of Dallas [Texas] in it, we're working on that. But what we do, we say we're whetting your appetite for when you go to the national museum of history and culture [National Museum of African American History and Culture] in Washington, D.C. So that it just won't be--you just won't be going through there looking. We discuss Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], we even have all the cases that were involved in Brown v. Board. We talk about Emmett Till, Medgar Evers, Ms. Boynton [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson] with the Selma march. 'Course we had these candles for 381; everybody asks what that represents. So we figure if we have these images out there, you will see them. And then we collaborated with the NET Xchange, International NET Xchange [International NET Xchange Group] and they brought the 'Pathway to Freedom' exhibit here. So we've been able to enhance what we've done here by incorporating their work, the quilts and other pictures. These things that we have about students in the Civil Rights Movement and what have you. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you ever think about getting back into the book business at all? Speaker 2: You know, I tell you what. I could retire and live in Ghana if I had a dollar for everyone who told, tells me, or told me, "We miss your bookstore [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]." I hear that every day almost, every time I'm out. So no, we've closed the chapter on that and so we're able to market and promote literature through our work here at the Civil Rights Movement--(laughter) civil rights museum, and through books, lecture series at TeCo [TeCo Theatrical Productions, Inc., Dallas, Texas] or the Bishop arts centers [Bishop Arts Theatre Center, Dallas, Texas]. Any other time, any time I have an opportunity to be involved with literature, that's how we're able to help continue to hand sell, market and promote books. Speaker 1: So is there an African American bookstore in Dallas at the present time? Speaker 2: Yes, Pan African Connection is at 4466 South Marsalis [Avenue]. I know that; I was born in '44 [1944] and got married in '66 [1966]; so, yes Pan African. In fact we gave them a number of our fixtures there. So it's nice to go over there and look at them. Story_ID: 658622 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I suppose maybe become more involved with ecommerce. You know, perhaps we could have continued our legacy through that vein. But that's about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a website when you closed [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas]? Speaker 2: We did, we had a website and everybody loved to go to our website just to listen to the music. It was some great music. Somebody locally design, had the best music. I don't even know the name of the tune, yeah. So we did a little ecommerce business, but by that time we weren't prepared to do that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Likewise when you look back at everything you've done, what do you think you're the most proud of? Speaker 2: Gee, I think I'm--what I, what I do really well is connect people. If you have a talent and I know somebody who can help you, I like to pair people. I like to marry. It's like what I would say with--when people would come into the store [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas], marrying the person with the book. I like to marry your experience, your expertise with somebody else who is in that area. I think that, that's my long suit. Story_ID: 658623 Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's what happens in that kind of environment; that's the best thing that happens there. Let me ask this question, we always ask this. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well very involved with voter registration and getting people to the polls and people writing their congressmen and their state legislatures about things they want--very concerned about education. Here in Dallas [Texas] we have a number of charter schools. And that undermines our public schools. The charter schools are selective about the students that they take in. And so then we get students who won't be able to fit in there, and then we don't have the resources to work with the students when they come. There's just not enough tax dollars allocated for that. And then there's this testing. Instead of teaching our children how to think critically and what have you, we're teaching them how to take the test. And then we don't--then we have a test, then the students master it and then there's a new test. So we're always trying to reach another bar. We need to always be trying to reach another educational bar, but don't keep changing the game on us. So I'm very concerned about what's happening in education. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what are some of your hopes? Speaker 2: Well in just general or in education? I hope that-- Speaker 1: For the African American community. Speaker 2: I hope that we will embrace what's happening in this world. And there's some good young people out there. I--this Garcia--what's her name? I don't know, I saw this young woman [Alicia Garza]. So I think we're in good hands with the young people working with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and there's another young woman, I really did wanna know her name; like Garcia, Gomez, she's out in California. We're in good hands with their leadership, with the Black Lives Matter movement because what we point out here is that the reason why black lives matter is because with the Brown v. Board case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], one woman [sic. Oliver L. Brown], one case that was put into that class action suit, all she wanted was transportation for her child. The bus passed by every day. All she wanted was transportation. We want equal treatment, we want a balance in not only literature, but in television. We want our total story pictured, not just us being in crime, but also as being crime fighters, improving our community, having things in the community for children where they can grow. If there's not a mother or father in their home where there are programs in the community where young men can grow, where young women can grow so that they can be good, producing citizens of the world. Story_ID: 658624 Speaker 1: Now you got married in the '60s [1960s] or the--'66 [1966] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay. And you have children-- Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: --tell us about your family. Speaker 2: Well we have two children, Derrick [Derrick Rodgers], who is the reason why Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas] got launched because of his ninth birthday party. And he's married and he has two children. I'm very proud because when school started in August of 2016, KERA [KERA Radio, Dallas, Texas], our public radio station, NPR [National Public Radio], talked to them about blacks and police. And to hear my family on the--I was just so proud of that moment to hear my daughter-in-law [Kenya Rodgers], my son, my granddaughter [Nia Rodgers] and my grandson [Zion Rodgers] talk about it. They have a good handle on the situation and they--I was just very proud of that. And then we have a daughter, our children are nineteen years apart, I call them my twins. And Candace [Candace Rodgers] is--went to University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: This is the one that was born in '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987]. That's my, that's my baseline. And she lives in Dover, Delaware now. She went to graduate school at the University of Maryland on the Eastern Shore [University of Maryland Eastern Shore], Eastern Shore, in Princess Anne, Maryland. Worked in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], worked for a college in D.C. and now she's working for Perdue [Perdue Farms, Inc.], which is a chicken processing company as a supervisor there. So I'm very proud of my children. They've done quite well in school. And I think the foundation we have given them, they, they're connected to their culture. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: You know when you've lived seventy-two years, you have a lot in your computer (laughter). No, I can't think of anything. Story_ID: 658625 Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, as someone who enjoyed reading, thought reading was very important, thought by being educated because our family encouraged education and getting a college education, that getting an education is the baseline for you moving in the middle class, up the ladder. Encouraging people to be educated, informed and look beyond what's presented to you. Go deeper, dig deeper, look behind and do your, your research in whatever area you're interested in. So somebody who enjoyed reading and wanted everybody else to read. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 658626 Speaker 1: All right. This is the lady [Constance Curry] who wrote 'Silver Rights' and her person [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman] who co-wrote it with her. But left to right in the background that's my daughter Candace [Candace Rodgers], my son Derrick [Derrick Rodgers], my business partner's daughter Ashira [ph.] and me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is at a family reunion in Newton, Texas. That's my uncle Marscine Simmons, and those are relatives, cousins and my husband [Mederick Rodgers]. And that was--he has been to every community homecoming and--except one. And we're getting ready to have the eightieth. Speaker 2: Now that's me and Cuba in 2016 sitting next to John Lennon on a bench there. And right after I got back, the man who organized it had passed away, so I put my picture, I sent a picture of me to [HistoryMaker] Norma Adams-Wade and she put it online. Speaker 1: And, so, the other person had his picture shot the same right, with John Lennon? Speaker 2: Yes. And here I am in Cuba again. And this is a mosaic. We went to this community that has nothing but mosaics. The artist has just taken over the community. So there's Castro [Fidel Castro] and Che [Che Guevara] and some other leaders. Speaker 1: Now this is what year? Speaker 2: Twenty sixteen [2016]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right now this is when we had David Hilliard who was the minister of defense for the Black Panther Party, and pictured with him are men who were in the local New Black Panther Party. Speaker 1: That's me, David Hilliard and my business partner Ashira Tosihwe. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, hold on. Next. Speaker 1: Now this is one of my favorites. This was in Ghana, West Africa in Accra [Ghana] in 1996. This was the Musta Marketplace [ph.]. And they had this before where they sent authors and publishers, but I was the first bookseller to be on a Musta Marketplace tour. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan at Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar, Dallas, Texas], August 2005. Speaker 1: Yeah. The family reunion on my husband's side, the Rodgers family reunion. We had saved our (unclear) shirts as our shirts for the gathering. Speaker 2: Now this is [HistoryMaker] Ishmael Reed. Speaker 1: Right, that's Ishmael Reed. Left to right, that's Timothy Seldes, who is the literary agent for Nadine Gordimer, Susan Shreve who is an author, Timothy Seldes, myself, Cyprian Ekwensi, a Nigerian writer. And the rest are Nigerian. The lady next to him is a Nigerian and the men are Ghanaian writers. Speaker 2: You had Cyprian Ekwensi, yeah, yeah (unclear). Speaker 1: So this is that same gathering, Musta Marketplace in Accra. We also went to Zimbabwe. But this is in the Accra and these were all the writers that were gathered there. Speaker 2: And just more shots of the same. That your tax dollars sent me to. Speaker 1: That's Chuck D, left to right, Chuck D, me and my son Derrick. He was here on a book tour, probably 'Fight the Power' ['Fight the Power: Rap, Race, and Reality,' Yusuf Jah, Spike Lee and Chuck D]. Speaker 2: Cornel West and that's attorney Elana Rawlings [ph.] here. Speaker 1: Emma [HistoryMaker Emma Rodgers], Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], president of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], my business partner Ashira [Ashira Tosihwe]. Speaker 2: Walter Mosley at a signing that we did offsite, down on Lamar [Street]. Speaker 1: Julia- me, [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux and [HistoryMaker] Cheryl Smith, who is a publisher here, a newspaper person here. She owns her own company [I Messenger Enterprises, Dallas, Texas]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Donna Richardson here promoting a fitness, she's a physical fitness person. Speaker 2: Johnnie, Johnnie Cochran and Emma. Speaker 1: Better shot of Johnnie at Black Images. It was standing room only. Speaker 2: Was this after the O.J. trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995]? Speaker 1: Well after. [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, John, Commissioner John Wiley Price, Susan Taylor and me. He was interviewing her following a signing. Speaker 2: Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.], Emma and Bernestine Singley who is the inspiration for Derrick Bell's, the alter ego in Derrick Bell's 'Faces at the Bottom of the Well' ['Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Permanence of Racism']. Speaker 1: James--I can only recognize [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones. That's me in the red next to him. Speaker 2: Tina Ansa McElroy [sic. Tina McElroy Ansa], a Spelman grad [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and we were presenting her with artwork and that's my son in the background, artwork by Frank Frazier. Speaker 1: Emma, Nelson George and my son Derrick. Speaker 2: These are the guys who wrote Black Wall Street, about Tulsa, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: That's Congressman Floyd Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Floyd Flake] and Emma. I sold books for him at an event. Speaker 2: One of the Wayan brothers. He came here on a tour. Speaker 1: This is the artist end of 'Brotherman' comic books. Can't think of the name [Dawud Anyabwile]. Speaker 2: Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] and Emma. Speaker 1: Now this is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. She wrote the book 'Jumping the Broom.' So Ashira made that cross stitch that we have in there that was in the book 'Jumping the Broom: The African American Wedding Planner.' Speaker 2: That's Harriette Cole? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Harriette Cole. Speaker 2: She does interviews for us. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Never heard of her. Speaker 2: And here is [HistoryMaker] Jill Nelson, my son Derrick, Jill Nelson and me. 'Volunteer Slavery' ['Volunteer Slavery: My Authentic Negro Experience'], she's the author of 'Volunteer Slavery' and many other books but I connected with her through Derrick Bell and we had her for every book that came out. Speaker 1: Okay this is 1992 when we had Terry McMillan, Emma, Terry McMillan and Ashira, my business partner. Speaker 2: Bebe Moore, Emma, and [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell for 'Your Blues Ain't Like Mine.' I think that's the first book I had for her, that was one I had to lobby for. Speaker 1: Walter Mosley at Black Images for probably 'Gone Fishin',' Emma, that's me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh that's Jill Nelson, Jill Nelson autographing books, okay that's Jill. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Emma and a man who is in jail with a South African, an Indian South African, with Nelson Mandela and he wrote this beautiful book on Nelson Mandela ['No Bread for Mandela: Memoirs of Ahmed Kathrada, Prisoner No. 468/64,' Ahmed Kathrada]. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers, a great young adult, children's writer. That's Ashira, Walter Dean Myers and me. Speaker 1: Emma, I need to see this picture. That's, that's, that's Michael Johnson the sprinter who won the gold medal from Dallas [Texas]. He's from Dallas and he was the-- Speaker 2: 440 champion. Speaker 1: And there's J. California Cooper. Speaker 2: And that is my daughter-in-law Kenya [Kenya Rodgers] and my granddaughter Nia Rene Rodgers [Nia Rodgers] with Ms. Patti LaBelle at a signing at Black Images. Speaker 1: I think that's another picture of Johnnie Cochran. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] E. Lynn Harris who helped us. Speaker 1: My husband, Emma, [HistoryMaker] Bishop Vashti McKenzie and Ashira, my business partner. Speaker 2: Sister Souljah signing 'The Coldest Winter Ever.' Speaker 1: Here we are with Earl Woods, Tiger Woods' dad. That's his dad. Speaker 2: That's me, Bebe Moore Campbell and [HistoryMaker] ReShonda Tate Billingsley, two people who wrote about bipolar. Speaker 1: And that's Edward Ball, he wrote 'Slaves in the Family.' Speaker 2: And that's my daughter Candace, me and my husband at the Romance, at the tenth--Romance Slam Jam, yeah tenth anniversary. Speaker 1: And that's Rafer Johnson who won the gold medal with my son Derrick. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley and Bertice Berry standing in front of Black Images. Speaker 1: Emmitt Smith when his book came out, autographing at Black Images, former Cowboy [Dallas Cowboys]. Story_ID: 658627 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Nathan McCall with me, Lois Lilly, my son, Camika Spencer the author I talked about sitting down next to him, and Mika. Okay left to right, it's me, Lois Lilly, my son Derrick [Derrick Rodgers], Mika Anderson [ph.] and Camika Spencer. Speaker 2: And this was in 2015 at 'Sense of an Ending' by Ken Urban. He's the one sitting down, the white guy sitting down. It's set in Rwanda and my cousin who is standing between me and his mother was in that play. Speaker 1: So you acted? Speaker 2: He is. Here's my daughter [Candace Rodgers] with Tony Brown. Speaker 1: And Tom Joyner and [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley had written a book and so that was during that signing. Speaker 2: And my business partner Ashira Tosihwe and I, we were getting an award. Speaker 1: And this is the poster from the first Romance Slam Jam cruise. We've cruised three times, but this is the first one in 1997, it was very successful. Speaker 2: And I'm so proud of this picture. These are the authors from the Romance Slam Jam, and we were in Nassau and I arranged for the authors to be interviewed at this radio station in, in Nassau in the Bahamas. Speaker 1: And this book-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. This book was published about 2015 about Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas], and I'm featured in it. I don't know how I got in, but I'm featured in it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay that's my daughter and I observing my fiftieth anniversary in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority. Speaker 2: And then on the opposite page I have this list of all of us who are AKAs in the family starting from 1942 to present. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And this was one of the ads. Speaker 1: My husband [Mederick Rodgers] and I following our wedding. And this was taken for--well this picture, this booklet was prepared for our forty-fifth wedding anniversary, at which we set up a scholarship fund at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Putting a face on black history. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is the book 'Redemption Song' written by Bertice Berry. And Black Images [Black Images Book Bazaar] in Dallas [Texas] is the setting for the book. And Ms. Cozy is the bookstore owner and I'm the inspiration character for this particular book. And the storyline is that they're in search of an old book and there are two customers in there vying for it. Speaker 2: "African American Gaining Acceptance," with me in a t-shirt. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: More coverage on Black Images. Speaker 2: And we got a lot of press 'cause it--as we were expressing that we celebrate black history 365 days. Speaker 1: And I was--with The Dallas Morning News they have this contest every year for children and I was one of the readers of the letters that the children sent in. Speaker 2: And that's an example--local bookstores battle the big chains. Speaker 1: Now this is a high profile that The Dallas Morning News did. That's page one, and then it continues on two more pages. The--the inside and the outside. The inside and the one with the color on, that's page two. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: And that's page, the next page, the conclusion. Speaker 2: And then that--this is set at Black Images. This was when the girls were going to Ghana, West Africa, the ROPP [ROPP for Girls, Inc., Dallas, Texas]. And we hosted, we host-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We hosted their, their, their launching trip at Black Images for the community to send them off with goodwill. Okay. Speaker 1: And my daughter is, if you got the--my daughter's featured there in the rest--on the back side. And those were the girls that-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Okay, then there's where Vonciel [Vonciel Jones Hill] is giving me-- Speaker 2: Now this one here-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It's just the photo right up here with Vonciel giving me the certificate for participating. Vonciel is on the left. She's a city councilwoman for District 3...