 Story_ID: 607292 Speaker 1: --that opportunity, and so I was determined. Speaker 2: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it wasn't--and, and it wasn't easy. It was lonely at times to know that there were places that you wanted to go but you couldn't go, not because you didn't have the money or you were not qualified to do it, but because of the color of your skin. But, yet, in the City of Portsmouth [Virginia]--let me give you an example. Right here in the City of Portsmouth, when we worked to integrate our schools, we had people to come in from HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] to work with a group of us that we were going to be going into certain schools and they prepared us for any obstacles that we might meet, but by the same token, we had met most of them anyway, so we were prepared. And I always had, in my mind, that I was gonna be the best teacher or the best administrator that I could possibly be because I was not only representing me, I was setting an example for others to follow me. And I would go in and take whatever they gave me. The, the, the first--let me give you a good example of something. The first job that I went in as an assistant principal was in Highland-Biltmore, which was over in Cradock section [Portsmouth, Virginia] off of Greenwood Drive and Academy Park [Portsmouth, Virginia], and the principal gave me a desk in the nurse's office. I couldn't even have a desk in the front office, and put a piece of corrugated paper around it so that the nurse would not have to look at me. But, I'm gonna tell you something. I went in there, I didn't like it, and I would pray before I went to school every day, and it still brings back bitter memories, but I made up in my mind that before I left that school, I was gonna have his job. That was my motivation, to be so good that they couldn't overlook me. That's where my first principalship was. Speaker 2: Was in that school? Speaker 1: Highland-Biltmore Elementary School [Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 607293 Speaker 1: I want to take, take you back, though, to Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] and we'll, we'll get you in your-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --first administrative job. But, but--okay, so, Columbia Teachers College, you were working on--you were telling me that your, your--part of your master's [degree] thesis had to do with a study in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so you would have to walk down the hill, down to Amsterdam [Avenue] to 125th and go on in-- Speaker 2: Right. And, and there what I did, it, it was a, a unique experience because these were children who were having problems in reading and I had a group of five black males and they were having problems because they could not read, and they would meet with me and I taught those little boys to read. And they were able to do--pass their little test and go--and, in fact, the little boy, little Corey [ph.] boy stays in touch with me. I don't care where he is, I still get a call from him during the holidays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He went on. He did very well. But, I never heard from the other little fellas. But, that was the thing to move--and he, he became my pet. I guess, I can honestly admit that he was my pet. Speaker 1: Okay. What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he tried so hard. Speaker 1: So, were you working out of one of the public schools in Harlem? Speaker 2: No, it was part of a study that I had to do because I was in childhood education and that was an assignment that Dr. Dolores Durkin had assigned, was for me to take time and go down to the school and work with children who were deficient-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in some of their skill there. Speaker 1: I was asking, did, did you work one of the schools in Harlem? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: I worked there and it was interesting. I would leave class and walk down from 125th Street [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] down to 123rd Street and work there with them. That was one of the jobs that I had. And the other one was to work in the early childhood education lab at Columbia, and that was working with the language development skills with children in the first four years of life where they developed their language skills. And I was monitored by Dr. Dolores Durkin, and that was a beautiful experience because I did my thesis on the fascinating twos, the frustrating threes, and the unforgettable fours. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was beautiful. Story_ID: 607294 Speaker 1: They say, child psychologists have said or maybe even psychiatrists, I'm not sure, that, that there's a certain time when you're between three and four where you, you really start figuring things out, you know, that people start thinking about what other people are thinking about (laughter), which is something that doesn't happen before that. Speaker 2: Yes, but I tell you, what I found with, with the children are, curiosity begins with them from the time they begin to utter their first sounds. If you've notice with babies, we have observed them in the--in the lab, soon they begin to zero in on sounds, they begin to respond or try to figure out where those sounds were. And with the, the children that we would find, once they begin to become toddlers and move around, they hit in the touching stage. They, they want to feel or either they want to put the mouth on to taste. Those are the key senses that they use at that time. Once they get there, it's sight and that movement, then they're curious about everything. They, they will touch whatever they see around them. They will ask you if you would give them a directive. They wanna know why, why, everything is why. And a lot of times people get frustrated with the why and that's the time you need to reach out and give them the answers-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --because that's the peaking of the fact of their curiosity. It says I wanna know, and that's learning. Speaker 1: Did your--when you were growing up, did your parents explain things to you when you were that age? Speaker 2: Not really. It was basically--when we were coming up, it was no, don't do that, you know. You weren't permitted to really express yourself because that was viewed as being sassy, talking back, you know kind of thing. But, I found that it was best if you were being told something to listen. Listening was the key. And then based on the reaction you got from them, you knew whether or not you could say anything because you learned to program your behavior based on the responses that you got. I found that my grandparents were more receptive to listening to what it was that we had to say because they were the ones there with us where with my mother [Gladys Daniel Pretlow] and my father [James West, Jr.], they were working, you know. So if Big Mama or Papa did not say something, then we felt as if it, it was all right, but our parents would come down on us. My mother and father would really come down on us. They would say, you know, "This is something you may do with Big Mama and Papa, but when you come home, this is the way it will be." So, we had to learn to operate between the two parameters, but we found that the grandparents were more nurturing in terms of giving us the opportunity to express ourselves, but at the same time without being disrespectful. They would let us at least talk back with them and they would tell us why where in with mom and dad, you don't do that, you know. You wouldn't ask that, but why? Because the response was going to be I told you. And that--it, it was a difference where in the grandparents would sort of pull you aside and Big Mama would say, now, you, you shouldn't do this because of such and such a thing and this is going to happen if you do that and I love you too much for that to happen. You see the difference? Speaker 1: There's a big difference, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So, as a result, we went to the grandparents. Story_ID: 607295 Speaker 1: You graduated from--with master's degree in early childhood education from Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] in 1963 and other than Dr. Durkin [Dolores Durkin], were there any other mentors or people that--interest at Columbia or any experiences in New York [New York] that really helped shape what you would do in the future? Speaker 2: You know, there were professors that I felt--Dr. Strosters--Strasknic-- Speaker 1: Strosnick? Speaker 2: S-T-R-A-S-K-N--S-T-R-A-S-K-N-I-C, Dr. Strasknic. I don't know what nationality or--he was, but I think I had more of a problem in communicating with him. I don't know if he, he may have--Russian, but he was some nationality because he had--I don't know. But, he had problems relating to many of us that were of color. There were only four of us in his class, but I always felt as if we had to do twice as much in terms of meeting the requirements in that class. I had not encountered that, but I tell you one thing, and maybe it was because of the area that he was in, he was in psychology, okay. It was only after I got out that I could re- re- really appreciate that. He would really tax you to the, the nth degree to really get the true emotions of what was coming through. You couldn't just make a statement with him because he could find a way to turn it around and you're sitting there, why did I make that statement, you know, kind of thing. But, in the beginning, I felt as if he didn't care that much for students of color in his classes. But, I tell you one thing, I learned to really appreciate him when I completed his class and he said to me, he said, "Ms. Randall [HistoryMaker Marlene Randall], I have truly enjoyed having you in my class." He said, "You're gonna need--don't lose the talent to persevere and follow through." He said, "I've been honored to have you in my class. You've been very honest and very open and if I can ever do anything to help you or give you a recommendation, I'll be happy to do that." I was floored and I was floored because I thought the man didn't like me 'cause he kept calling on me, you know. I felt as if he was picking on me in class, but he was stretching me because he felt as if I really wasn't giving as much as he felt as if I had to give. And I give him a lot of credit because he brought me out and he helped me to balance things. Because I think when I went in his class, I may have had a little chip on my shoulder and he helped to take that chip away, but at the same time, he made me look at life differently. Story_ID: 607296 Speaker 1: What did you do after graduation? You went--you, you came back here [Portsmouth, Virginia], right? Speaker 2: I came back. Speaker 1: And so, so what did you do next after 1963? Speaker 2: When I, I came back here, I concentrated on my career in terms of working and teaching and tried to remote myself, upward mobility as I was working through, and at the same time, I focused on my marriage, had my first child-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, now-- Speaker 2: --during that time. Speaker 1: --you, you got married [to Vernon Randall] in 1968? Is that right? Speaker 2: In sixty-- Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]? Speaker 2: --eight [1968]. No. Speaker 1: Oh, was it earlier than that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married in--I got married before '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Did you get married before you went to Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] or? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did you? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: All right. Now, that's-- Speaker 2: I was married before I went to Columbia. Speaker 1: Okay. We were trying to-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) figure it out. Speaker 2: --I-Ricky [Ricardo Randall] was born-- Speaker 1: Oh, 1958. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yet--and what, what was--I--Ricky was born in '65 [1965] and then my Ronnie [Veronica Randall Williams] was born in '70 [1970], and, and so as we--then I--my Michelle [Michelle Bryant] that went out the door, we brought Michelle in. You'll find I got a lot of children in my family. Michelle's mother and father died and that was Vernon's cousin, the daughter that just left out. Okay. We brought Michelle in and we raised Michelle. Michelle is the only one that's still here at home. I don't think my Michelle will ever leave me. We brought Danielle [ph.] and Brenda [ph.] in. I brought several people in here and, and raised them. Speaker 1: Okay. But, but, in--by 1963, you had--you had some children, but you, you did have like how many then? Speaker 2: In 1963, it was Ricky. Story_ID: 607297 Speaker 1: You came back to Virginia and did you teach in Portsmouth [Virginia] or? Speaker 2: I, I started teaching in Portsmouth. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, when--now, when did the federal program start, the desegregation program? When, when did that-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: I'm looking for-- Speaker 2: It started with--I might have to check with my husband [Vernon Randall] on that because that was--let's see, '55 [1955], I graduated [from Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]. In '58 [1958], I got married. The federal program started right somewhere after in that. I need to look at those pape-- Speaker 1: Was it before you got your advanced certificate from the-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Before that? Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Well, well, just tell us about what happened 'cause you started telling us about what happened. You were assigned to a school and they-- Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: --they segregated you within the school. But, what was the federal program? What, what was the name of it and-- Speaker 2: That was--what was that program called? Speaker 1: But it was run--it was-- Speaker 2: It was run by-- Speaker 1: HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]? Speaker 2: HEW. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was run by HEW and in addition to that, it was the beginning of the true integration of Portsmouth Public Schools. Speaker 1: Okay, so--and, and on--for--on your part, you were one of the first administrators assigned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was assigned. Speaker 1: --black administrators assigned to serve in the white public schools. Speaker 2: In the white schools. Speaker 1: In, in the--really, the public schools, but they were--had been kept white up to that point. Speaker 2: Up 'til that point. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I've-- Speaker 1: And your taxes are paying for all of them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All of them. And that was the school that they had sent me to and put me in the nurse's office and put the, the paper around me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was Highland-Biltmore [Highland-Biltmore Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Highland-Biltmore. Speaker 2: Highland-Biltmore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is now Newport [ph.] and the school is now called Victory Elementary School [Portsmouth, Virginia]. They built a new school there that's right off near where Tidewater Community College [Tidewater Community College Portsmouth, Portsmouth, Virginia] is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The new Portsmouth campus is there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you and how many other people were selected for this experiment? Speaker 2: I, I think that were probably about--there was about fifteen of us at the most that was in that program. And they put us in role-playing roles, but many of us had already been through that, the name calling. Speaker 1: Oh, they gave you a training with role playing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A training. Yes, we, we had to role play. And not only that, they put some of--there were whites in with us, too, because what it had to do--they were going to go into predominantly black schools-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and pave the way. And those of us of color, we were going into the white schools, and that's what they did. They trained us in a summer program and we did role playing. We, we talked about everything ugly we could think about, talking about from the environment that was going all, all around and how to appropriately respond to those things. Because we could not go in and create friction, else we would never be able to integrate. And our role was to go in and try to make things pleasant, where people would accept us and, and come in with us, and it worked. It was good because there was nothing that anybody could say to us that we had not said to one another in our role play-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was good. Story_ID: 607298 Speaker 1: When you started at, at Highland-Biltmore [Highland-Biltmore Elementary School; Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia], how many other black administrators were there with you? Speaker 2: I was the only one. Speaker 1: You were the only one? Okay. Speaker 2: I was the only one. And in, in each one of the situations that they were put in, they were the only ones. You know, they put that one and you were dealing still with the staff. Speaker 1: Now, you, you evinced several instances of harassment in terms of, you know, being--them segregating you off in a small office and putting cardboard around your desk so they didn't have to see you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. How else did they--what, what else did they do? Speaker 2: Well, one of the, the things that really stuck out in my mind was when I was assigned to that same school. I think that was--that was the most humiliating experience that I had. When I went into the office to meet the principal, you had to go over to the school to meet the principal, the secretary was at her desk who later became my best friend, was at her desk and she looked up and she went back to what she was doing, and I stood at the counter. And then I noticed that she was not acknowledging me, really. And on her desk, her name was written, Ms. Huff [ph.], on the desk plate, and I looked over and I said, "Ms. Huff? Ms. Huff?" And finally she looked up at me and I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Marlene Randall, and I'm here--," before I could finish, she said, "I know who you are." I said, "Well I'm here--." She said, "I know why you're here." I said, "Well, if possible, can I see Mr. Mashburn [ph.]?" And her comment to me was, "I'll see if he can see you." So, then I moved and sat in one of the chairs that was out in the--in the corner, but she never moved from the desk, she never picked up the telephone or anything. And after I had sat there for a few minutes and she had answered the telephone a few times, still not acknowledging me, I went back up to the counter and I said, "Ms. Huff, I have another appointment down with the superintendent and he wanted me to come here first before going down." And she said, "Well, I'll see what I can do." And then I went back and sat and that's when she went in to his office. Now, I had been sitting there feeling like an idiot, very--getting upset and saying, "You were told you might run into this, don't blow it," to myself. And then finally, she came to the door--back to the door, and she came and she said, "He'll see you now." Now in the meantime, I'm noticing what she was doing down in her drawer, she was crocheting while I'm sitting there waiting. So, I knew I wasn't going into a good situation. I go into the office and there's a chair there by his desk and he's sitting with his feet propped in the bottom desk, I'll never forget it, reading a hunting and fishing magazine. Speaker 1: He's real busy. Speaker 2: He's real occupied, and so I go in and I said, "Is it all right or--if I sit here, Mr. Mashburn? I'm Marlene Randall." He never said sit down, so I didn't sit. And he's--and I said, "I'm here because I've been assigned to this school and I will be your assistant principal." He said, "I've gotten the notification." I said, "Well, could you give me some idea as to where my office will be?" He said, "You will not have a, a office. There's a spot that we can give to you in the nurse's office," and I said, "Could you show me where that is please?" And he yells to his desk, "Ms. Huff, take the lady over to," he did call me lady, "take the lady over to Ms. Gibbs' [ph.] office." And so she carried me over--which was the office door that I had seen on the other side of her desk area, and I went over and she introduced me to her, and she looked up and she was very cordial, and she said, "They haven't gotten everything squared away for you, but there's a desk and they have corr- given you some privacy by putting this corrugated paper around," she said, "but we'll be able to work things out, and if there's anything I could do to help you, let me know," and I said, "Thank you." And I said, "But right now, I have to get back downtown," and she said, "Okay. When you coming back to work?" I said, "I'll be back here tomorrow." And then I left. I waved to the secretary, she never acknowledged that I left. Story_ID: 607299 Speaker 1: I went downtown and I went to a lady named Rufae Holmes who was really the pioneer for bringing about change in the City of Portsmouth [Virginia] integration of schools. She was a giant of a lady. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Rufae Holmes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: R-U-F-A-E, Rufae Holmes. Her father [Oscar Conklin] was a Baptist minister at Mount Hermon Temple Baptist church [sic. Mount Hermon Baptist Temple] in Portsmouth. And the Mount Hermon community--I'm gonna tie it all in for you, which was interesting. I want you to know, when I went into her office--I will forever love her--when I went into her office, I walked in and soon I called her name, I started crying because I was hurt. I cried and I just stood and she let me cry, and then she got up from her desk, and I'll never forget it, and she came over and she caught me by my shoulders and she said, "Now what are you crying for?" Just like that, "What are you crying for?" And I said, "They just treated me so mean," and she says to me--I'm, I'm getting teary just thinking about it. She said to me, "What did you expect?" She said, "Why do you think I sent you over there? You have so much to give and I want you to clear your face." And she went over to her desk and gave me some tissue. She said, "I want you to clear your face and I don't wanna ever see you shed another tear. You're used to this, but I want you to show them that you are the best thing that could've ever happened to them. And I'm gonna tell you something--" I, I just get emotion thinking about it. She said, "But let me tell you something--but what she said to me meant so much. She said, "You have something to give and it's a rare gift. They may not like you now but they're gonna learn to love you because I wouldn't have put you over there if I didn't think that you could turn things around. Now, you go in there and you get yourself together and you come back." And I went in the bathroom and I got myself together, and I came back in and she had pulled her chair close to where the other chair was and she sat there and she put her arms around me. She said, "I would never put you in anything that I didn't think you could handle." She said, "But you're one of the best ones that we have and I want you to understand, you knew you weren't going to go in there and get people loving you, but you're going in there to do a job because we're gonna send some children in there that's gonna need a role model, and I believe you're going to be that role model. Now, you go in there and let them know that this is the best thing that could've ever happened to them," and she hugged me. She said, "Now you go home for the rest of the day and get yourself together and walk in tomorrow morning with your head high." Until this day, I will forever love Rufae Holmes because she gave me a sense of pride and dignity that I didn't think I could ever have, but I could overcome so many more things as a result of her not coddling me, now, because I needed that tongue lashing at that point, and she gave it to me and then she hugged me. And do you know I have gone through many situations since then and I've had some hairy experiences including someone shooting out my--in front of my driveway for me having to close and integrate some schools when that was my role. But I want you to know, if I had it to do again, I would do just what I did then and I would pray that there would be Rufae Holmes. Story_ID: 607300 Speaker 1: Now what position did she [Rufae Holmes] hold at that point? Speaker 2: She was the director of the black schools. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was--what--they called her director of the black schools? Speaker 2: She was the director of the schools. She, she was like--she worked to the superintendent of schools and he did not--she was a supervisor, then she supervised all of the black schools in the city. She hired, she did everything. Speaker 1: So, actually the desegregation process was meant to dismantle, I guess, the, the--not dismantle, but change the administration of the black schools, too, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There were many more black schools-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --as such. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, what position did she finally end up in? Speaker 2: Well, she was the assistant to the superintendent of schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What happened with her was, she brought this team together of blacks and whites, and through HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], they trained us. They sent the white administrators into white--black schools, and they sent the blacks-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --into the white schools. And what we had to do was to go in and work where teaching staffs were beginning to change because zoning, court ordered zoning was coming through, and you had to bring people together. And as a result, we were able to do that with a smooth transition. Story_ID: 607301 Speaker 1: Now, the job that I went to after that was the coordinator for all of the schools, and my job was to draw the zones for downsizing the schools and creating a racial balance. And that was when I--my job was to make sure that I had to close a high school. The high school that I closed down was Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Was this one of the black high schools? Speaker 1: It was a white high school. Speaker 2: White high school? Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. And in the process, I took the students--I had to close some elementary schools. See, I pulled the plan together for the City of Portsmouth [Virginia] for realigned all of the schools so we could get a racial balance. And in the process of doing that, like Lakeview Elementary School [Portsmouth, Virginia] out here had K through three and then grades four, five, and six, they would leave from this school and go over to Hodges Manor [Hodges Manor Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia], which was the neighboring school, and Hodges Manor's children in the K through three were in Lakeview, which was a school out here, and then the four, fives, and sixes were all over. I had to do that with all of the schools including downsizing the high schools. And so we had Wilson High School, Churchland High School [Portsmouth, Virginia], Manor High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and Cradock High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Speaker 2: What did they--what was your title in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My--administrative assistant to the director of instruction. Speaker 2: Okay, to the director of instruction. And what, what year is this? Speaker 1: It was just before I retired. I retired from that position. I'm trying to remember what year I retired. I need to probably check with my husband [Vernon Randall]. I retired--I've been so busy, I don't even remember what year it was I retried. Ronnie [Veronica Randall Williams] was born in-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to think--looking here. Speaker 1: --seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 2: Let's see. Speaker 1: I retired in--man, isn't it funny I don't have those dates. Do you have those dates with you? Speaker 2: I'm looking here to see if you wrote it on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I retired in seventy--no, it wasn't 'cause Ronnie was born in seventy-- Speaker 2: It wouldn't have been in the '70s [1970s], would it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, no. It was in the '90s [1990s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: --when I retired. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Was it before you became secretary of the Area II NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Okay. So, sometime in the mid '90s [1990s]. So, this job then took place in the early '90s [1990s] or what? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Late '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: Early. Speaker 2: Or Early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Right. It was-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had--in fact--I'm trying to remember. I had open heart surgery in 19--because I came out following that job because I had open heart surgery and that was when I retired and I don't even remember what year I had open heart surgery. Isn't that pitiful? Story_ID: 607302 Speaker 1: You become the principal you said of Highland-Biltmore? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And how long did that take? I mean, what--how long was that process? Speaker 2: I was over at Highland-Biltmore--Ronnie [Veronica Randall Williams] was born in 1970, all right. That, that give me some perspective of time. In 1970, when my daughter was born, I was at Highland-Biltmore Elementary School [Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and I left Highland Biltmore-Elementary School and went over here to Lakeview [Lakeview Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia], which was the school that was built over here in this community and I-- Speaker 1: About what year was that when, when you went to Lakeview from Highland-Biltmore? Speaker 2: Let me check. Could I check my husband [Vernon Randall] a moment 'cause those dates are down there on the wall? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, so if, if it's--it--was it in the '70s [1970s], in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. That was in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were there--you were at Highland-Biltmore until, until the early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, so this has been--you were--you were there for a long time. Speaker 1: Yes, I was. Speaker 2: So, you, you, you started in--what, sixty-- Speaker 1: I was at Highland-Biltmore and I did the job there at Highland-Biltmore, and then I was moved to the principalship of Lakeview Elementary School. See, I became principal out here at Lakeview Elementary School. Did I put Lakeview Elementary School down there? Speaker 2: No, I don't see it. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Well, I was principal at Lakeview Elementary School. Story_ID: 607303 Speaker 1: We have discovered that when you first started the desegregation program, the HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services]--that, that, that program, that, that was 1972. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and Rufae Holmes is someone that we should all know about. Is she--is she still around? Is she-- Speaker 2: Yes, but she--she's in senility but if I would go to her, she would know me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She always said that she taught me how to grow up and she did. Her butt had been kicked. You pardon the expression and she said, "You have to put more padding on." I'll never forget it, and, and I learned how to appreciate that. Speaker 1: So, how were you able to--I mean, I know it was a--probably a slow process, but how--you were able to take that secretary who ignored you basically and tried to make you feel as bad as possible and, and make her your best friend. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: How did--how, how were you able to do this? Speaker 2: Well, she was very talented in crafts, crocheting, knitting, and whenever she had a spare time, I would see her at the desk crocheting and knitting, and that's what she was doing when I first came in the office the first time. And she shocked me one day because she came in and brought me four kitchen placemats that she had knitted for me and I remember when she had asked me what color was my kitchen and I said, "Well, basically it's all white but I have pink in there in the curtains," and she made me the nicest white mats for my, my kitchen and I'm saying, maybe she's not all bad after all. Well, it so happened that the principal, that she didn't just come to me, what she did was the principal [of Highland-Biltmore Elementary School; Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia] became incompetent. You know, God works out things for you. And-- Speaker 1: Now, this is the fellow that was reading Field and Stream right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --while-- Speaker 2: And what happened was, I would find him sleeping at his desk and he would be with this magazine, but I didn't know that what he was actually doing, he was sleeping. The magazine was a front. Speaker 1: Actually, front--right in front of his face, I guess, right? Speaker 2: That's right. And so I said, you know, I called and then he, he doesn't answer the telephone and finally she said to me, she said, "Ms. Randall [HistoryMaker Marlene Randall], Ms.--Mr. Mashburn [ph.] is not able to do the job here anymore. He's having some problems and he does a lot of sleeping." I said, "Ms. Huff [ph.], I had picked up on that but it wasn't for me to say anything." She said, "That's why you're doing everything. You're running the school 'cause he doesn't feel good." And I said, "Well, I think you need to talk to his wife about it because it's not fair for him to be here and he's the principal and I'm having to take all of the workload. I don't mind it, but he's sick with him doing that kind of sleeping all the time," and she said, "I'll see what I can do with his wife," and she did and he went out on medical disability. He was sick and he died about six months later. Speaker 1: Gee whiz. So it--so, how long were you there before you became the principal you think? Speaker 2: I was made principal like three--acting principal three weeks after he, he had passed. And then when the board met through--at the end of school, I was acting principal there for the rest of that year. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but I meant like long was it before you arrived at the school did he leave? Speaker 2: I guess it was about four or five months. Speaker 1: Oh, so it wasn't long at all, within the first year. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, that didn't take long. Speaker 2: And it didn't take long for me to move into that position, but in the meantime, the parents had gotten to the point they were coming to me for everything anyway, so they did not put up any alarm or anything. They had accepted me. The parents accepted me because the children had accepted me 'cause I was the one working directly with them. I was in the office and in the halls and so as a result, they said they didn't want anyone else in there. They would like for me to stay there and the school board honored that request. Speaker 1: Now, now, these are mostly white parents. Speaker 2: These were all white parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They requested that I would stay there because the children loved me, the--they were doing well, and they didn't think any more changes needed to take place at that point. And so they let me stay in through the end of the year and then appointed me officially as of July one as the principal of that school. Speaker 1: Okay, and how-- Speaker 2: And I stayed there for like eleven years and then Trumble [Richard D. Trumble] pulled me from there. Story_ID: 607304 Speaker 1: Dick Trumble [Richard D. Trumble] decided to--he, he sent me to Lakeview, and then after he sent me to Lakeview to do some things at Lakeview, then he pulled me downtown in central administration to redistrict the school division, and that was where I retired from. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you went from--you went from Lakeview from-- Speaker 1: Highland-- Speaker 2: --Highland-- Speaker 1: --Biltmore [Highland-Biltmore Elementary School; Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Speaker 2: --Biltmore. And you were there until he pulled you downtown? Speaker 1: Pulled me downtown. Speaker 2: And, and that was 1972, '92 [1992]-- Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Yeah, for-- Speaker 1: --was when I went downtown. Speaker 2: Okay. So, eleven years at-- Speaker 1: Lakeview--oh. Speaker 2: --at, at Trumble--I mean, at Highland-Biltmore, then at Lakeview for another almost--well, about eight, eight years almost. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And the strangest thing was that, which made that so unique was the fact that they had another problem because all of the parents they had requests, schools were zoned and parents could request for the students to attend other schools and all the requests were coming in for transfers into Lakeview Elementary School [Portsmouth, Virginia]. Lakeview Elementary School out here became the top school in the division. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It became the top school. We had the top scores. The, the teachers were happy. The parents were white parents who were singing the praises all over. If you want your child to get a good education, send them over there to Lakeview with Randall [HistoryMaker Marlene Randall]. The TV reporters was over there, Kurt Williams, all of them. They were over to find out what was the magic at Lakeview? Lakeview was a unique experience. It was a happy place. We were the first school to--where the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], we had the highest percentage of PTAs, parents involved. We won every district PTA affair in the district for Lakeview school, the scrapbooks. The whites and black parents worked together and it was the top school, not only in terms of parental partic- participation, but also academically. Because it was the best of the students that were coming in, and the students of the parents that were in there were from this community and they were basically educated or career oriented people including the mayor's family. All of them were out here 'cause this was the black belt all the way through. The community was built from minorities. And so they were professionals. They came out into the area and in the process, what they did was they formed a coalition which was a power base, this community has more political clout than any community in the city. And it was not intended (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) okay. Speaker 1: --to be that way. But, it happened because the people who were qualified and career orientated purchased homes out here because this was the only place you could buy a decent home and raise your family, so all of us came out into this area. And as a result, it just hit to the point where everybody wanted to come here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it paid off. Story_ID: 607305 Speaker 1: We were starting to talk, talk about what happened in 1992 when you were--you left Lakeview [Lakeview Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and you were hired as administrative assistant to the director of instruction to downsize the Portsmouth [Virginia] schools, right? It was 1992. Speaker 2: Right. That was the superintendent of schools, Dick Trumble [Richard D. Trumble]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The superintendent of schools came in. He asked if I could consolidate, come up with a plan because we did not need all of the schools that we had. They had built a new high school, which was Manor High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] out here in this community, but yet the enrollments of some of the other schools had gone down and we did not need that many high schools, so one of them had to be closed. So, in the process of redistricting and drawing the lines, I had to close a high school. The high school that I had to close was Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. And in, in the process, rather than to close it right out, what we did, we closed Cradock [Cradock High School; Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] 'cause it was a small school. We closed Cradock and made Manor, Wilson High School, and we built a new school in Churchland [Portsmouth, Virginia] for the community out there. And then as a result, we were able to pull everything together with the big Churchland High School [Portsmouth, Virginia], the Manor High School in place, and we held on to the Wilson High School and made sure that the Manor High School was big enough to bring those children in there and built a new Norcom High School [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] because the blacks did not want Norcom High School closed. So, we rebuilt Norcom, closed Wilson, and put them in the new Manor High School, and built a new Churchland High School, which was where the outward expansion was beginning to go at that time, and in the process, we were able to balance the schools through there. The thing that we ran into was there was resistance. It was a very stressful time. Cradock had a lot of loyalty to that school. The people didn't want to give it up any more than Norcom wanted to give up their school. So, it was a lot of tension. That was a very tense time in the history and this consolidation of our schools. Story_ID: 607306 Speaker 1: Now, there was a time when they actually shot at your house. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was that in reference to Cradock [Cradock High School; Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] or, or Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] or, or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How do you know who-- Speaker 2: They--I--I'm not quite sure which one it was, but they followed me home from a meeting. I was also there at the same time recall down loading and rezoning to bring about a racial balance in the elementary schools, which also--was a whole lot going on at one time, but that was my job, to bring it about with the least resistance. Speaker 1: So, it was on a evening you were coming home from a meeting. Speaker 2: I came home (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: --from a meeting where I had explained-- Speaker 1: This was 1992. Speaker 2: That's right, a zoning plan of how we were going to do it. And I was followed home by a carload of young men. I recognized when I pulled out of the parking lot that the car appeared to have been following me, but I didn't really think that anything would happen. And when I pulled--turned into WynnStreet, when I turned in, when I, I noticed that the car turned in behind me, and I pulled up into the driveway and the car stopped at the curb, and then put the gun out the window and they shot. The casings were out in front of my driveway. Speaker 1: Were you outside when they were shooting? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I was outside--I was getting out of the car and the police came and they said they think that they really didn't wanna shoot me, but it was like a warning 'cause the casings were out there in the--in the street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think it was a warning, too. I always felt as if it was saying leave our schools alone, that they did not want it. But when that happened, they created a bonding because the community did not like the fact that it happened on either side, you know. And so the parents and all began to work together to go along with the plan. The, the ironic thing about that was the guy who is in here now, Judge Mark Davis [Mark S. Davis], who is a judge in the City of Portsmouth [Virginia] was sent to me from Richmond [Virginia] to work with me while I was downtown and his job was to guide me through the process, and he did. He worked with me, he had showed me how to stay within the zones and all, and he's a close friend of mine. He was also very close to Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], the governor, and as a result, we still hug and kiss one another whenever I see him. I tell him he was my lifeline. But, right after that was when I had my heart attack. Speaker 1: Okay, this, this in '92 [1992], same, same year? Speaker 2: I had back to back heart attacks and open heart surgery. Speaker 1: Gee. Story_ID: 607307 Speaker 1: You were working on a Ph.D. at that time, too-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --right, in-- Speaker 2: At that same time. Speaker 1: --in Nova [Nova University; Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida]. Speaker 2: At Nova. Speaker 1: And had pretty much completed it-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --except the-- Speaker 2: All but the writing. The only thing I--do is to finish all of my writing. And--but then, I decided to take it easy and back away for a while. I felt as if I--if I had continued at the pace that I was going, I wouldn't be here today. I had taken all of the hits for integrating the elementary school. I had to realign every school. I had taken the hits from the middle schools. And then here I am trying to do the high schools and someone shooting. I, I think I--that was at my low point. I just felt as if, why do I always have to be the one out there on the firing line? You ask yourself those questions. But in my heart and mind, I felt as if that was what my mission was for, to show that we could all work together and get things done and still have an outstanding school division, and we do have that now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it, it--that--it did pay off. Speaker 1: All right. But, that's-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, do you think that the stress had something to do with your heart attack? Speaker 2: I, I believe it did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I was running and doing things at--I wasn't taking care of myself, really I wasn't. I was very stressful. I wasn't eating like I should have or doing things, you know, like that, late hours, running in and out from place to place. Speaker 1: Now, you worked in the school system [Portsmouth Public Schools] until 2002-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then you decide to run for city council [Portsmouth City Council]. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 607308 Speaker 1: Before we leave the schools, I just--you--I wanted to ask you what your--what your concerns are about the public schools today maybe, you know, as you look back on-- Speaker 2: As I look back at our schools today, there are different challenges. Even during the midst of what was going on, we always had parental involvement. The, the community, the church, and the family truly worked as a triangle with--embraced everybody within that triangle, and so it was truly a family concern kind of thing. I see us going backwards. We'll build you more jails. We're losing more children to our penal institutions. Just recently in our city [Portsmouth, Virginia], we had a young man to go up to a school and someone let him in the door and he shot at someone. These were things we never heard of as we were working with children. We have a generation now that needs mentoring from the males. The males need to mentor to them. Drugs have stagnated the minds to the point that there is no more conscience. And if you notice in your churches, you aren't seeing many of the males, figures and--from our young people in them, in this community. We just had a young man that lost his life out here. It--it's something wrong with what is going on. We need to probably go back to some of the principles that we had and see what we can do to bring them together. So--I--that's one of the major things that I've seen. Speaker 1: So you think these are--these are problems that the school district can solve or problems that the community can primarily solve or, or both or what? Speaker 2: I see a combination of both. I've noticed the churches are doing more with their outreach programs. It is a community problem, but not only the churches and the schools, but I'm saying neighborhoods. We, we as residents need to be concerned about what's going on on our streets or what's going on at the neighbor's house if there are young people. This is a whole new generation of young people. They have no fear and, and we see that whenever we pick up our papers or whenever we look at TV. There is no fear. They--there is a feeling, I can do anything I want to and guns gives me my power. We never had this kind of thing, particularly around in our neighborhood. I'm, I'm finding that that's the thing that's happening even in my own home and it's disturbing. I walked in here and someone was in my house, right here, upstairs. I come in through the side door and I see a shadow across in the upstairs bedroom. Nobody in the house with me. Speaker 1: Nobody is supposed to be. Speaker 2: Right. And I'm starting that way when I noticed the shadow and I back away and I yell, and it was only through the grace of God that the person didn't come down because I yelled come downstairs, I'm waiting for you. It will be the last steps you come down as if I had a weapon. I was standing there with nothing but a poker in my hand. I would've died had he started down the steps. But, then I put an alarm system. Speaker 1: How did you get out? Speaker 2: Prior to that-- Speaker 1: I'm, I'm sorry, but how, how did--did, did he leave out a window or something? Speaker 2: He went out the window in the bedroom upstairs, dropped down on top of the deck, and ran through, but he had come on a bicycle. He couldn't get the bicycle because it had been chained to me fence in the back, so they were able to-- Speaker 1: Catch him? Speaker 2: Catch him-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as a result of the bicycle and he had the cell phone and was so stupid, he answered it when it was called. So, the thing that we-- Speaker 1: He took your cell phone and when, when you were-- Speaker 2: Took the cell phone and the young lady answered the telephone and I recognized her voice 'cause I'd seen her in the--in the store up there. But, it's a whole new ballgame. It's a whole new ballgame. Story_ID: 607309 Speaker 1: When you retired from the school board [Portsmouth Public Schools], that's 2002, I guess. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You decide to run for city council [Portsmouth City Council]. Now, you, you thought about it--about it ten years before, right? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And, well, tell, tell us what happened. Speaker 2: Well, what happened then, I was pushing someone else. A young man who was--had been the chairman of the school board, Mr. Griffin, Bernard Griffin [Bernard D. Griffin, Sr.], a very fine gentleman. I loved him and it's funny how life goes around in circles. Bernard Griffin was the student and his wife [Alveria Griffin] were out of Mount Hermon [Portsmouth, Virginia] at the first school that I started at [Highland-Biltmore Elementary School; Victory Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Bernard married a young lady that was teaching there and as a result, we built a friendship. But, but I just admired that young man who had married this new teacher that was at the school I was teaching at, never recognized me 'cause he was a teacher, too, that one day our paths would cross again. And I just felt as if he, he was a man that was stable to run for the city council and I worked in his campaign, never thinking that one day I would decide to run for city council. And guess who was there in my campaign to push (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bernard-- Speaker 2: --me? Speaker 1: Bernard Griffin? Speaker 2: Bernard Griffin. And guess who was here with me this time? Bernard Griffin. So, I have fond memories of all the beautiful people that have been in my life and I think if I had it to do again, I would do it all over again because from each experience, I learned something different. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I learned-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --something about me as well. Story_ID: 607310 Speaker 1: Now I want to take you to--back to '99 [1999], you, you were--the--you were appointed the secretary of the Area II NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --includes Norfolk [Virginia], Portsmouth [Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Portsmouth. Speaker 1: --Chesapeake [Virginia], and Newport News [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Newport News. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so, now, this is a--is this like--was this sort of like a springboard to 2002? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Yes, it was. I, I worked very closely with the NAACP and I worked particularly with the youth group, and there is a friend of mine, Dr. Elizabeth Daniels, we are very close. Her husband [Jesse Robinson] and Vernon [Randall's husband, Vernon Randall] and I are very close. She lives out here also. And we sort of just bonded together like sisters and as a result, I got involved in doing things and became the Area II secretary for the NAACP for Norfolk, Portsmouth. For all of them, I served as the secretary, just gave it up. Because once--I found my council roles were getting a little bit more demanding and then I had said to myself that this would be the last go around. If I made it through this time, I will not do it anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is it for me. Story_ID: 607311 Speaker 1: You've been in office now for, for eight years. You were elected in 2002. Was, was it a difficult campaign in 2002 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't think it, it was. We didn't have as many people running in 2002 and Councilman Griffin [Bernard D. Griffin, Sr.] was one of those who pushed for me to do it, plus the Area II NAACPs [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] pushed, said we need you, we want you to go out and do some things there. And, of course, we went on and wound up doing well, being the top vote getter during that time. And then when I decided to run the second time, that worked out nicely. Bill Moody [William E. Moody, Jr.] who was already on the council [Portsmouth City Council] when I went on and Charles Whitehurst, who I had directed his campaign when he ran for city council, we ran together as a ticket and got things running through. And then this time, at first I was not going to seek another term for city council, and I began to look at things that are happening in the city [Portsmouth, Virginia]. We, we need to be focused, particularly, since I'm also on the regional jail board, was a motivation for me, too, and I'm seeing more and more of our young men and women in jail. And then Governor Tim Kaine appointed me to the criminal justice services board, so I'm serving on that board also. So, it gave me an opportunity to look at what was happening across the state in doing things. Story_ID: 607312 Speaker 1: The prison issue, you got, you know, crime is an issue, prison issue, the education issues. What, what other issues here in Portsmouth [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Well, the economics in, in the area. We're, we're really looking in at trying to market the city. And I'm sure probably you're familiar with the fact that we were mandated to upgrade our court system, so now we are trying to build our courts. We have a beautiful plan for the Port Centre [Portsmouth, Virginia] where we're going to put all three courts [Portsmouth Judicial Center, Portsmouth, Virginia]. It's going to be gorgeous to put them there, but at the same time, it's going to free up some much needed space that we need for economic development. We are landlocked. There's not a lot of money coming into the city. We have to figure out a way to generate revenue because all around, all of the areas are doing things and we are not bringing in any revenue. We're looking at things a little bit differently. Our, our schools are top of the line. That--that's a strong plus. The, the waterfront is our major challenge right now, bringing in retail development. We have a large population of people who depend on the city and other agencies for subsidies just to survive. We have an older senior population our--in our city. But we are going to have to do even a greater job with our young people. Speaker 1: Now, now how large a City is Portsmouth? Speaker 2: I guess we're looking at--I'm, I'm not even sure. I guess I would say between seventy thousand, somewhere around, up in there. We are a part of the Virginia First Cities, which is Newport News [Virginia], Hampton [Virginia], all of us are locked in. Hamp- Newport News have place to spread out. Norfolk [Virginia] has spots to spread out. But now Chesapeake [Virginia] have closed them in. Chesapeake has the largest mass of land area and we were not very foresighted because we did not branch out. Now, there's no place for us to go. Suffolk [Virginia], large area to spread out. So, basically, what we have to do is do a smarter and better job with what we're doing within our city because we have no place to go. The--our biggest plus is our shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia] and hoping that the fleet will stay in here, the naval facilities. Otherwise, we have no other recourse except to work smartly with our neighboring cities. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm, I'm sure you probably noticed as you came into the city, many of our older areas have been torn down. Did you notice that? Speaker 1: I, I supposed that, you know, but I don't--you know, this is my first time, you know, in Portsmouth. Speaker 2: In here. But if, if you look at the Jeffry Wilson [Jeffry Wilson Homes, Portsmouth, Virginia] section, which is where the old Norcom High School [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] was. You--are you familiar with that section? Well, the old Norcom High School is in the midst of a renaissance, that section. Everything has been torn down. The other piece that we have in here that is a ray of hope is with the seaport, with the (unclear) corporation. I did have a chance to go out to the Long Beach [California] location and look at that operation before saying, "Portsmouth, let's bank on it." You're--we're coming in. And it has worked out nicely in here, but we're just beginning now to reap some of the financial things in it. But we're a--an old city that's--we have little space, but we have to market it in a way that we can generate some revenue. Story_ID: 607313 Speaker 1: But a lot of history. Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it's now--I know there's a lot of historical activity in this area now to--I guess to retell the history of the Tidewater area [Virginia]. Speaker 1: That's what we are trying to do. If you look at Norcom- I mean, Norfolk [Virginia], Norfolk has very aggressively pursued a new image for Norfolk. We have been very reserved and laid back, but we can't afford to be that way anymore. We're gonna have to aggressively pursue the market. I can recall when the riverboat program that Norfolk is very successful with, where they take the ships out into, what is it? How they call the waterways where they can do the casinos and everything, that project was called (unclear) that was brought to Portsmouth [Virginia] and we were not perceptive of it enough to embrace it because those boats, cruise ships could've been on this side of, of the river. But, we were laid back and I put myself in that group because it was one--I was one of those who was pushing for it, but we couldn't get enough support in the city to do it, and now we're looking at the money and the rewards that Norfolk is benefiting from as a result of the riverboats coming in, and we don't have it. Speaker 2: So, what, what, what river is this that, that-- Speaker 1: That's Elizabeth River. Speaker 2: Elizabeth River, okay. All right. Speaker 1: Elizabeth River. So, we did not do such a good job of marketing our waterfront and now we're trying to clean it all up because we know that the future on the waterfront is going to result by what we do on that waterfront. The Renaissance Hotel [Renaissance Portsmouth-Norfolk Waterfront Hotel, Portsmouth, Virginia] is our one big hotel there. It's beginning to pick up, but for the longest time, it was not doing much of anything. We're praying that it will. The Holiday Inn closed down. We lost that and we're trying to bring something else in in that area. But what we are also seeing, which is a ray of hope is that Portsmouth are many subdivisions in one city that small because when you go across the bridge, you're in Churchland [Portsmouth, Virginia], which is a whole new world, and then you have this section out here, which is like the furthest point here that connects with Chesapeake [Virginia]. So, we're, we're seeing a lot of things that are going on. But, we have no place to go expansion wise. Story_ID: 607314 Speaker 1: Do you have a, a, a main project or a pet project of yours that you're--that you're working on in city council [Portsmouth City Council]? Speaker 2: Yes. My major concern with city council is to make sure that we stop looking down and thinking about how small we are, but think in terms of what do we have to offer to cities to want people to come to our city? Well, we have an nTelos [nTelos Wireless Pavilion; Portsmouth Pavilion, Portsmouth, Virginia], which is nice, but we aren't bringing in the right shows. We have a waterfront that we are not bringing in the revenue for because we had court complexes on prime real estate, so we are reassessing what we're doing there. I can't wait to see the court complexes come off the waterfront and move over into the Port Centre complex [Portsmouth, Virginia] where they're gonna have all new courts, but look at that corridor from city hall [Portsmouth City Hall, Portsmouth, Virginia] down of what we can do that's a mirror image what is going on in Norfolk [Virginia]. And we can do some venue things between the two cities. Because the shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard] is in Portsmouth [Virginia], okay. Now, that's, that's a major asset. Speaker 1: That's the biggest navy shipyard in the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --country. Speaker 2: And what we need to do is to market. And we have a president--now, opportunities are golden. When we look at the president, Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], who is looking at how we can maximize what we have, let's look at the shipyard. It's the oldest shipyard on this coast and it's been around a long time. Why not make it one of the major shipyards? We got the workforce. We got it all built in right here, so that's what we are pushing, marketing that shipyard, adding the medical complex. Like Newport News [Virginia] has this medical complex, Norfolk with Dr. L.D. Britt over there, fine man. I love him dearly. We are getting ready now to bring a medical complex and bring it in through a developer, which is going to be another segment that we can have over here. But if we don't use our property and the few assets that we have to maximize what we want to produce in the city for the citizens, this city could die. So the only thing that we really have to push is our waterfront, and we have to bring festivals in here that says to people, we want you in the City of Portsmouth. And we have an older population. What are we doing to bring the young folks in? We're gonna die out, but will the young folks stay? These are the questions that we are having to ask. Story_ID: 607315 Speaker 1: The biggest pearl- now, you're gonna love this, I'm excited about it-- is Tidewater Community College [Tidewater Community College Portsmouth, Portsmouth, Virginia]. Now, I am so excited about that piece because the lady at the helm of that, Dr. Debbie DiCroce [Deborah M. DiCroce], visioner, brilliant, and she is a shrewd business woman. I admire her and I tell her that. She has brought a vision in here that we would have never thought of. You know, the original Tidewater Community College [Tidewater Community College Suffolk] was located in Suffolk [Virginia]. Isn't that strange? Now we have within walking distance of where we are sitting right now, our own Victory Boulevard, Tidewater Community College. It has a first college program built into it where students in high school who want to go in nursing and some of the other professions, in their senior years, they can get model assimilation programs at TCC, beautiful opportunities. So, I, I just love Dr. DiCroce and she knows that. Speaker 2: How do you spell her name? Speaker 1: It's D-E-capital C-R-O-S [sic.]--well, how--how's that other part in there? S-E or S-Y, but it's Dr. Debbie DiCroce. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: C-R-O-C- Vernon [Randall's husband, Vernon Randall] knows. He's on that board. But, she is a brilliant lady, but not only that, you have a horticulture program over there, you have everything that you need for businesses and everything else over there. I think it's going to be the pearl of Portsmouth [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think with that, it will spice up and people will want to come in here. Because if you notice, our housing market, many of them, the housing units are--were decrapidated and just all messed up. And right now, what we're doing, we're rebuilding them up, but the key is to get these people with jobs. We're filling up jails, but we need to be marketing skills in our schools where people can have a sense of hope and, and right now, our young men are filling up the jails, and it breaks my heart to see that. Story_ID: 607316 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question and you, you addressed it somewhat before, but when you look back on everything you've done to this point, would--is there any major thing you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I, I can--the only thing that I can think of that I would have done differently, I think I would have probably been more assertive in the political process much sooner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right. And that may sound strange-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --but, the reason I, I say that is that so many things had we looked at them differently could've made a greater impact on where this city is now and what I'm thinking in terms of we laid back and we let other areas close us in and box us in to a point that there was no outward movement and we could've avoided that. We could've avoided that. And a lot of the, the land that's just across the railroad track up here off of Cavalier Boulevard, that's Chesapeake's [Virginia] land. And all of that was wilderness and woods when we came out here. Speaker 1: So it could've been acquired by Portsmouth [Virginia]? Speaker 2: It could've been acquired by Portsmouth, and that's all of that industrial development. They have businesses. That revenue across the railroad track that's going to Chesapeake could've been in Portsmouth. We could've used that land, but we didn't. So, as a result, we lost on that. And that's one of the things that we could've done. The other thing that we could've done earlier was look in terms of more regionalism in the planning instead of everybody doing their own little piece, more cooperative planning about-- Speaker 1: Do-- Speaker 2: --the area as a whole. Speaker 1: Do, do you see that becoming more of the theme in politics around here in the future, the Tidewater area [Virginia], these small cities? 'Cause this is really the biggest metropolitan area in Virginia, right? Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: This-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Do you see more cooperation between the cities? Speaker 2: I think we're going to have to see it. Necessity is going to push it. When we look at the water, that's Chesapeake. Think about it. Here we are, we have to buy water from Suffolk [Virginia]. You see where I'm coming from? Because we did not embrace some things. The large industrial area that's right down the street here could've been very easily at Portsmouth. When we look out at Western Branch [Chesapeake, Virginia] and the Churchland [Portsmouth, Virginia] area that goes all the way out to Suffolk, we lost all of that because we weren't thinking big enough. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's the thing--we--we've been sort of close-fisted-- Speaker 1: Now, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in some things. Story_ID: 607317 Speaker 1: When you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, one of the major legacies that I would see is the fact that all of our schools [Portsmouth Public Schools] are accredited and I started all in education to make things better. I've done that. I've pushed, I've served in every capacity there to see it. That was my goal, to make sure that every child had an opportunity to reach whatever their dreams may have been. And that's why I endured some of the things that I did endure, to make things better. Now, I can say, that's done. That part is done. But the other piece is to keep that sense of pride in our young people, that they feel a need to move to the next level to keep the city up and not let the undesirable elements come in and destroy what you can build on, also to see more regionalism come together. We can't grow anywhere. We're locked from all sides, but that means that we have to work smarter. We need to work cooperatively with the leaders in Chesapeake [Virginia], in Virginia Beach [Virginia], in Suffolk [Virginia], in Ches- all of us, Norfolk [Virginia]. We all need to come together. Now, what could we do? And we're beginning to do that. We're coming together, we're talking about how can we market this big market that we call Tidewater [Virginia]? How do we market? And one of the things that I'm finding that we're doing, by working with the cities and we do it all the time--Congressman Bobby Scott, you probably heard the name, Congressman Scott has done a super job in terms of pulling all of us together. When I look at Senator Yvonne Miller [Yvonne B. Miller], when I look at Mamie Radcliffe [ph.], when I think about Senator Louise Lucas, when I, I look at Delegate Matthews--Ja--Matthew James, I worked in every one of those campaigns. And to me, I see a pearl that's in the rough now, but if we can bring this all together, we have the most valuable pearl that you could have on this East Coast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe that. Story_ID: 607318 Speaker 1: I haven't asked you to talk a lot about your family, but tell us something about your family right now before we-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --before I ask my last question. We've only got a couple more (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. My family--I think that well, let's--well, there's two families. The family that I think of is the family that I was born into, always was highly motivated, professional, and they always wanted the best. Their families did not have the education, but they were good entrepreneur business people, so they instilled that. Speaker 1: I, I just wanted to talk--you to talk about, you know, what the family is doing today, you know, I mean who's your family still right now? Speaker 2: It--with my family? Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause we've been through the history-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --so, so we just want-- Speaker 2: All right. I have a sister [Jean West Dickens] who is a retired educator. I have a, a son [Ricardo Randall]. It's funny how they've run into this area, a son who's in education in Norfolk [Virginia]. I have a daughter who was a teacher of the year for Portsmouth [Virginia] last year. I have a nephew who is a mortician in Norfolk. The grandchildren are doing well academically. In fact, I have--my grandson, Cordell [ph.], came in second place for third graders in the mathathon. He--he's a little person. I guess you see him. He's around here somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he's quite a little man. Jamaier [ph.] has done very well. I look at my daughter, Michelle [Michelle Bryant], who is with a computer company she dearly loves. She is a gradu- all of them graduated. She's the only one I can't seem to get to leave her mother. That's the one that left a while ago. But, I, I think that part of it, because all of them are not biological children, all right. Michelle is the daughter of my husband's first cousin, and they were killed in a automobile accident when she was seven years old. And I'm like her clinging vine. I, I don't believe my Michelle will ever leave me, you know. She just clings and I'm gonna let her cling as long as she wants to. My daughter, Ronnie [Veronica Randall Williams], is ironically teaching. She's a math whiz. That's the one with the little boy who is the math whiz and she, she was the teacher of the year. Her husband is a psychology professor at Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], and he's doing well. My son's wife, we just lost her to cancer and so he has the grandbaby and we're taking care of the grandbaby here. My Danielle [ph.], her--I guess I probably need to show you her--the pictures 'cause they're on the wall. Danielle just finished Eastern Virginia Medical College [sic. Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia]. Danielle and Brenda [ph.], we brought them in. We've raised a lot of children in our home. We brought them in. Brenda is getting ready to move in to look out for the grandchildren for me 'cause Dannie has gotten married and I feel as if she needs to be with her husband in her home, but I didn't want Brenda to be alone. So, I told her to, at the end of the year, come on in here. I got the space, and so she is going to move in here, and she will look out for the grandchildren. Because I'm finding that for the next three years, I'm gonna be busy and I do want to focus on some other things, and I don't want to be tired especially to the grandchildren. I think it's time for me to back away from that. But I thank God that I'm able to see them all doing well. Story_ID: 607319 Speaker 1: The other thing in Portsmouth [Virginia] I'd like to see us do is to market not only downtown, but put out some satellite market places like the other cities have done, like Virginia Beach [Virginia] have several marketing spots around in the city. I'd like to see us expand what we're doing in the Churchland [Portsmouth, Virginia] area 'cause that's a large area with economic development. I'd like to see us do more with that midtown area where we have the Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] and we're beginning now to market in that area and focus on that downtown corridor, get those courthouse things out and bring revenue back into that area. We are moving the jail out. The jail should've never been put on waterfront, prime property. We can't go out. Move the jail out. If it's no more than adding on a part to the regional jail--the regional jail is here in Portsmouth, so since we are hosting that on the land area, why not let the regular jail be out in that area. There's plenty of land out, which frees up the waterfront for us to market. See, I'm, I'm looking at things like that. I'm looking at--down at our shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia] where we have the shipyard corridor down through there. That's one point that we need to expand. It's the largest. Let's really market and move that, and the government and the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and everybody working with us. He's been super with some things that we have on the market to do there. And in addition to that, we have the largest shipping company through the port through (unclear) out there. Let's market it. Let's bring some revenue into the city because we are land locked. We're gonna have to bring the resources into us. So, that's what we're looking at and that's what this council is going to be focusing on. Speaker 2: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Enhancing that. Story_ID: 607320 Speaker 1: I would like to be remembered as someone who dearly loved her city [Portsmouth, Virginia], enjoyed her life to the fullest, and was committed to making things different from what it was when I came in here, when I leave it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That it would be a better place for everyone to be because I did not back up from the challenges. I faced them head on and I believe if we forge forward, this little pearl can be the center of the future in the Hampton Roads [Virginia] area because we have big hearts...