 Story_ID: 167856 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with the mayor of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts, Kenneth E. Reeves, the location of the interview is the mayor's office in the city hall of Cambridge at 795 Massachusetts, Ave. The date is April 6, 2006, the interviewer is [HM]Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Mr. Mayor, Mr. HistoryMaker, would you state your full name for me and would you spell your name including your middle name. Speaker 2: Kenneth Errol Reeves, Errol is like Errol Flynn the actor, named after him actually. So I can sp--Errol is E-R-R-O-L and Kenneth is K-E-N-N-E-T-H, Reeves is R-E-E-V-E-S. Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location of birth, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born February 8, 1951, in Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: And, Mayor Reeves, how do you identify yourself in terms of your occupational profession? What are you? What do you do? What have you done over the years very briefly (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: I'm trained as a lawyer and I, I--if people ask me what I do now? I tell 'em I'm an elected official which, 'cause all elected officials seem to be lawyers too so, it is that or today I say I'm the mayor of the city. Story_ID: 167857 Speaker 1: Before we move into looking at your family history or family background, we have a few, what we call warm up questions, People magazine type questions and it'll give the viewers of your tape another little dimension of your personality and so let me ask you, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Turkey dressing, (laughter). Speaker 1: Turkey dressing? Speaker 2: (Laughter) made with cornbread stuffing. It is not that white bread stuff, well and the best person who can make that is my godmother Valeria Wallace [ph.] in Sacramento, California. That's the best stuffing maker in the world. Speaker 1: So you have to go all the way out there to get it? Speaker 2: Well I haven't had it in a while, but (laughter) it's very good. Speaker 1: She doesn't freeze it and ship it overnight? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (unclear) overnight. Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately she's quite elderly now so she doesn't do any cooking-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --but, she could really do it. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I guess I would have to say it's May. Usually May into the first week of June and why that is, I'm extraordinarily fond of flowers and for about a two week period at the beginning of June, just by the end of May, we can get peonies here in New England and I usually buy about two dozen as a just kind of, you know, the winter is over, the spring is here so, that's a great time. Also, it's when Cambridge [Massachusetts] is it's prettiest and my favorite thing in Cambridge is when the first Thursday in Sept--no, in June, all of the--there's Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] commencement and Harvard--it, the city kind of becomes very full with all these wonderful proud parents and all parents are proud. But particularly the black parents show up, and then the whole family comes, so you'll have these tribes at the graduation and I love to see them because they, it, it's such a point of pride for the parents and to have them here is just something that I enjoy so, just seeing them is, that's a, that's a special piece of Cambridge. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. Very attracted to green and I have a lot of green around me, I see it has to do with life and also I'm Jamaican by heritage and one of the major colors in the Jamaican flag is green. Speaker 1: Good. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Black Island [sic, Block Island], Rhode Island, spent nearly twenty summers going there. It's my--I know you're a [Martha's] Vineyard/Nantucket [Massachusetts] guy-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, Black Island is a--if you, you wanna get away and it's a beautiful place and I and I love it 'cause there's no social pecking order-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --like nobody cares who you are and nobody cares how long you've been coming there or any of that. It's--and you're unlikely to run into anybody you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The people either come for the day or at least two weeks. Speaker 1: Every Fourth of July for the day, I leave Martha's Vineyard and I go to another island and I went to Black Island about four years ago. And I didn't see anybody I knew. Speaker 2: And, and that's my island. (Laughter) I just love it, I love it. Speaker 1: Last one more question. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you like to use from time to time with your friends or staff, something philosophical maybe, or? Speaker 2: I probably have more than one. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I'm fond of saying three things. One is that I can fuck up on my own, I don't need help with that, so that I use often in my office. (Laughter) and second is that, for me it's very important not to pay too much for what I get. So I'd like to know that if I'm--I'd like to keep a certain balance so that I know that I'm not--I, I--the payoff for my energies is going to be equal to the energy, seems to be important to me. Those are two very frequent ones-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --I'm sure there, are, are others, but those-- Speaker 1: Those are very adequate. Speaker 2: --those two jumped to mind. Story_ID: 167858 Speaker 1: Kenneth we'd like to explore your, your family background so that those who will look at your interview over the years will have a context in which to see your nurturing years, growing up years and where you are today. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so we're gonna start with your mother. What was her name, when was she born and where? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison [ph.]. She was born in Mandeville, Jamaica, on Christmas day in 1913. It's interesting she has two middle names because in Jamaica you're--you take your middle names from your godparents. Female children have two godmothers, male children have two godfathers and that's where they get their middle names from. Speaker 1: How long did she live in Mandeville? Speaker 2: Well, our family story's interesting. She was born there, her mother, her mother inherited a farm from her mother's first husband, my, my mother is the, the daughter of the second husband. They, they had like a sixty acre farm and they owned a large water tank which was the water source for the whole district so, they essentially were in the farming and the water business which my grandmother ran and my mother and her sister, her elder sister was the daughter of my grandmother's first husband, they were both sort of kinda tracked to become teachers. And in fact my mother did teach for a short while, but my mother then decided to become a nurse so, she went to nursing school in Jamaica, which is a fascinating thing. I hope to be able to give you some pictures of this but, in Jamaica, Mandeville is in the mountains and the mountains of Jamaica are cooler so, Jamaica, during the colonial period had a lot of English and Irish people who were there doing various things. There's an Adventist, Seventh Day Adventist teachers college [West Indian Training College, later, Northern Caribbean University, Manchester, Jamaica] in Mandeville [sic], there's also the nursing school that a lot of English nurses who trained Jamaican girls and I have to say my mother was sort of raised as an English woman 'cause though I had a very, very, very mannered mother without any artifice, but she was extraordinarily clear about who she was in relation to other people. So, I would say, "Oh mom I saw your friend, Mrs. So-and-so," and she'd say, "no, Mrs.--Mrs. So-and-so is an acquaintance she's not a friend" and so I grew up with a lot of these tapes that, you know, know of you but I don't really know you sort of thing. So, and her sister in telling me about them growing up would say, you know, "Ken we were," what she refers to as the better girls in the district and, and they sort of were that way. They're both very formal women and they carried themselves with a great deal of dignity and that, that's something that I admired in her and she--it was just in her. Story_ID: 167859 Speaker 1: How many years did she [Reeves' mother, Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] live--she grew up in--? Speaker 2: She grew up in, in-- Speaker 1: --Jamaica. Speaker 2: --Jamaica. Speaker 1: How long did she live there? Speaker 2: She lived there until she was in her very early thirties and then she decided that she wanted to come to America. Her father and my grandfather, whose name is Archibald Robert Morrison, had immigrated. He came to this country in 1913, and he came as an immigrant, he fought in World War I [WWI] and became a citizen by virtue of fighting World War I and he was a he's an extraordinarily distinguished man, very, very smart. He's one of those people who would have been quite more than he was had he had an opportunity, but he luckily found his opportunity in Detroit [Michigan] in the real estate market because he worked for, as what wasn't called then, but something more or less like a paralegal for a law firm and did a lot of real estate transactions, meaning sales. And by the time I was in high school, there's a section in Detroit that we used to call Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan] which is where Aretha Franklin's father [C.L. Franklin] and that whole thing began. Before it became urban renewed, and when my grandfather was in his eighties he ended up owning about half of a block, very much into real estate acquisitions, he did two things, he married widows who had farms and he acquired real estate, those were his two things. So, he came in '14 [1914], and never returned to Jamaica, he kinda was, it's a interesting story, he sort of told his wife that she should come and bring the kids, but he never sent for them. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, (laughter) my mother, when she got in her thirties really wanted to come here to meet him again and-- Speaker 1: How old was she when he left? Do you have any idea? Speaker 2: Yes, she would have been about fifteen years old. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah, so she was old enough, but not yet, you know, post high school. Speaker 1: Yeah, but she grew up with him (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: She did, she did, she did. Story_ID: 167860 Speaker 1: Did, did she [Reeves' mother, Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] ever share any stories with you about her childhood years and her growing up years in Jamaica? Speaker 2: Really a lot, just as she was, she had an elder sister, the elder sister's father had bought the farm, they owned a piano. The elder sister was a better pianist, my mother also was the pianist and then had two younger uncles, both of them were members of what they call the [Jamaica] Constabulary Force, they were detectives in the police department. They had a lot of like fruit trees in the, on--and they used to get involved in, in, they had to be picked and marketed, in my grandmother house, they had a stall in the market, they did a number of things and she grew up in the depression.So, I had been back to the family home as such. Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and it, it was--they were not wealthy people by any means, but compared to those around them, they had both this farm and they had this water tank so they, they did well enough, I would say. I think my grandmother's challenge was without my grandfather [Archibald Robert Morrison] to find a way to raise these children and keep them sort of going forward, which she was quite successful in all four cases so, the things my mother used to tell me about her childhood is like, at my house in Detroit [Michigan], we would have a armchair like this that sometimes we'd like to sit in near the telephone and lean back against the wall, and she would say, please don't lean back against the wall. She says, you know when I was growing up we had a chair and we always used to lean it back and it made a big indentation in the wall. So, many years later I go to Jamaica with my mother, in fact her whole family went for Christmas and we go to Mandeville [Jamaica], and they're still is the house and we'd ask the people who lived there if we could take a look around and there patched in the wall is where the chair was so, I, I knew those kinds of things, she seemed to have had a very much fun girlhood and my mother was a very beautiful woman so-- Speaker 1: Let me just interrupt you-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --I spent three weeks in Jamaica this past February, and I spent one full day-- Speaker 2: In, in Mandeville. Speaker 1: --In Mandeville, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So I was there. Speaker 2: Well, I've been back there to where--their property is called Phoenix Hill and it's, it's a lovely spot, I often say--the only problem I have with Mandeville is there's no ocean right by it and I feel if I were in Jamaica, I'd like to be by the ocean. And so, (laughter), but it's an idyllic little town, I've been there for Christmas which is wonderful in Jamaica, 'cause it's not about gifts, but it's about you. They have music all night and everybody comes out and it's a--I, I have come to enjoy being Jamaican and in fact, I had told you earlier about a documentary of Marvin Gilmore, but I also did one this summer called, 'On Being Jamaican,' and where, just tried to tease out what makes the Jamaicans the same from Bajans, the Trinidadians, or Cubans or anyone else from the West Indies. So now, I have to do one on each of those groups (laughter). Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 167861 Speaker 1: When your mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] came to the United States at age thirty, she went to Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Where'd she go? Speaker 2: She had an aunt in New York [City], and her aunt, her name was Remma Morrison (ph.), she was married to one of my grandfather's [Archibald Robert Morrison] brothers and she was her sponsor. So, she came to New York and this aunt was like a second mother to her and this aunt had two daughters who were roughly my mother's age and so she kinda took in my mother like a daughter, but, and my mother went immediately and worked at the hospital in New York City called the Montefiore Hospital [later, Montefiore Medical Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she also worked for Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York], and these two cousins of hers, Thelma [ph.] and Irma [ph.], lent her their winter coats, 'cause she's come from Jamaica, she doesn't have a coat. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She never needed one, so they kinda really adopted her and my mother was very close to those two cousins and that aunt. And then, after a couple years my mother decided she'd like to come to really know her father as an adult, so she decided to move from New York City, or actually they lived in Queens [New York, New York], to Detroit [Michigan] and my grandfather by then, was doing reasonably well and had a, a new wife and so my mother moved in with them in, in, in, this area of Detroit, it's called Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan]. Where--which is now called the--Black Bottom was on the East Side, that was the black neighborhood and then in Detroit the black citizens migrated to the West Side. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Which is where I grew up. Story_ID: 167862 Speaker 1: Did she [Reeves' mother, Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] continue nursing? Speaker 2: Yes, yes she was a registered nurse, she worked, she was what they called a private duty nurse so in essence she worked from an agency that when someone needed I guess, the hospital always has practical nurses and they have some registered nurses, but they don't have a kinda personal nurse. So, if you wanted your own nurse, she worked through an agency that would send her for a week, a month or however long it was and she was a very gifted nurse. It's that there were a number of people in her career who if they were going to the hospital would wait until she was available. And, I really marvel as I have been an older person seeing people try to raise their children and families, I mean two couple--two people, couples, my mother after being in Detroit [Michigan] about three years married my dad [George Luellen Reeves (ph.)] and had--I have an older brother Kingsley, and then had me and the year I was born my parents were divorced, so most of my recollection is of having one active parent, and how my mother ever did it, I don't know. But, she managed to work, she worked the, the evenings from eleven to seven and would be home to get us off to school and then would nap during the day and would be up and have dinner when we came back and she did it in a way that didn't seem arduous. And, the whole purpose of her life was to, what she would say, to get her boys to take their place in the world and, and if anybody got in the way of that they were in trouble. (Laughter). Speaker 1: (simultaneous) I see. Story_ID: 167863 Speaker 1: In talking to Bernard [ph.] earlier, particularly around pictures, he said that your mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] came to Cambridge [Massachusetts] at some point? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You moved her here?-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: When did she move here with you? Speaker 2: She came here in roughly 1987. And was with me here 'til roughly 1991. Speaker 1: And she passed at that point? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. She's still here with me she's in Mount Auburn Cemetery [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One last question on your mother, then I'd like to ask you about your father [George Luellen Reeves]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You've given me a little flavor of your mother's personality but, in sum, how do you remember her as a person, her personality. What was she like? Speaker 2: I think--I mean she was a real lady. I, I--in, in whatever that implies, she, she had great posture, she was--had some very--one particular portrait of her that my families very proud of, it was the first picture she sent back to Jamaica, after she had come to New York [City], and it's a very lovely hairdo and she has a big kinda corsage on and it's the fa--the picture we remember the most of her by and I subsequently have a cousin and actually a niece who look very like my mother. She was, she didn't have any airs but she just had a great deal of presence, she was a very friendly person, not at all like me. She was not someone--I think I take a lot more after my father, in personality gregariously. She was more reserved, but she was also very focused on the task of parenting and, and security. She was a very frugal person and I know she, she never--she was very self-sufficient and, I, my mother never borrowed a nickel from anybody nor did she ask people for help. Whatever she needed, she found some way to put it together for her boys, it just was that she didn't have an extensive social life as I think of it. Her boys were her life. Story_ID: 167864 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. His name, where he was born and when? Speaker 2: My father's name is--was George Luellen Reeves [ph.], he was born of Jamaican parentage, but he actually was born in Costa Rica. Our family secret is that my father was born out of wedlock, but his mother was from a better family so they sent her to Costa Rica to have the baby but, she brought him back before he was five so he could go to school in English, they didn't want him to speak Spanish. So, he grew up--the best that I know, 'cause my father didn't really tell my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] a lot about his family, but he was quite estranged from both parents and grew up more with a group of cousins, one of whom was my uncle Cleveland [ph.] and another who I just met at his funeral. My father died last year in West Palm Beach, Florida, so-- Speaker 1: How old was he? Speaker 2: You know, he was in his early eighties, he lived a good long time he-- Story_ID: 167865 Speaker 1: My father [George Luellen Reeves (ph.)] was a very interesting, in that his goal in life was to do two things. One was to build a mansion in Jamaica and two was to send his sons to private schools, and that was his only goals. So, he did buy a lot of land in Montego Bay [Jamaica] near the airport [Sangster International Airport, Montego Bay, Jamaica] and he built a big ol' stone house and he rented it to some airline pilots from Air Canada, for much of, the time after it was built, they--I guess they paid for it in, in the essence while he worked here and he worked for Greyhound. He-- Speaker 2: What was his job, what position do you know? Speaker 1: You know my dad, he was not a mechanic, he basically dispatched the buses. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: And he worked for Greyhound in Detroit [Michigan] and when my parents were later divorced as I mentioned, he remarried and his second wife, he would--my dad married two registered nurses, he, he sort of followed the pattern my grandfather [Archibald Robert Morrison], you always marry somebody who is not gonna go to sleep on you. So, and the second wife and he would, became somewhat estranged and, I guess very estranged. She moved to New York [City] and then he moved to New York too and they resumed the marriage which later ended. But, he was able to transfer with Greyhound, which was a, a big issue, and later life was his--Greyhound is incorporated separately in Michigan, and in, in New York, and he was never able to put his two times together which was a big point of contention for him. Story_ID: 167866 Speaker 1: But he [Reeves' father George Luellen Reeves (ph.)] went on to have two other children. I have two half-brothers. They are actually fascinating too. One whose name is Donald Reeves, he actually grew up in Queens [New York, New York] and went to the high school of music and art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts] in New York [New York], and when he was a senior, he was the president of the citywide city council and in his senior year of high school he wrote a book that was published and that's where I learned the most about my father's early parentage, 'cause I, I just really didn't know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about that story so, if you'll go to the Library of Congress and, and google the name Donald Reeves, you'll get that book. Which would tell you about my father's side of the family. And then I have a young brother named Frances Reeves he-- Speaker 2: Half-brother. Speaker 1: --half-brother, well they're more like cousins, but I, I guess they are brothers, they--we grew up not that far from each other so as kids we would visit them. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: My elder brother is three years older than me and Donald and I are exactly a year a part which I've been proud of that, that we didn't overlap. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 167867 Speaker 1: And it turned out, now it's funny, just keep on living, I--when my father [George Luellen Reeves (ph.)] died, in his later years and I don't know how far we'll get into this, but we were a bit estranged I would say 'cause actually when my mom [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] died, he called to tell me he'd like to come to the funeral, I asked him not to which had been her request and I think he was quite taken aback, but I took the position this is all difficult enough, I--you know, (laughter) I don't need another complication, but we got it resolved-ish--But then he had Alzheimer's in the end, so it was not clear, he--and then he didn't remember how many sons he had, that kind of thing. But, I get to the funeral, it's a very odd thing to know that your father is dying. I have a month notice and I decided that because of the Alzheimer's there was no particular reason I needed to go visit somebody with Alzheimer's. So, I got the call that he had died and I actually went to the funeral because I knew at some later point, if I didn't go, I couldn't make that up, but I really was sort of like in Oz. Well it turns out that my father had the same relationship with all four of the--his sons, so we get to the funeral home, there was a wake the night before and we do that and we hadn't seen each other in quite a while and so we go to this funeral and we're getting lined up to go into this church, it's a new episcopal church on West Palm Beach [Florida], that is--I've never seen--it was so West Indian, it was mobbed with everybody wearing black because my father was very, very gregarious guy, so everybody in West Palm Beach knew him. And we get there and we begin to walk down the aisle and I look to the right and low and behold, here is Walter Sullivan, the farmers--former mayor of Cambridge [Massachusetts], his brother Edward Sullivan, the clerk of courts and Mr. Hickey, the funeral director from Cambridge, they all--it was in January, they all wintered down there and the mayor, their son and nephew sent them to represent the city at the funeral. So, I, I--it was one of the most--that, that, you know in Cambridge, politics is very local and the--a son of Cambridge adopted or otherwise has backup where ever he goes so, of things that have happened to me that got my attention, that did. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Because I thought now, this here was abo--way above and beyond and for me, unforgettable and I was very pleased by that which was a wonderful distraction 'cause when the four of us was sitting on the front row, at some point the minister, who's a young African American (unclear) wanted to know if any of the sons had anything to say and we looked at each other and we all said no, because I really don't know what I would have said except that, in my life I had a spectacular mother and then I also had two wonderful godparents, they--my godfather, Nathaniel Wallace [ph.], was from Mississippi-- Speaker 2: What was his last name? Speaker 1: Nathaniel Wallace. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Actually he was from Alabama, his wife Valeria [ph.] Wallace was from Mississippi, and they were my godparents from my christening, but hey actually were a childless couple that lived down the street from me in Detroit [Michigan] and they just kinda took to me and I became their son, and they sort of shared me with my mother and from him I learned, what a father really does. Because a father really teaches you how to be a man in society and tries to put in the things, the things in you that enrich your life and will make you able to succeed, and I, I really got that. Story_ID: 167868 Speaker 1: Kenneth would you tell me about your, your one sibling, your broth-- Speaker 2: My senior sibling. Speaker 1: Senior sibling (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, well you know, what I-- Speaker 1: His name is? Speaker 2: --Kingsley Anthony Reeves, Sr. Actually I have two more siblings which I, I was about to tell you at this funeral I opened the program and I learn I have a brother I didn't know. My father [George Luellen Reeves (ph.)] apparently had a son who is older than my elder brother who is the fire chief in Montego Bay, Jamaica, so I, I was in the, you know, one of the--one thing I've always prided myself on in my family is we didn't have any out of wedlock people, and then I learned that my father's sort of on the cusp of that, but to learn that I have an out of wedlock brother, I was outraged. (Laughter) and then I found, and then I spent the whole time wondering, I honestly don't believe my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] ever knew. So, and I think that's maybe why my father was so, so sort of sketchy on his family connections 'cause I don't--we did not know this. So any (unclear) my, my full brother and senior brother, Kingsley, was always three years ahead of me, he's a very smart brother so, and was always in accelerated programs and in fact, got double promoted in school three times, which, I think my mother and her wisdom did her best, but it didn't really serve him well because my brother graduated from high school at fourteen years old. And he was not really mature enough, in fact he, he had to wait a year to go to college 'cause nobody would even take him 'til he was fifteen, and his social maturity lagged I think and that created for him a lot of problems I think, this whole double promotion, it seemed to be a wonderful thing, but for him it didn't work as well. He, his dream was to be a doctor and his tragedy is that he went to medical school for three years and flunked out and that sort of combined with his having a kinda Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] brother who seemingly was more successful, didn't--it's been difficult for him, so he's done things--like now he has an M.B.A. and he has a L.L.B. [Bachelor of Laws], I mean, my brother is a very smart man, so he, he works for Blue Cross Blue Shield and he basically is involved in a legal division which prosecutes doctors when they over bill. So, if someone has billed like thirty-five hours in a twenty-four hour day, he kinda makes the case that's not possible. And he's also been very involved--he was here actually for five weeks for Blue Cross Blue Shield and some consolidations of their operations and- Story_ID: 167869 Speaker 1: --Very interesting, his--that brother [Kingsley Anthony Reeves, Sr.] and my brother who wrote the book, Donald [Reeves], have both--Donald went to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] in labor studies, went to law school at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], doesn't seem to have ever passed the bar, so he kinda became a kinda junior college teacher. But, he and my eldest brother are very focused on what geniuses their children are. If you--you talk to them they only talk about their children. Speaker 2: Children. Speaker 1: So, so Donald, if I talk to him he's telling me about his daughter and (unclear) friends who--and she, you know, that she's gonna be a great novelist and they wonder why at, you know, eight she hasn't published yet and I'm thinking, you know, that's stretching it, my eldest brother, Kingsley has a son whose name was Kingsley Anthony Jr. II. Can you imagine naming your child, well his son has gotten a Ph.D. in engineering from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and was a candidate for a couple of positions at M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, my brother is--if you wanna talk about his son who's the Ph.D, you, you can ad nauseam-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now he also has a daughter who is really the spitting image of my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)], now she went to a school in Michigan that I don't know, like a Saint Joseph's College [sic], she seems to have gone for two years and come to live at home, I can't hear nothing about her, so her name it is Tiffany [ph.], it's a small--so we're a very, it's, it's a education family. And, and if you don't do whatever you thought you would do you certainly should produce somebody and then drive them nuts trying to make sure they succeed. Speaker 2: What does your brother Kingsley live? Speaker 1: Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 2: Detroit. Story_ID: 167870 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up as a child in Detroit [Michigan], how far back can you remember? Speaker 2: I remember way back. I was born in '51 [1951], I think my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] bought our house in '54 [1954], I remember when we lived in an apartment building before we bought a house. I re--I actually remember waking up when--I must have been two or three years old, early in the morning and my mother was at work and I think we had an uncle that lived with us, one of my, my mother's youngest brothers and I remember sort of staying up for maybe like four in the morning 'til seven thirty waiting for her, that I remember. I remember moving to our new house, mostly remember that the people who lived there before had left certain things like a, an iron door stop that we always kept too, I remember that in Detroit, it's very much that black people moved into Jewish neighborhoods, which remained integrated for a while and then became all black. Story_ID: 167871 Speaker 1: I moved to a fabulous neighborhood which had two family houses and then some boulevard with one family houses and an extraordinary black middle class, because at one time Detroit [Michigan] had more black doctors than any place else in the country and the reason was that in Michigan, because of the auto industry, and the volume of black people involved in the auto industry, they all had solid income so that's when you used to pay for the doctor yourself. So they went to black doctors and black doctors got together in groups and created blue, black hospitals and black lawyers got employed, was a, a very interesting situation because it also had--I went to a black Episcopal church, it was sort of like the black Episcopal church, so that we had a great cross section of people but a very strong middle and even, even like elite class in their mind, but elite in Detroit was two things, it was determined by skin color and, and education. So, you could be darker but you had to be smarter, I, I fall often in that crowd (laughter). So, but it was--that was fabulous, and, and, I didn't grow up as an inferior in any sense-- Story_ID: 167872 Speaker 1: In fact, my best friend in high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] was a guy, actually it was somebody with a great Boston [Massachusetts] connection, I--my best friend in high school, a guy named Jack Barthwell [III] who was Wade McCree's nephew, son of Catherine Barthwell, who is Wade McCree's sister. Speaker 2: How do you spell Barthwell? Speaker 1: B-A-R-T-H-W-E-L-L. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: And the Barthwells were an old Detroit [Michigan] black family that owned a chain of pharmacies, they were pharmacists and they had about six soda fountain pharmacies and, and one time there was a Barthwells Ice Cream, and as you know, his uncle Wade McCree became the first black solicitor general and Wade McCree is the only black person whose name is on the wall at Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, Jack Barthwell was a lot of my education because Jack Barthwell would say to me, "Ken, this isn't high school," we went to the, the exam school in Detroit called Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]. And he would say, "You know, I know we're not inferior to white people," he says, "now, my grandmother went to college, how many of these people do you think they grandmother went to college?" And, he would say, "And you know, I know I'm not inferior to these Polish people because they sit on the front porch, drinking beer and watching T.V. that's something we would never do." So, those tapes are in my mind and have been. Now, unfortunately, Jack died last year, I have so many close friends at my age who, who have died, it's, it's like awful, but Jack went on to be--his, his godfather was Charles Diggs, the congressman in, in [Washington] D.C., he went to work for him for a while and then he did government affairs for Stroh's Brewery [Stroh Brewery Company, Detroit, Michigan] and, and then for the railroad in New York and he came back and he basically became the lawyer and partner for one of the four casinos that exist in Detroit, he died of, of cancer. Story_ID: 167873 Speaker 1: But, he [Jack Barthwell III]--and we grew up in this church Grace Episcopal Church [Detroit, Michigan], that was led for many years by a, a real well known in the Episcopal church, (unclear) named Henry Steins (ph.), Henry Steins was a Haitian actually, you look very like him, he was a great guy, but he built what had been a white episcopal church and just became black, the, no, no purchase involved, just who was in the pews changed. And that church provided a social and educational center and I grew up literally during the Civil Rights Movement so, at one time a famous white Episcopalian priest named Malcom Boyd, was the co-pastor of my episcopal church. And every week he would be in the South on the freedom rides and on the weekend he would be in the pulpit at our church. And so, I feel I, I--week by week I lived the Civil Rights Movement from this experience. This was a church in which all of the students too were expected to excel, excel and most of the kids were the children of whatever elite Detroit [Michigan] had, but I didn't know that then, I just knew that they were the kids in Sunday school and it really didn't become fully apparent until I got to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], my high school had extraordinary social pecking order amongst black students. But because I knew all these people from church, you know, by dent of the fact that I was there, because it was a group you couldn't get in. You're either born into it or you couldn't get in. Speaker 2: What was the name of the church again? Speaker 1: Grace Episcopal Church. Speaker 2: And where was it located? Speaker 1: On Virginia Park [Street] and 12th Street [sic, Rosa Parks Boulevard] in Detroit, which is in--it's about ten blocks from where the riots in Detroit started. It's still very much there. It's still very much an upper middle class black church with all these little, I call them the peach ladies, because their, this makeup, they look peach, they--(laughter)--I went back there at Christmas time and our, our big thing is on Christmas Eve, there's a midnight mass and everybody who is from those days comes to that and it was hilarious because then these ladies still look great and but now they have hired a social worker to do the outreach of the church because, of course, they're too old to be doing these things so they hired a woman whose duty it is to find out who needs a ham at Christmas and to take it to 'em. And so, the, black middle class is a mess, I must say. (Laughter). Story_ID: 167874 Speaker 1: Let me say that you're answering a lot of the questions that I wanted to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One of the things we wanna capture, and you're doing it, is a little bit about the history of our black communities--in our major cities, and people who lived it like you did, so you're really answering a lot of my questions so just keep going. Speaker 2: Well, I only have to tell you this because this--when we had the riots in 1967, that was the beginning of the end of the life that I knew. Speaker 1: You were in high school [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] then weren't you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was just at the end of high school, graduated in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I grew up right where the riots were, and so I--they were right outside of my door, pianos were walking up and down the street and couches and--you know, you name it, yet a little piece about that time, I actually recall that when I was in in junior high, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], came to the main street by my street and they let out my whole junior high school for us to go see him and they had 'em in the back of a large open back truck, I'll never forget this and I remember kind of, I guess I was meant to be a little of a historian, 'cause I was taking like mental photographs that, you know, this is gonna be important one day, but this is gonna be equal to you saw, President [Abraham] Lincoln, and so now, in January, when I go to public schools or to other things that involve children, I say that I actually do recall seeing him--it's true, now he wasn't my best friend or anything like that (laughter) but I do remember seeing him and I, I think and hearing him live so, that was a special thing. But these riots in Detroit [Michigan] really caused the complete disruption of a very special black society because after they happened--see Detroit, Detroit has some of the highest home ownership for black people in the country. Because most people worked in the auto plant, all my friends'--the combo in Detroit is your dad worked for the auto plant and your mom was a teacher and they had gone to historically black colleges [HBCU], the women had, the men hadn't necessarily. And, but you could put together those two incomes and maybe a house cost between $15,000 and $25,000, in Detroit when you go on vacation that means you have two weeks, you barbeque a couple more times in the backyard, and then when you retire you go to holly--Hawaii--and then you die within five years 'cause you didn't do--you don't do anything. But, Detroit has very set patterns. Story_ID: 167875 Speaker 1: But black Detroits [ph.] [from Detroit, Michigan] are very into their gardens and the, the whole social pecking order is who has grass and who doesn't have grass. And if you have a bad lawn in Detroit [Michigan], that says something about who you are to the whole community, so they--like my godfather was a great gardener and they had one of those beautiful homes anybody had ever seen and my godmother was quite a horticulturalist, I think that's where I get my love of flowers from. So, I used to help her a lot in the garden and she was a good--she could crossbreed dahlias and she had her peonies and I also had an uncle that had more what I called a mature peonies in his yard and I used to love to go there in the spring 'cause they, they--peonies come and go they don't pay their rent too well--but, she--my godmother was remarkable and she was a great gardener, she was a great seamstress, she was a great housekeeper, there wasn't anything that she didn't do very well. And she was a great godmother, I want to say that. Story_ID: 167876 Speaker 1: How did the Civil Rights Movement and specifically the riots [Detroit Riots, Detroit, Michigan 1967] affect [HM]Kenneth Reeves? Speaker 2: Well, the riots destroyed my neighborhood, which-- Speaker 1: Destroyed your neighbor? Speaker 2: Destroyed my neighborhood yeah, 'cause we kinda burnt up all the stores we used to go to so, it became a place that people began to move from, which was change and then for me it was--because then I moved, I graduated from high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] and, well I graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I spent my first year at Trinity College in [Hartford] Connecticut, and when I would come home I would ke--come home to an increasingly changed Detroit [Michigan] and before I left Harvard, I, I really didn't go home that much, I stayed here in the summers but, it, it lost Detroit began a long saga which is still going on of hoping for a renaissance tomorrow. And it just--I don't think it will ever come 'cause I've never seen, it, it just has a--what happened in Detroit is that all of the white people moved. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and they built what would be downtown around the city, so if you go to Detroit, and you looked down by air, the skyscrapers are in a circle, and the circle is outside the circumference of the city. Because when the Detroiters elected Coleman Young, their first black mayor, Coleman Young was a magnificent guy and very black and he let the business community know that he was now the mayor and now business was gon' be done according to the tune that he sang and they said well, good luck and they pull up stakes, pulled up stakes and left, and, and certain families like the Ford Motor family, Henry Ford's prodigy and what not, they lived various renaissance attempts and they built renaissance centers, but the white people never really came back to the city and it's an interesting trend around America, where inner cities have been abandoned, 'cause that's what happened to Detroit and the wealth and the business realities move away from that center and it's funny by the time that happens then you get a black mayor. So, so Cambridge [Massachusetts] is one of the few cities that got a black mayor and didn't (unclear), when the city wasn't in distress. In fact, police are saying that our city has never been in better, fiscal or other conditions, so this is atypical from what some of my peers experience. Story_ID: 167877 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about another phenomenon, that was I believe emerging and growing, while you were in high school [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] or just after, and that's Motown. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You were a teenager when Motown-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: --took off, is that right? Speaker 2: --you, you have asked the right one the question, 'cause I grew up as Motown groupie. Speaker 1: Tell me. Speaker 2: And, and I, well, I lived at Gladstone Street and 12th Street [Detroit, Michigan], 12th is a major street and then 12th Street, you go up and it intersects with West Grand Boulevard, I could walk-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --like from my church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan], my house to my church was about six blocks, if I went about six more blocks, I would be at West Grand Boulevard and as I turn there were two old houses next together on the boulevard that were connected and had a big sign outside that said Hitsville, USA. And-- Speaker 1: I know the neighborhood, I've spent some time in Detroit [Michigan] so I know where you, where you are. Speaker 2: Well, this was--and we used to walk boy, we--I mean, when I think of it now, that would have been nothing for me to walk up there 'cause, I, I had a childhood where I got to explore a lot and we used to walk or ride or bikes, we could ride our bikes downtown to--and across town to this thing called Belle Isle [Detroit, Michigan], there's a island just on the side of Detroit that you could ride to and ride back. But anyway, my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] owned a two family house and upstairs there was another family, the Gallions (ph.) they had two boys, so Edward and David and my brother Kingsley [Anthony Reeves, Sr.], he was also known as Tony, so the four of us kinda grew, grew up very closely. Well, they had a uncle Norman (ph.) who was in one of these doo wop groups and that group used to practice in our basement, now they were a little different from my family because, like on Christmas, they would get like Schwinn bikes and every game and every piece of clothes, you couldn't even find your way through their living room for the stuff they got. In my house, and I'll never forget this, on my tenth birthday, I got two gifts, I got a watch that I could wear to church on Sunday and I got a briefcase with my name on it, it says, Kenneth Errol Reeves, and it, it was to put my music books in to take 'em to my music lessons, I still have this briefcase, I'm gon' show you this, and my name is this big in gold leaf. My mother was a serious person, we did not get all that stuff, but we got-- Speaker 1: You got stuff that (unclear) (simultaneous) useful (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Laughter) we got different kinda stuff and we weren't, we'd kinda wonder why, but, anyway, their uncle Norman was in this group, and I forget what they were called but they were one of the numerous groups that you may have heard of or they had half a hit or something and in fact, as life went on, Norman never lost that dream and he ended up one period for about two years in London [England], trying to see--'cause all of his friends became like The Temptations, and The Miracles or Holland-Dozier[-Holland], now those, he knew them and--it--they--I guess he was hoping that, you know, what happened for them would happen to him. Story_ID: 167878 Speaker 1: And this is a era where black men of a certain class, processed their hair and that was a big dividing line, like in, in, my house, the thought of processing your hair was like, that's, that's not gon' happen in here. So, it was interesting in that, I remember in high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], like there was a little area that developed on the East Side [Detroit, Michigan] near my high school, I think it was called Plum Street and it was just some shops, the psychedelic shops, the beginning of that and you could go there in the day or night and walk, they have few stores to go in and we were there some friends and Florence Ballard of The Supremes showed up and we were all, "She's--you know how bad her complexion is," and this is after she had even left The Supremes and also, my godparents who when they moved from street, they moved to a beautiful area in Detroit [Michigan] called Russell Woods [Detroit, Michigan] and they had a big beautiful house and The Supremes when they made their first money bought three houses in Russell Woods. So, a lot of times on the weekends I would stay with my godparents and I would help my godfather rake the leaves or cut the grass or whatever, I used to have some wonderful weekends with them but you'd also, if like maybe I'd have another friend come spend the night with me, you'd walk 'em around and say that one's [HM] Mary's [Wilson] house and this is Diana's [Ross] house and then, in--off my neighborhood, I'd say we had a lot of two family houses but we had several rather stunning boulevards, Chicago Boulevard, Boston Boulevard and that's where the sort of major black people lived, so the big preachers, the big doctors, and eventually [HM] Berry Gordy bought one of these house. And he even in that neighborhood, were two large homes, one owned by Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca] and another one owned by Prophet Jones [James Francis Marion Jones] and these are two other people in African American history who I, I remember seeing Daddy Grace, sticking my head in a movie theater, coming back from one theater, and Detroit has a history of movie theaters that fail becoming churches. And in fact, the New Bethel Baptist Church [Detroit, Michigan] where Aretha Franklin's father [Clarence LaVaughn Franklin] pastored was a movie theater and it was where Daddy Grace had a church. And Prophet Jones actually, he had his meetings in what was like a dance hall setting above some stores and the Prophet Jones people were remarkable in that the women all wore evening gowns and men wore tails as of--part of their worship was that you didn't have to, I guess it was like the precursor to Reverend Ike [Frederick J. Eikerenkoetter II], you, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you don't have to look down trodden, you should dress up like you belong to somebody who wants you to do good. So, those are all kinda pieces of the Detroit I grew up in and I felt--all of that was accessible to me. Story_ID: 167879 Speaker 1: Except that my friend, Jack's [Jack Barthwell III], father was very good friends with Esther Gordy Edwards, Esther Gordy Edwards was [HM] Berry Gordy's sister and she was married to a Judge [George Clifton] Edwards [Jr.] who became a professor at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Well, the Gordy people were not acceptable to the upper class blacks in Detroit [Michigan] at all, they called them the "Gaudy's," and of course they bought--they had more mink coats than you could count, but the "Gaudy's" were kept in line by my friend Jack's father who would advise Esther on many things. For example, when their parents wanted to have a fiftieth anniversary, I'll never forget this, Jack's father, they called him and said, "Well you know, we're gonna have this anniversary and we're inviting three thousand people," so Jack's father says, you know, "the only thing I've ever been to with three thousand was a baseball game." I said, "Nobody has a three thousand, people (laughter) party." So he was able to help them, but they never made it, I mean they, but, you know, it was funny because Detroit kinda became what Boston [Massachusetts] is, like the, the people with all the social standing didn't exactly have as much money as the "Gaudy's," but they didn't, they weren't looking to mix with the "Gaudy's" and they thought they and all those other entertainment people, because they had all come from the projects, which in Detroit that's the death now if you were from the East Side or from the projects they couldn't, didn't have a place for you. And, and it's a very stratified-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --city but that's kinda why I live here, I, I escaped that, Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: I, I enjoy, in Boston the pecking orders, I (unclear) that nobody here I wanna be with. (Laughter) I don't feel left out of nothing, you know. Speaker 2: That's great. Story_ID: 167880 Speaker 1: Before we leave Detroit [Michigan], tell me about your four years at Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan], because that is a well-known high school, very briefly what was that experience like for you? Were there teachers there who made a difference in your life at that point? Speaker 2: Oh boy, well I told you about growing up in this church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan]. So, I arrived at Ca--I always knew my brother went to Cass and my brother was in something called science and arts, Cass is a, is five thousand kids on ten floors with thirty-two curriculums, you have to major in something. Yeah, so the, the smartest kids were in something called science and arts and the people who wanted to go to medical school were in something called chem-bio and you could major in air conditioning and design or refrigeration, or graphic arts, performing arts, vocational music, avocational music, health and welfare which was sort of between cooking and social work---so, there was a lot of opportunity. Story_ID: 167881 Speaker 1: And what curriculum did you do [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I decided to major in performing arts because that's where if you wanna be a lawyer and you a lot of performing arts was debates, radio speech, television, playwriting, scenic design, costume design, modern dance. The woman who taught modern dance was the best friend of Martha Graham and a contemporary. So I learned, her name was Fannie Aronson, I knew more about modern dance then almost anybody--because, she took us from Isadora Duncan to the early modern dance, Ted Shawn and people like that and Ruth St. Denis and Pearl Primus and--you--it was quite an education. And of course performing arts didn't have that many boys in it. Story_ID: 167882 Speaker 1: Tell me briefly about your studies at Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan], and what you finally majored in there. Speaker 2: Well, I majored in performing arts and I guess in--you have to kind of be admitted to Cass and you have to determine, you have to have certain grades and then you have to elect which curriculum and I knew what they sold people who wanted to be lawyers on--because initially, in what they steer you to becoming a member of the Future Teachers of America, FTA. And then, sometime in junior high I decided that I think I wanted to be a lawyer and this was much to my mother's [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] chagrin, 'cause she says, you know, you don't wanna be a lawyer, now, nobody goes to black lawyers because when they get before white judges you need somebody (laughter) white, and this was in the era of 'Amos 'n' Andy.' And they had these terrible portraits, it's some of the funniest humor in the world, but I think only we should watch it, where [George] Kingfish [Stevens] would go to the judge and say judge how much ground do we lose while our lawyer was representing us. Speaker 1: So, that was what the black lawyer was then, so--Where'd you get the lawyer feeling from, what, what connected you to that at that point in junior high? Speaker 2: You know, this is a interesting question, at my episcopal church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan] while all this civil rights stuff was going on, one of the boys from one of the better families who was a paperboy got arrested and roughed up by the police while he was doing his route early in the morning, he was perceived to be a black male early in the morning, must be something wrong. And my black middle class church got outraged because they knew who he was and his family and that he wasn't doing nothing but delivering his papers. And middle class families would always have paper routes 'cause that was a character builder, you had to earn money and work, well I got it in my head that I should be a lawyer so should if the police approach me improperly, I would know the right thing what to tell 'em, that, you know, you can't search me because of so-and-so or you can't touch me because of so-and-so else, so, I decided to be a lawyer to make sure white society could not inhibit me in illegal ways. And that's where I got that idea from. Story_ID: 167883 Speaker 1: So, I was gonna do that, I got to high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] and, you know, I had a wonderful high school career and a wonderful college one [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I, I just was lucky in both of those, I mean I was in peer group number one, I got elected in my high school, my senior year as the most popular boy in the class, I knew everybody that I needed to know and we had good friendships across the board. I had great tutelage in my friend Jack [Barthwell III] and my other friend who was actually a year older than me, Ron Lavell (ph.), and Ron is where I learned about style from. Because Ron Lavell, who is the founder of something here in Boston [Massachusetts] called Stepping Out [sic, Steppin' Out]. And he was also my first campaign manager, I--he came here basically to do that and stay, but Ron, there are some wonderful things about him. He died three years ago, it was just awful, but Ron's mother used to shine his shoes which I used to think was the funniest thing and his father always had a Thunderbird and it was odd, his father spend his life waxing his Thunderbird, so I--my family when I was growing up didn't have a car, but I always was squired around either by, in the Thunderbird or my friend Jack's parents had a Lincoln so I had great ride and just meant I went on a lot of double dates. I think socially I had a great time and the church part started to connect to the school part, I got very involved in my church youth group, the junior Episcopal young church men and then the senior ones, that we used to have a lot of dances and then we got involved with a white church out in Grosse Pointe [Michigan] and I ended up as their youth day speaker one time and then I started competing in high school in national oratorical contest and I got really good, so I, I would compete at the national level and that was a point of great pride and I'd end up in the newspaper and my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morison (ph.)] would have a bag full of clippings (laughter) for anybody who wanted to see. And you know if we'd go on vacation, there's this place called Mackinaw [City, Michigan] up in the Upper Peninsula [sic], my mother would sort of read about these places and say okay, we're gonna go on a trip up there. And I went up there and I know she registered in this hotel and before I knew it she says, do you wanna know who this boy is? (Laughter) and I--it was a point of great joy, embarrassment but she was a very proud mother-- Story_ID: 167884 Speaker 1: But I think of the social part and the intellectual part, my high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] was about 40 percent black, 40 percent white, 20 percent Latin and Asian. Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you about that, thank you. Speaker 1: And, it's amazing because today, I'm also the chair of the school committee here [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I think of the level of excellence in that high school and how, when we had the national honor society or Phi Beta Kappa, it was 40 percent white, 40 percent black, Asian and Latino, now in Cambridge [Massachusetts], if I get an invitation to Phi Beta Kappa, I'm sure I'm not gonna see one black boy of any description, I don't care what country. I might see one Haitian girl and I--the riddle for me is how could I have come from an environment where everybody excelled, to come to one where only certain kids are involved in that way and that's something that I--it really has me kicking around in education to try to solve that riddle--'cause I know intelligence is random so, it just doesn't make sense. But- Story_ID: 167885 Speaker 1: That was good. Then I remember my senior English [at Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] I took, the AP English course with the most demanding teacher, Mr. Lichtenberg (ph.) and we had to write a thesis. And mine was on black power and I remember my friend Jack's mother [Catherine Barthwell] edited it and helped me with the footnotes and I remember I got an "A" minus on it, I was very pleased and Mr. Lichtenberg wasn't trying to hear about black power, but it was a good (laughter) and it did me well because when I got to college, I was really prepared and most of my peers had not done a thesis, which is how I got to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] really because I got a "A" plus in English at Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut]. Story_ID: 167886 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: So you went to Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] after Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 1: --I went to Trinity after Cass, Speaker 2: For a year, for a year? Speaker 1: For one year, my freshman year. I grew up in a house where my mother's [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] dream was that I was gonna live at home and go to Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. I didn't share that dream at all. I used to think to myself, I have the laziest brother on earth, I have to rake all the leaves, I shovel all the snow, I cut all the grass, when I graduated from high school-- Speaker 2: Out. Speaker 1: --Out. So I didn't apply to Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. (Laughter). Speaker 2: Why Trinity, why, why Trinity, why--what (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know, my church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan]--there's a family there, the Graves family, Mr. Graves was a lawyer, this family is related to the black Governor [HM L. Douglas] Wilder, his nephews of Virginia. Well, Raymond [sic, Ray Reynolds] Graves who was about three years my senior went to Trinity College and when he came back, the first Christmas, I'll never forget this, they--he was received like God had come back home, it was like, you know the prodigal son has gone to this, we thought prestigious eastern boys school and come back. So, I said to myself, I'm gonna get me some of that, because the interesting thing, I really wanted to go and had been invited to go to a boys prep school in Michigan called, Cranbrook [Bloomfield Hills, Michigan]. Another one of these sort of Grosse Pointe [Michigan] Schools. Speaker 2: It's a post high school? Speaker 1: No, before high school. Speaker 2: Oh, before high school. Speaker 1: I really wanted to go there but my mother for reasons I never understand was adamantly opposed to private school, adamantly, so it was like not gonna happen. So, the most thing like prep school was gonna be of course, a prestigious New England school. So, when Ray Graves went to Trinity and Trinity is also connected to the Episcopal Church-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --And the Episcopal Church was very connected to the Civil Rights Movement, so Jack Barthwell [III] and I applied to Trinity and got accepted. Speaker 2: I see. Story_ID: 167887 Speaker 1: So, I had the pleasure of going to--and this is a story you will like, we flew to Boston [Massachusetts], his [Jack Barthwell III] uncle was a famous white Bostonian named Dr. Price [ph.]. Dr. Price was married to Wade McCree's sister-- Speaker 2: I knew Dr. Price? Speaker 1: He's was an early friend of Ed Brooke [HM Edward William Brooke]. Speaker 2: He had an office on Humble Avenue [sic, Humboldt Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, so we came and stayed at Dr. Price's house, I think it was on Seaver Street [Dorchester, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, Dr. Price and Mrs. McCree, Mother McCree, the grandmother drove me and Jack to Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] in a great big ol' Mercedes. So, so we arrived in the right way. (Laughter) and we came to Trinity, what--it was a awful year for me beyond description. Hartford [Connecticut] after five o'clock, nobody moved. Trinity had twenty-one black students of whom nine were Africans, and everybody was unhappy, it was twelve thousand of us, I went to a high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] of five thousand people. They didn't have a band a orchestra or ch-chorus or nothing remotely as good as what I had come from and th--the black social life was mostly complaining. And, and you couldn't meet nobody to go on no date with, you couldn't find them. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: And, you'd go downtown Hartford and, you know, Hartford is not a kind of town where sort of the black hair thing is going on, so that means people walking around with all this Vaseline in their head, strange girls with gold teeth and stuff like that. So I happen to go--and when you go to these smaller England schools, they have these things called road trips, so, you know, we're gonna--they have a black weekend and a black weekend over there. So I went to the black weekend at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] and I fell in with some Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] students who were part of recruiting students and they would tell me, you know, if you hate it that bad, you can transfer. And so I'd never heard of that, so I applied to transfer and sure enough, my friend, this guy named Williamson [ph.] was on the committee. Story_ID: 167888 Speaker 1: So you came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a sophomore? Speaker 2: I came as a sophomore, transferred from [Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut]-- Speaker 1: Tell me about that transition, you're now in Cambridge [Massachusetts], what was Cambridge like when you arrived as a sophomore at Harvard? Speaker 2: Well, Cam--oh God, what was Cambridge like-- Speaker 1: How, how do you remember your city, your city? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's when I really got introduced to it. I had another friend from my church [Grace Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan], his name is Michael Jordan (ph.), who actually was the best friend of Ron Lavell (ph.), they were very good friends, Michael Jordan, who had gone to prep school got into Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts], he wanted to be an actor, so here I am in the East, he's in the East, I know him from high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], I'm in Boston [Massachusetts], I decided to call him up. We go over to Emerson, this is when Emerson was on Beacon [sic, Boylston Street, Boston, Massachusetts], we walk around downtown he says let's take the subway to Cambridge. Get on the red line, come up in Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Harvard Square got the Hare Krishnas, they got hippies all over the sidewalk, dirty feet, no shoes, incense, the pit of today was nothing compared to that Harvard Square, street musicians. I came out of that subway and I said this is where I'm supposed to be because compared to Hartford [Connecticut] and Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] and all that, this--I thought Lord have mercy, you could actually have this experience? So, that's where I first got the idea that, you know, why stay in unhappiness when you can achieve happiness, so that was kind of how-- Speaker 1: You got to Harvard. Speaker 2: --I came and, and it's interesting to me that this is where I'm supposed to be. (Laughter) I, I've had that feeling ever since. Story_ID: 167889 Speaker 1: --And so I came here [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I really didn't know anybody, I was put in a rooming group because I wasn't here as a freshman and turns out that one of my roommates was a famous Olympic ice skater named, John Misha Petkevich, he's the guy who started the Jimmy Fund Night that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] does for the Jimmy Fund I guess, Night of Evening of Champions [sic, An Evening with Champions] it's called--it's now in its thirty something year, I fell in with some very interesting people, my chief--I came to Harvard the semester that Ewart Guinier came to lead the Department of Afro[-American] Studies and for the first six months of my time here, I had dinner with him every night. Now, ain't that something. (Laugher). Speaker 2: Now, let me ask you, where you part of the student group that protested and sat in for african american studies? Speaker 1: (Laughter) not afro studies, that group would be the class of--I'm the class of '72 [1972], that's the class of '70 [1970], which includes people like [HM] Lani Guinier. Speaker 2: Right his daughter, yeah. Speaker 1: My class of '72 [1972], I was involved in the takeover of Massachusetts Hall where we were there for two and a half weeks in the spring of 1972, around the idea of Harvard divesting from Gulf [War] and Harvard out of Africa, Harvard out of gulf so, Harvard had some interest in Gulf War which was in Angola and Guinea-Bissau getting south. And we took over the president's office and that was the largest protest at Harvard ever. Speaker 2: I remember that. Speaker 1: And, and they marched around the [Harvard] Yard because in, in 1968, a group of Harvard students took over University Hall and in the middle of the night, the police went in there with tear gas and gear and pulled them out. That was a defining one. That had to do with Vietnam plus afro studies. I was there when afro studies was established and as it grew, but I was not wise about a group of seven students who at the thirtieth anniversary, Skip Gates [HM Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and the university had a huge convocation and they gave the seven medals. Jeff Howard is one of those people-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, Lani. Speaker 1: Lani is one, this guy named Ernie West (ph.) is one, it was kinda beautiful to see and it was also beautiful to see--when I got to Harvard and they started talking about, have I broken the mic? They started talking about we'd like have the afro studies department, and there would be these meetings with the white faculty and they would say, "You know, we wanna respect everyone, but how could you have afro studies because, what would you study?" There's no written, I mean, you know, for whatever reasons, Africans haven't, didn't write in the early days, there's no books et cetera and maybe we could take literature and history and sociology and kinda make it together and maybe we could have a committee on it, but it could never be a rigorous discipline, not in the you--you have to understand, a department is based on, you know, rigor and depth and, and scholarship." And we sat there and we thought, look we go to a university that has a department of folklore and mythology, which seems to us at least (laughter) as unusual, is what we're proposing. And thirty years later, to see the president of Harvard have to stand up at that convocation and apologize--if I tell you the truth Bobby [Robert Hayden], I actually cried. I--because the level of insult intellectually we withstood to suggest that our history, might be interesting in terms of its many penumbra in the history of this country and the world. That was something to hear President [Neil] Rudenstine say, you know, we apologize for that. We apologize for excluding black people from the dorms until 1940 something, we apologize--and it was just--and I thought now, I had to wait a long time for that apology, but I accept it. And then only to--and then to have Skip come here and start a department. Today the Department of Afro-American Studies is the most discussed department at Harvard, anywhere. Speaker 2: And in the country. Speaker 1: Like it or not, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And this is the department you could not have and then to have Cornel [West], Cornel is class of '74 [1974], to have him come here and to have Jamaica Kincaid, and to have Professor [Kwame Anthony] Appiah and to have [HM] Professor [Charles] Ogletree and have Lani come back-- Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 167890 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to Ewart Guinier, because he was a very special person to me, a good friend, a good supporter, one of my favorite people. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And you have evoked his name a few minutes ago, so, go back to you and Ewart, would you? Speaker 2: Well you-- Speaker 1: Because I want people to know who he was. Speaker 2: Ewart Guinier was probably one of the most distinguished kind of gentlemanly intellectual bearings you could be. He demand--just exuded presence and depth. And it turns out that he's Jamaican too. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well you know, Jamaican goes a long way with me so, every night he was temporarily living at Eliot House [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as was I and he didn't know anybody, I didn't know anybody, so we just ate together all the time and I didn't have clue one who he really was, 'cause I'm just a sophomore. But we talked about many, many things and he knew all about the Harlem Renaissance and being--he was a, a radical in the '30s [1930s] and he married a Jewish woman who chose to live as a black person and they were in the midst of, you know, the intellectual ferment of New York City and of Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Did he tell you about being a Harvard student for two years in the early '30s [1930s], did he tell you he was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I knew he had been at Harvard and, and it was not a good experience for him. Speaker 1: That was two years and then he went to New York. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he didn't have--and he didn't have a good time at Harvard the second time around either because, given his integrity and intellect, he knew when he had been insulted and they--I can't say it wasn't intentional because I'm telling you we got insulted--the fact of our contribution to the world was insulting at every conceivable turn. But, Ewart Guinier, now this one you can-one day I was asked to be in this rooming group, my--turned out to be my best friend in college, a guy named Doug Harris (ph.) from Palo Alto [California], African American, very talented, pianist, economist, everything and we were inseparable, so Doug comes to me one day and says, "Ken, we have a four man group but if we get two more people, we can be a six man." And we were supposed to be moving into the newly built [Harvard] Mather House [Cambridge, Massachusetts], it, it wasn't--it was supposed to be ready in September and it wasn't, so all of the Mather House people were scattered throughout the houses. So, this group wanted to pick up two more members so they could get a sixth man, because a sixth man at Mather House had a living room of its own and everybody wanted a living room to party in. So, I agreed and so one day, Doug and I are talking and he turns to me and says, "Ken I wanna ask you a question," and I said, "yeah what is it," he says, "are you gay?" (Laughter) and I said, "No!" Well, this resulted in a psychosomatic reaction. For the next two weeks, I was in the infirmary hiccupping, I couldn't stop hiccupping (laughter). So, well it turns out, of course I am gay, and of course he was too, but this was a very early piece of that, so I'll never forget this, so I get outta the hospital and, or the infirmary, nobody has a diagnosis for this and I go to have dinner with Professor Guinier, and we've become such good friends, I decided to tell him what happened. I didn't tell him I was gay, I told him what he asked me. Professor Guinier says to me, "You know, there's a lot of different kind of people in the world and all of 'em have whatever gift they have," and he says, "you know, I lived in New York and Harlem and the most brilliant writers and artist and dancers and there're a lot of gay people and they do just fine. So, I don't know why he asked you that. But whatever the answer to that question is okay." End of story. And I have often kinda thanked him for that-- Story_ID: 167891 Speaker 1: I actually knew I was gay before I went to college, I learned that in, when I was thirteen, I think I probably knew since I was in-- Speaker 2: So you were in the middle (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --never was in the middle, no, I-- Speaker 2: No, in the middle, middle school. Speaker 1: No, I--oh middle school? No, I knew, I knew I was gay the day I went to kindergarten. Because all the little--in the kindergarten in my school, Thirkell [Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], they had--one side of the room was like a playhouse and that had like a kitchen and dolls and all that stuff and the other side of the room had teddy bears and the boys was supposed to be over there but I was always over on the wrong side of the room. So, I knew something was up, but urban children always tell you who you are early so they, they, they have names for you. So, that was never--but you know I was well out in many ways but I just really--you always, and particular in those years, think that you're controlling the information. And if somebody's asking you that must mean this cover is not good. Well anyway, I--turned out I had a, a wonderful gay ol' time at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and my partner now of thirty-eight years was my other Harvard roommate so, I got lucky, I would say. Speaker 2: As a teenager and going through Cass [Technical] High School [Detroit, Michigan], where did you get the support that you needed as an individual being gay? I mean, now where did you find your support? Speaker 1: Well I was in performing arts-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --so that all the Nellie Bells were there I would say. No, I think I knew because anybody involved near the arts is always suspect so, but that's where my talents were. I--I was a, a fairly accomplished singer believe it or not and I've always sung my whole life wherever I've been and I was very involved in theater and I had a more or less Bohemian crowd, but it--what was odd is I had tons of women friends. And, and like my brother used to say, you know, I knew it was something 'cause you--how can anybody have that many women friends. But, I was lucky because my Sunday school teacher who was the youth group leader, a guy named Charles Turner (ph.), when he kind of was clear I was a gay boy, he sort of took me aside one day, he says you know, "You have a gift and one day you're gonna learn, and I don't won't you to be afraid of it but I want you to be sure that as long as you live your life in an intelligent and respectful way that has integrity, you will be beyond reproach." That's what I did. I just--I, I had great mentoring in how to be this thing. So, I never--it wasn't that kind of a burden as it were and you know, you never know Bob [Robert Hayden] what role history has for you to play, so, if I had ever realized that all of this ended up as the, the first black mayor of Massachusetts and the first openly gay black mayor in the country. That those are my little roles in history, I hope I didn't fail them. Speaker 2: No those are hist--those are historical, those are historic things too. Speaker 1: Well it was been- Story_ID: 167892 Speaker 1: The two of them have been interesting I must honestly say and in this, you know, in this very building, the first same sex marriage intentions and the first same sex weddings occurred in, in our chamber. And we're about to place a plaque here which states that. So, that's the first time same sex people have been able to declare their love and have it recognized by the law in this country ever. Happened here, and I've been glad to be part of that government I would say. Story_ID: 167893 Speaker 1: But, the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of that time was an interesting time, it was also interesting time, it was interesting time to be black. I'm an original Kuumba Singer. I--I was in the Harvard glee club and then we, my roommate Doug [Harris (ph.)] who--I've always had these close friends like Jack [Barthwell III] and Doug where I was quite a leader myself, but I always had some friend who was ahead of me. Well, my friend Doug would always say, he'd say well you know, he'd come back to the room and say, "We gon' start a choir." And I'd say, (unclear) and "Yeah, Thursday night we're going." And Ronnie [Ron Lavell (ph.)] was like this, truly I always have one friend who can tell me what to do as opposed to ask. So, Ron Lavell, the--there's a succession of these folk and they're all gone now, so I don't have anyone to tell me what to do. But, we went and were starting a freshman union, it was started by two guys, one of whom I just went to see, the Reverend Dennis Wiley of, it's called Calvary Baptist Church [sic, Covenant Baptist Church of Christ]in, in Washington, D.C., it's his dad's church and another guy named Fred Lucas, they were the two who begun it and, and we, they engaged, oh, I'm not gonna remember his name, but we had a first director [Hubert Walters] who was a wonderful guy, somebody you know, he's at UMass [sic, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 167894 Speaker 1: Well we started the Kuumba Singers in 19--it began in '69 [1969], they had the first concert in '70 [1970], last year Kuumba Singers celebrated its thirty-fifth year. And, I don't feel old about but they had the, they had a morning where you would all came together and they wanted to start from the beginning. So-- Speaker 2: What were the Kuumba Singers? So, what--tell me what-- Speaker 1: The Kuumba Singers is--Kuumba is Swahili for creativity and Kuumba started as a group of students [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who want to celebrate black spirituality through music, through poetry and even through dance and we were organized to be a traditional gospel choir, but they always broke down into smaller quartets of men and quartets of women and they always had several musicians and students also conducted. The first conductor was a guy named Hubert Walters and Hubert was a wonderful person, 'cause he came and his mother had been a black piano teacher so he knew the whole thing. But he would say, you know, I'm more classically trained, I don't know gospel, well my roommate Doug [Harris (ph.)] was one of the best gospel pianist you ever heard of and, and he never picked up a sheet of music, he just played anything. And so, Doug played and I remember, so we got ready for our--we, we sang at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] and we came back for a spring concert at Sanders Theater, I'll never forget this because I had a solo but I was so nervous, so I had to have a--I had a flask with some rum in it and I felt this will just do the nerves and it turned out-came out okay. My friend who later--a graduate student at that time was [HM] Nell Irvin Painter and so she came to the concert and afterwards I said, well what did you think, she said I thought it was wonderful, I said well that's good 'cause I--Nell retired as the chair of the Department of African American Studies at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now has a great book out on blacks in the art-- Story_ID: 167895 Speaker 1: So we [Kuumba Singers] had our--our first concert and after two years, there was all this business about well, was Professor [Hubert] Walters, if you're going to teach music at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] you had to have a faculty appointment and is he somebody we want and what's so funny, there's these people like [HM] Walter Leonard who was at the president's office then, black guy, assistant to the president and [HM] Archie Epps, who was the dean, well to the black students these people were not helpful to us. Now fast forward thirty-five years later and there is a, a, a Walter Leonard Concert and there's a Archie Epps Concert, (laughter) and so for people from my time we come by and say, you know, these are figures who have been a Harvard a long time, they've meant many things, but they were not supportive of us in this way 'cause they thought it was separatist or somebody told them to think that. But history depends on whose telling it, because I have seen it retold and, and, and the wrong, things get wrong--so Fred Lucas and Dennis Wiley who really started the Kuumba Singers have kinda been left out of its history. Now it just so happens that the Kuumba Singers today are the largest multi-cultural organization at Harvard. They represent about 134 voice choir that is black, white, Asian, Latino, they go across the country, nobody can believe they are like the model group for look--look at all these people together performing this music in such harmony. So, when I just went to Reverend Wiley's church [Covenant Baptist Church of Christ, Washington, D.C.], I told the church about that and that I'm hopeful to get Skip [HM Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] to the--these medals that were given to people who started the department--I'm hoping to get him to get two more and that we have--there's gonna be a black alumni celebration at Harvard in September. I really want to get these guys recognized. And Professor Wi--both of them are doctors now of religion. It's time, and for the thirty-fifth anniversary, I could not get this done. Mostly because the, the understory of Kuumba is that after Hubert Walters, [HM] Robert Winfrey-- Speaker 2: Bob Winfrey. Speaker 1: --was directing for many, many years and he-- Speaker 2: And Bob was a HistoryMaker, we interviewed him. Speaker 1: And he did a great job. And he did many, many things, but he did not start Kuumba. And somehow we cannot get the beginning added, but--and I mean that all in love. But the facts are the facts so we have to put the facts in the order and I want these two guys recognized. Maybe I'll get Bob recognized too. And now I need three medals and that'll fix history up right. Story_ID: 167896 Speaker 1: Could we come back to Ewart Guinier? I believe he served as the-- Speaker 2: Chair, first chair-- Speaker 1: Chair of the afro-- Speaker 2: --studies depart [Department of Afro-American Studies, later Department of African and African American Studies, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], yeah-- Speaker 1: --program for at least a decade. Speaker 2: At least. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And, just in summary, just for the record, you know, just summarize you--his contribution to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and-- Speaker 2: Well, well he had to sit through those stupid discussions about what would you study and he had to beg and pled for enough space and enough resources and of course they could never find a black professor that they would appoint, so he had to have--well he did some interesting things, he got some people like C.L.R. James to come to Harvard and C.L.R. James was like the dean of black history. Well, I learned black history from C.L.R. James, I'll never forget I went to this course in afro American studies and C.L.R. James was talking about his but--book '[The] Black Jacobins' and he said and what is the importance of F.D.R. [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] to American history and I had just had a course that morning, American intellectual history, that explained that F.D.R. was the first president to declare that the government was responsible for the people of America, social programs, et cetera. So I jumped up and said that, Well, C.L.R. James said that. "Well that's the most brilliant student in our class--(laughter)," I liked that. But we had--Professor Guinier was--we're here on the bridge called his back, he was the leader, he established the foundation for that department. So, Ewart Guinier really, you know, in his later years, he slipped off into Alzheimer's and was a sad thing today but, to see, but he remained, he was, you know, he was so tall and just impressive in--I think Ewart Guinier, he had one of those careers like [W.E.B.] Du Bois, where I think at one time he flirted with their far left and he, he was many things but he was astutely and acutely aware of Harvard's insults to black people. And he didn't just suffer them in ways that probably didn't make him even happy, he stood up for us in some very troubled times when the [HM] Archie Epps and them was doing something else (laughter). They was, they had another kinda finger in the dike but citing, what's Douglass, Frederick Douglass said, "Where there is no struggle there is no progress," well the struggle that went on with Ewart--and he was equal to the task, but he was able to bring many people here, Dr. Geneva Smitherman, there were people who came to Harvard, visitors, and others and we began the Journal of African and Afro American History [sic] and got some money from Time magazine to do that and then it got embezzled and we, we started an Afro center that was a beautiful, beautiful building that somehow didn't last more than ten years and now is a neighborhood center here in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: From my perspective Ewart Guinier was the foundation for the William E.B Du Bois Institute [W.E.B. Du Bois Research Institute, formerly Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh without saying. Speaker 1: --and, and the Afro program that we have at Harvard-- Speaker 2: Without saying. Speaker 1: --today and he almost did it single handedly. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: About, for about ten years now. Speaker 2: He was that, tho--if you go to the department today, they have the pictures of all the directors, but his is particularly meaningful to me because I know what he suffered. Story_ID: 167897 Speaker 1: And what I love is I think Skip [HM Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] understands that a lot went on to be--it's a lot has gone on even in his time because, [Neil] Rudenstein was quite generous to the department [Department of Afro-American Studies, later Department of African and African American Studies, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to say, you know, build whatever and make it the best department and [Lawrence] Summers who, after all that thirty-fifth saying, a thirty-fifth anniversary's department apology Rudenstein--Summers came and in one fell swoop reversed it because Summers came here and addressed Cornel West in a way that was so insulting that it's, it's unimaginable what he told Cornel West and one thing, as much as I wanted Cornel West to stay here. One thing I am so pleased with is Cornel to them to kiss his behind, I do not have to be here. And have you, of all people address me in this way, question my scholarship, my intellectual ability, my politics, give me a break this is a university. So, I, for shame on Larry Summers and, and did he even have to step down. I mean it was evident then and, and more evident later, but praise the Lord, I hear Skip is hoping to get Cornel back, which would be the coup, I could be eternally grateful again. Story_ID: 167898 Speaker 1: One of the important pieces of my own library are the annual reports that Ewart Guinier would write every year and bring to the annual meeting of the Association for the Study of-- Speaker 2: Negro--ne-- Speaker 1: -- African American Life in History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History].-- Speaker 2: Well I know it-- Speaker 1: --And you would bring them one year, it had a gold cover-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --and then they have a red cover and each year he'd report on the struggles, the obstacles, the strategies, the new courses, the speakers and so he showed us each year what he was doing at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and others, Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts], other black studies could look and see how he handled things and those documents are very important history documents 'cause he really documented what he was doing. Speaker 2: Well, Ewart Guinier in 1970, took me to the national meeting of the Association for the Study-- Speaker 1: Well I didn't, I didn't-- Speaker 2: --Of Negro Life and History. (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I didn't meet you there but I was there. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I represented Harvard, that was fascinating, cause I had never been with black historians before-- Speaker 1: --Um-hum. Speaker 2: --and, I could tell you two stories, one is, I was very popular with them, but I think I really, it opened my eyes to the world of [W.E.B.] Du Bois and to, this whole, you know, Du Bois who I fell in love with at Harvard and wrote my thesis on. Speaker 1: Oh you did? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, I, I, that was, well that was interesting, now this is a Harvard story that will get us somewhere. So, I majored in American History and Literature [sic, History and Literature Department] which was a very small prestigious major, you could--very few people could get in ok, and I was the black male and then my very good friend, Susan Jo McHenry, who went on to write for Essence and, and, and Ms. and a number of other magazines, Susan was a black female and in each, we, we both were in history and literature and you had to choose a century and a country, so we were both twentieth Century America. I think there were only six people in that and what made history and lit so prestigious is that in the sophomore and junior year, you were part of the seminar that was only six people and you and the professor. And in the senior year, you were at a seminar where you, it was just you and the professor, and the professor came to you. I mean it was quite extraordinary to, to have them and my professor came and we talked about what did I want to write about et cetera, so I chose Du Bois. And I chose Du Bois because Du Bois kind of personified the problem we had at Harvard with the university. Du Bois came to Harvard and said, "I want to study the history, and the contributions of Africans to human history," and they said, "well what would you study?" You didn't write anything, we could, you know, there's very little literature, there's not an oeuvre of knowledge. And so Du Bois said well, you know what? If you don't know, I'll collect it and I'll devote my life to collecting all of the contributions of Africans and so we'll have a compendium, I shall write the encyclopedia Africana. And you know it's funny, I told you that [HM] John Hope Franklin was here last night, I gave him the key to the city [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. One of the questions from the audience was, Dr. Franklin, "In addition to your new book, can you recommend to us a couple good books that we should read?" And he said, "Well, you know, they're many past and present and it's hard to choose one," and then he says, "Well, I tell you this, you can always read 'The Souls of Black Folks' [sic, 'The Souls of Black Folk'] and get something." I wanted, that is so true, that book and I want to say 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison] ain't far behind either 'cause there's some real stuff in there and also you can always read just about anything that James Baldwin wrote and, and get some new understanding of American society. Story_ID: 167899 Speaker 1: But--so [W.E.B.] Du Bois, you know, had this long, long life he came from Great Barrington, Massachusetts, he went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], he came to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he had three autobiographies, I had to read all that, I lived in [Harvard] Mather House which is right next to Flagg Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I'm up in Mather House reading this biography one in the morning and then he says, when I came to Harvard, I couldn't live amongst my fellows in the Harvard houses, I found lodging with a Jamaican maroon woman on the second floor in a bay front bay window room on Flagg Street, number four. Well, I'm up over Flagg Street and block one is Mather House. So, I look down and I count one, three, two, four, I go downstairs and I walk to this house and there it is, there's a bay windows in front of it, second floor, and one of the little things I have done is that we started an African American heritage trail in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and we had in front of that house is a plaque. Well, I thought, I said to myself, boy this Harvard education is good, 'cause you reading about the history and it's happening right outside your door, (laughter). So, it was quite fun. Story_ID: 167900 Speaker 1: But I wrote this thesis and I had a devil of a time writing my thesis because every time I got into it, I felt I needed more research so I--and then I went down to the Schomburg Library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture] in Harlem [New York, New York] and that's when the Schomburg wasn't this big beautiful thing it was today, I mean they was taped up books in there and I went to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I read the, all the years of minutes and typed up and I got very fascinated in the relationship between [W.E.B.] Du Bois and like the Spingarns and people like that, and they were still living--were descendants of them. So I would call up and say, you know, I'd like to come interview Amy Spingarn, and this one and that one and finally I've realized what the problem was. My professor, one guy named Barry O'Connell, who's now a professor of English at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] was a good guy, but what I discovered in my research on Du Bois, is that while Du Bois was the blackest of Americans, he never worked in black organizations at all. There were not--he dealt with rich white people to the exclusion he didn't have black peers, he might have a black secretary or something, but he did not work in concert with similar black intellectuals at the same level. Did not happen, nowhere in his life. So, I didn't want to reveal that to the white people, so it resulted in me having a very truncated, I mean I got the learning part, but I didn't in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], radical sense believe that I should tell our secrets. So-- Speaker 2: You didn't think he was up to that level when he was at Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: Well, working in organizations that he led and funded is what-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is what I really mean. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: He, he by--I mean he was at, obviously he was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. But the big part of his life, and that part of his life that I spent the most with him on that thesis is in the NAACP years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I would say that--and, and I guess what I mean, he--they're many people he really didn't care for, he didn't think that [Asa] A. Philip Randolph was that smart, he thought Walter White was limited, he, he--and, and it's the similar thing between him and Booker T. Washington, him and Marcus Garvey, all of the--none of--though he wasn't embracing of other black intellectuals. And, he didn't work in, with the exception, now you know I have a predecessor here on the Cambridge City Council [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Clement Morgan. The, the class day orations in Du Bois' class was not Du Bois it was Clement Morgan. And Clement Morgan and he were co-founders of the NAACP and he is one friend from college that they remained on some collegiate basis, there's not a whole lot written about them, but he and Clement have something but in terms of the funding and the power and the resourcefulness, he really dealt with the white power structure and in the way that didn't involve him and anybody else similar to him and that seems to me not a view of him that seems to be typically well known. Now we have found later fellowship with [HM] David Levering Lewis and others that, you know, Du Bois was quite a yarn teller and then there was, you know, he gives you one lineage and now they find another lineage. So, but Du Bois was a brilliant, brilliant man and then, about 2001, I took a delegation from here and we went to Ghana, Ivory Coast, Togo and Benin, but to see that there is a Du Bois Research Center [W.E.B. Du Bois Memorial Centre for Pan African Culture, Accra, Ghana] in down Ghana now and they have, when I first went to Ghana, when I graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Du Bois was buried next door to, next to a slave castle in, in a crop, he's been exhumed now and moved to a mausoleum that is next to the house where he did his research that [Kwame] Nkrumah gave him and then the research (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That was nice to--I have lots of pictures of that. That was good and I, and Susan McHenry was a part of that delegation, as was Bernard (ph.). Speaker 2: So you exited Harvard University with your bachelor's degree and Du Bois? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And Du Bois, you two kinda walked out together. Speaker 1: We're still walking with Du Bois, I, I mentioned him last night. Story_ID: 167901 Speaker 1: Where did you walk to once you had your Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degree in hand and the [W.E.B.] Du Bois thesis, where did you move? What happened next in your life? Speaker 2: Well, another life changing thing. I got a fellowship called the Michael Clark Rockefeller [Memorial] Fellowship and this is a fellowship that is only at Harvard given in honor of Michael Clark Rockefeller, who was a son of the Rockefeller family, who got lost in the Asmat [New Guinea] and was believed to have been eaten by aborigines. And as a memorial to him, he was in the '60s [1960s], a large fund of money was raised and they give four Rockefeller Fellowships every year and they go to students who propose research projects that were similar to the adventure that Michael Clark Rockefeller went on. So this is, Bob Hayden [Robert E. Hayden], this is where life gets dangerous because you take Harvard undergrads and their under developed sense of fear and they get to propose some romantic journey to where ever they wanna go and they give 'em, in my year it was like ten thousand [dollars], now I think they may give 'em like forty thousand [dollars], it's well funded cash for you to go pursue this thing you proposed. Now, I proposed to go to Cameroon and I was very interested in the connection between African mythology, dance and mask making. I wanted to know what all those mask were about, what were the dances about. And there had been this black anthropologist, [HM] Katherine Dunham had done such a trip both to Africa and she had done a trip to Jamaica to kinda meet the Maroons and find out what they--so I proposed an adventure such as that. So they gave me the money and first, you know, it's funny you give a little money to a little ol' black boy from Detroit [Michigan], so he, he's very interested. So I decided I'm gonna get to Africa but via London [England] and Paris [France] because a lot of the antiquities of Africa are in London and Paris so, I visited the British Museum [London, England] at length on the African mask and also the museum of man [Musse de l'Homme] in Paris for what was there and then--and I, and Greg [Gregory A. Johnson] went. So those were the days of Eurail Pass. So you pay three hundred dollars and you can ride all over Europe, so we rode all over Europe. We went to England for three weeks, we went to France, for a month, we went to Spain, we went to Portugal, we went to Denmark, Greg is Swedish, we went to Sweden. That was my first time being a being a suspected drug dealer, we, we got this hotel and within ten minutes of being in the room, somebody knocks on the door, it's the police (laughter) so, that, that was interesting. And Greg is a great believer in social democracy and how wonderful Sweden is, I said well, looks like they have that other thing over here too. But I came to (unclear), I went back later in life, I lived in Sweden for a year so, I have a great deal of respect for Sweden-- Story_ID: 167902 Speaker 1: And then when I finished all of that, I took the train to Italy, took the LSAT's in Italy in Florence [Italy] and then I got down to Marseilles [France] and took a boat to Casablanca [Morocco] and took the Marrakesh Express, and met a friend of mine from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a Curt Anderson, a very good friend of mine. Curt Anderson was from my class at Harvard in a production of 'Othello,' he was Othello, he's a wonderful, smart, smart Polish and black guy from Chicago [Illinois], one of the more fascinating characters Harvard ever had. So he had collected all of these references and so, the first stop we spent two nights with Yves Saint Laurent, at his house in Marrakesh [Morocco], and then his professor had given him some more, we, we were with the curator of Japanese prints from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and various other people and, and Morocco was filled with, particularly Marrakesh with these like trust fund Americans who didn't have enough money to live too expensively here, but on that economy they did just fine. And after-while, it was kinda sickening to see how people could use money to manipulate people who were poorer than them. So, I ended up, I said, you know Curt, I've had enough of this so we were there for New Years, I guess now were are in 1973, January 1, and I said to Curt, I'm getting outta here, I'm going to go to the Canary Islands for a vacation and then I'm gon' head on to my African adventure. Story_ID: 167903 Speaker 1: So, I fly to Canary Islands and I'm on the plane with a Ivorian man and his wife, her name is Andre (ph.), his name is (unclear), and become very friendly with them and spend a lot of time with them while we're together in the Canary Islands. She turns out to be the daughter of [Felix] Houphouet-Boigny, the president of Cote d'Ivoire. So they say, "Well when you come to Ivory Coast, you must come to us." So I begin my African journey by flying from the Canary Islands to Senegal, I spend a while in Senegal and get over to, what is that little bitty country, it'll come to me, I used to remember all this better but, I spent time in Senegal, which was a real dance center an interesting early education and slavery in Africa. And I take a train to Bamako, Mali and I get off, and I spend nearly a month in a place called Kita [Mali], which is a, a village where the Dogon are, and I go to the Gambia, Bathurst [later, Banjul, Gambia]. I go to Upper Volta [later, Burkina Faso], Lower Volta, I'm on a train now. And I get to Ivory Coast, I get off and I realize then who Andre is. And this kind of opens Ivorian high society, so I just said to myself, I've really--I'm African and Ivorian, these the most elegant people you could ever hear of. And at that time Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire] was so beautiful, had beautiful lagoons and the beautiful Ivorian Hotel, Hotel Ivoire. Why all this is interesting to me, is believe it or not, twenty years later oh, Andre is pregnant, the wife, twenty years later, they tell me there is a student at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] they named, something, something, (unclear), I meet him from an Ivorian friend I have, it turns out it was that baby. (Laughter). Speaker 2: It was what? Speaker 1: That baby. Speaker 2: That baby? All-right. Speaker 1: He's the, the first child of (unclear), and Andre. Story_ID: 167904 Speaker 1: Well I think we were in Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire] with, Abidjan, and then I got over to Accra [Ghana], my first visit to Du Bois [W.E.B. Du bois Memorial Centre for Pan African Culture, Accra, Ghana] I had to pay homage there and then on to Togo, where I met some wonderful Peace Corps types in Lome [Togo], and then I actually spent some time in a center in, was then called Dahomey, now called Benin, it's called Ouidah [Benin]. Ouidah is a sort of real center of what they call fetishism or what's called in the west voodoo, with a lot of dance, lot of religion and mythology and then on to Cameroon. But I found, when I got to Cameroon, the chef (unclear) in whom I was, who I was seeking died, and it takes them three years to choose a replacement. So, I went back to Ouidah and had a marvelous time there, but this story also was when I met [HM] Willie [Willard] Johnson, because I was a student at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I got the fellowship [Michael Clark Rockefeller Memorial Fellowship] and I wanted to go to Cameroon and somebody said to me, Professor Willie Johnson and his wife [HM Vivian Johnson] lived in Cameroon, call him. Speaker 2: He's also a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I call Professor Willie Johnson and I say, I, I just got a Rockefeller Fellowship, I'm going to Cameroon, I hear I should speak with you, you would have some advice, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So, in this conversation, I say to him, "By the way, what is the capital of Cameroon?" And Willie Johnson says to me, "Young man, I think you want to sit down with some books prior to our conversation (laughter)." You know, when I think I was well raised, 'cause that was exactly the answer to that question. So, and of course Willard and his wonderful wife were at the thing last night, for the professor, so it was--you, you belonged there. Story_ID: 167905 Speaker 1: So anyway, I spent the better part of nine months in this African adventure and then I got, I wasn't so much home sick, but I hadn't seen Greg [Gregory A. Johnson] in too long. So and we have, we don't know where these letters are, and it would--but, we have them but, we have saved all those letters from then and they are in a couple boxes, they move around with us but at some point I wanna be sure that those letters don't get lost. But, there were some very interesting--you know, I lived in like non-electrified villages and I didn't have nothing to do at night but write and, and I used to write long letters to him and he'd write long letters to me and they were, you know, those missing you letters, that's some good stuff, you can really, you know, go to good places. So, I came back and actually my promise to him, he had a terrible time, he came back early. He came back in January and he couldn't really find a job that he liked and he ended up with two jobs; one working in some sort of education program in Rhode Island, in the prison on a referral from somebody from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then he had a second job as a waiter and Greg is the last person on earth to be a waiter, so he has many funny stories about being a waiter and how these vegetables are blanched when people would say they're not cooked and what not. So, I came back and I was supposed to, I promised--he got a job in a prep school in Cincinnati [Ohio], the Hillsdale Lotspeich School [The Seven Hills School, Cincinnati, Ohio] and I was supposed to go to Cincinnati and go to work for Colgate-Palmolive, and the strangest thing on earth happened. I had applied to law school and been accepted and then instead went on my fellowship [Michael Clark Rockefeller Memorial Fellowship]. The University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], calls me up in August of 1973, and says, "Are you-did you go to law school?" "No. I was in Africa." "Would you be interested in a place in our class?" Well, I'm a little spiritual, I kinda felt this was a sign of something and you see in Michigan, Michigan is a little like this B. C. [Boston College] Eagle thing. Everybody in politics in Michigan went to the university of law school [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], it's sort of what you need. And I kind reversed decision--there's somethings in a relationship that are mistakes that you can never be forgiven for, but I decided to go to law school as opposed to Cincinnati. So, we ended up commuting for a year, every other weekend that's, this is the new years of student fairs and then finally Greg came to Ann Arbor [Michigan] to live and after a year at Ann Arbor, it was his turn again to choose, so we went to Sweden to live, that's where he went to the University of Stockholm [Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden] and I spent my days learning Swedish. So, (speaking Swedish), so I have this talent that nobody knows and I don't need (laughter), but I can speak some Swedish, if I have to. (Laughter) so anyway, then we come, then he goes back to Cambridge [Massachusetts], I go back and finish law school. Michigan has this very odd thing from World War II [WWII], where you can finish--law school is usually three years, Michigan, you can finish in two years and three summers, if you go full time. And they did that for returning vets and I just happened to be there. So, I--with my Swedish time was in part, a fellowship and one more summer I graduated and got out of Michigan. At which point Greg declared that, "I'm gonna live," meaning himself, "in Cambridge. So, like if you wanna live with me, this is where that's at." So I packed everything in the U-Haul and, I'll never forget this, I had to drive--I hate to drive, I had that, you know, the thing broke down, I slid in a gulley-- Speaker 2: What year was this now, you finished law school? Speaker 1: Well, this is 1976. Story_ID: 167906 Speaker 1: And tell me just a little bit about the law school [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] experience, how did you find it? Speaker 2: I--the law school experience was horrible, I hated, I hated Ann Arbor [Michigan]. Because in Ann Arbor, everything is related to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], everybody's on that schedule, they're all on vacat--it's not in the, it's not a real city. And the thing I hate about it most, is that most of the people who go to University of Michigan, as big as it is, are from Michigan, so I would always be in these weird situations where like I would be in the--I lived in something called the lawyers club, which is the dorm for the law school and I'd go to the dining hall and I would say, "You know what? I think I'm gonna go to New York [City] for the weekend." And they would say, "You're going to New York? Wow, that's so far," you know (laughter). The only friends I had in Michigan went to eastern schools it was terrible, because it was just a culture difference. And then I resented deeply that the people and Michigan felt that Ann Arbor was an interesting town. I didn't find Ann Arbor, I found Ann Arbor imprisoning, it was like Hartford [Connecticut] all over again, but a different name. So, what I really learned in Michigan, is that I'm a city person, I need a big ol' dirty city out there where people are doing something that I couldn't even do. I just need to know it's out there, otherwise, I, I'm bored. So, I did not like Ann Arbor. I did not like Michigan Law School, I thought my best friend Doug [Harris (ph.)] went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], he was around the country every weekend, I worked so hard at Michigan--don't ever go to a number three school, because they work you way harder than (laughter), I, I-- Speaker 1: Harder than, harder than in Harvard? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Yes. Because Harvard knows it's number one. When you're number three, that's a bad place to be, because you like, you know, you don't sleep, (laughter). So I would never do that again. Story_ID: 167907 Speaker 1: But I worked very hard and then I got into these most strange things 'cause I really didn't understand the environment well enough. My best professor [at University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] was the current president of Columbia [University, New York, New York], Lee Bollinger, and I, I had him in his first year of teaching. But you know, I didn't know anything about, you know, white shoe law firms in New York [City] so I would go to these interviews and they would say well, you know, what talents do you have? And Bob [Robert Hayden], I'd tell 'em, "You know I speak Swedish," and they would say, "Well, why would anybody ever study Swedish?" And I would say, you know, "I trained as an intellectual, I mean, all knowledge is good, I didn't, don't hold it against me." (Laughter) so, I worked in, we moved to Berkley [California] one summer, I worked for the Alameda County DA's [District Attorney] office, I worked in New York at a legal job and when I got outta law school, I didn't really decide where I wanted to be, Greg [Gregory A. Johnson] kinda decided where he wanted to be-- Speaker 2: He got you back where you-- Speaker 1: So, I yeah, so I came back [to Cambridge, Massachusetts], we had a college roommate, Burt Rosenthal (ph.), he's still a good friend and he was this superintendent of a building here by Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] on Everett Street, he was at the law school and was the super, so, he, he gave us an apartment there and suddenly this is where we live. Story_ID: 167908 Speaker 1: And, then I had to take the bar and then I got recruited by this group called the National Consumer Law Center [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: That's what I wanted to ask you about. Speaker 1: A guys named Bob [Robert] Sable, he thought I was gonna be [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], he used to say. Speaker 2: Where is this in Cambridge [Massachusetts] or Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: Boston. Speaker 2: So Boston-- Speaker 1: 11 Beacon Street. This guy now is the head of Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts], he's actually a wonderful attorney. And then I spent five years doing-- Speaker 2: What was your work at the consumer services? Speaker 1: Consumer Law Center. The Consumer Law Center basically worked in the areas of banking, utility rates and insurance rates, to make sure that insurance companies didn't charge you more premium then was reflected on what they called their loss ratio. In insurance, for every dollar you spend in insurance, the loss ratio is how much go to claims. So if three cents on the dollar goes to claims, that rate is too high. In banking we work to make sure that interest rates were not usurious by compounding of interest. In utility rates it had a lot to do with how utilities would add in future plants, experiments and alternative energies, were the rate players paying rates that reflected what they were really getting. And what my job was, was to go to national meetings of insurance companies, of bankers and of utilities, their lobbying groups, and speak to issues we would always have, you know, the rate payers panels and then it would be in congress committees that we're looking at energy rates, or insurance rates, or in banking rates, so we would go and testify there on behalf of the national networks that were served by the national (unclear). Story_ID: 167909 Speaker 1: Did you find this work [at the National Consumer Law Center, Boston, Massachusetts] satisfying or not? Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting question, what happened in my legal career, I don't think I was mentored by anybody too interesting. And my first mentor was this Bob [Robert] Sable, but basically, I did a lot of Bob Sable's work, I was a glorified researcher because, you know, I handed him the book, he testified and then if there were too many questions, I got some. So, I didn't like that part and I also learned something. I was there five years, I usually shouldn't be anywhere for more than three years, it's just not, my interest don't, I shouldn't be too long. So, I got a recruited from there by a headhunter, by a woman named Nancy Gist who since became a great friend, she was given the, the United Auto Workers [UAW] and General Motors had negotiated a legal plan that was to be a benefit to any United Auto Workers, so I was recruited to be the general counsel for the United Auto Workers here in Framingham [Massachusetts], and to establish their legal plan. So, I was general counsel managing attorney there for five years and I got involved in politics-- Story_ID: 167910 Speaker 1: And I ran-- Speaker 2: This was all during the 1980s? Speaker 1: We're now in the '80s [1980s], yes, '83 [1983], '84 [1984], '85 [1985], and I run for office the first time in 1985, while I'm based in the day in Framingham [Massachusetts], Natick [Massachusetts], the mayor died in 1985, Mayor [Leonard J.] Russell, in the summer and I, we're at Block Island [Rhode Island] and my friend Ronnie (ph.), we invited him to come, he was living in Hollywood [California] and I decide, I'm gonna run, 'cause I--by now I've gotten involved in the city's [Cambridge, Massachusetts] big issue which is rent control, because this apartment building we lived in was a rent controlled apartment. Speaker 2: This is 1995, roughly? Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I become the president of the buildings tenant association and I get involved in the network of citywide tenants organizations and it's kind of where my political career began. But, I had always intended to be an elected official, but in Michigan. And the reason I intended to be one in Michigan, is because, one, that's why I went back to Michigan, but two, the--now I've explained about my mother [Carol Sibyl Anita Morrison (ph.)] and what an upstanding lady she was. So, she knew the sister of this guy who was a state rep in Michigan, named [Jackson] Jackie Vaughn [III], and she knew that Jackie Vaughn was gay. Now, my mother wouldn't know anything about anybody gay, I mean, she just wouldn't know, I mean she could know, but she--it's not like anything she would know. So, I learned that you could be black, a lawyer and gay and an elected official, and the world wouldn't end. So I didn't feel--I kinda knew about that. So, when I got involved here and, and by the way this time I'm just getting involved in things like the Museum of Afro-American History [Museum of African American History, Boston and Nantucket, Massachusetts], I'm on its board of directors and-- Speaker 2: And I think that's when you and I maybe first (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --yes, and these are-- Speaker 2: --well let me just back up quickly for a minute. Story_ID: 167911 Speaker 1: At what point did you have a notion you wanted to be in elective politics? I'm not clear when that came to you? Speaker 2: That came in junior high, because that's why I wanted to become a lawyer, because I always knew I wanted--see, I don't think I really knew that much about what the practice of law really was in terms of major firms, et cetera, and by the time I got to know what that was, I realized that, you know, well firms did hire black lawyers, it seemed like within three years, they were outta there and that didn't sound like what I wanted to do. And in this time I also was introduced, strangely enough there was a lawyer at the Consumer Law Center [Boston, Massachusetts] who was a nun, and she says to me one day, "You know, I have this friend who's a lawyer, and black that I think you would like, you guys should have lunch." This turns out to be Reg [Reginald] Lindsay, and so we proceed to become the best of friends because, we--we're, he invites me over to his firm and we go upstairs to the Skyline Line Club for lunch and, while we're waiting for the elevator, he says, "You know, those [Boston] Red Sox," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and then he looks at me, he says, "you don't care anything about baseball do you?" I said no I don't, (laughter) so, we--and when I met Reg Lindsay, he was walking. So, he subsequently had some complications now in a wheelchair, but he has been a magnificent friend, oh, God, the best. But anyway, I digress. Story_ID: 167912 Speaker 1: So, I'm at the Consumer Law Center [Boston, Massachusetts], I spend five years flying around, I was a couple years in insurance and then I was a couple years in banking and then in the last year in energy and, the headhunter came and got me, I was at the UAW [United Auto Workers, Framingham, Massachusetts], I really, I got to virtually start my own law firm, I had to hire all the lawyers, I, you know, rented the space, I did the politics with the union, I liked them a lot, they liked me a lot, except that I was driving a Volvo, so they said, you know, you cannot drive that car. I said, well, fine, you don't like this one, you get me another one. Speaker 2: Another one. Speaker 1: So they go out and they say, okay, you can get any car you like, so I got a Corvette. Now, the secret about me is I'm a slow driver, but I got the Corvette because, it's the only American car that didn't lose appreciation. So, I had a number of years as to being the slow driving Corvette guy, which was fun- Story_ID: 167913 Speaker 1: I think after running in '85 [1985], I decided two things, that I--if I was gonna be serious about politics in Cambridge [Massachusetts], I-- Speaker 2: What were you running for now? Sorry, we-- Speaker 1: --I ran for city council, the mayor-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)(simultaneous), of '85 [1985]-- Speaker 1: --The mayor [Leonard J. Russell] died-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and there was an opening, I thought, but I didn't realize that, that mayor's wife [Sheila Russell] would, one, run, 'cause see where I'm from, if your husband died, you could not conceivably--you had to be bereaved for at least, you couldn't (laughter), go to the funeral and then start running for office, (laughter) I never heard of such a thing, but that's why I was naive, but turns out she ran his campaigns anyway, and she was a quick wonderful, counsellor and later mayor herself, so Cambridge has had the distinction of having a husband and wife mayors. Before you leave I'll show you these paintings, that I-- Speaker 2: I saw her painting. Speaker 1: --yeah, they're-- Speaker 2: That's her on the left? Speaker 1: That's her and that's her husband on-- Speaker 2: I saw it. Speaker 1: --okay, that's them. Speaker 2: (Unclear (simultaneous), took me in. Speaker 1: Yeah. They, they have,--that's the Russells. So-- Story_ID: 167914 Speaker 1: In '87 [1987], I didn't run again because there was no vacancy, but in '89 [1989], city councilor and state rep [representative] Sandra Graham, lost the st--Democratic primary for the state house. She served as both a rep and a counselor at the same time. We have a current state rep Councilor [Tim] Toomey. Now, Sandra promised that if the voters would elect her an Independent, she would not run for council, so she didn't run for council, that left an--there were three openings, David Sullivan, who was a big rent control guy, he stepped down, Sandra stepped down and a third person stepped down and so four new councilors were elected; myself, [Edward] Ed Cyr, Jonathan Myers and Tim Toomey, so that's how we came here. And of that four, Tim Toomey and myself, are left. I now, after seventeen years, I'm the most senior counselor in service to the city [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, I--and, but the tradition before this, we had people who stayed thirty years and forty-three years, I, I don't know that I'll make these numbers but, I've done what I, I could so, I think we got to Cambridge [Massachusetts] in politics, I, I think it's difficult to describe Cambridge during this period because, rent control went into effect in the early '70s [1970s], and it, it basically came because, people who owned houses found out that, if you had a triple decker house, and you rented it to the three families, maybe you could get two hundred [dollars] a month. But with all these students, if you rented to four students, you could get four hundred [dollars] a month, so you'd rather have four hundred [dolars] a month. So, you stopped renting to families, and families couldn't find anywhere to live. So rent control came in and they--rent control said okay, the rent for this apartment is $275 dollars. There's no, no reason to choose amongst types of tenants, and you know, why would you want four people when you could have a full family so, but that made the landlords mad, because they felt they couldn't do repairs and, after all, this is America, how can you tell how much to charge my rent and the truth is and it was rather incredible, I mean, as someone who lived in that system, I don't know how it got to be, but this is a majority tenant town and this is a democracy so. Speaker 2: So as you went to the council, in January of 1990-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --the whole rent control and affordable-- Speaker 1: Ohhh. Speaker 2: --that was kind of the big issue out there certainly with you and the-- Speaker 1: The huge issue, in Cambridge, we were a one issue town, that was the only issue. And you were either for it or against it, there was no middle, if you were in the middle, the two sides ate you. And, I was quite a gladiator for rent control, I mean I could do good battle here and the landlords would come up and you know, "You're a lawyer and you went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]," and I would say, you know, I am the only legal services lawyer, I know who has been counted with the millionaires with no visible evidence of the money. (Laughter) of course that didn't go very far, but I, I was all fired up around that and I had a very good constituency 'cause there were a lot of people who, you know, they just felt that Cambridge should be available to everybody. But the, the people, landlords got so mad they did a statewide referendum, and that's how we lost rent control, and I was mayor, I became mayor in 1992, the first time...