 Story_ID: 633003 Speaker 1: Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: My name is Amelia, A-M-E-L-I-A, Platts, P-L-A-T-T-S, Boynton, B-O-Y-N-T-O-N, Billups, B-I-L-L-U-P-S Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson]. Speaker 1: And can you tell me your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth--real date of birth is August 11, August 18, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay and your place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Savannah, Georgia. Speaker 1: And tell me, what was your former occupation? Speaker 2: I was--when I graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] my former occupation was home economics. Speaker 1: Were you a teacher? Speaker 2: I graduated from Tuskegee in home economics. I taught for a short length of time. Then I was employed by the United States Department of Agriculture where instead of teaching in the classroom, I taught in the rural district on plantations where people were living, in a way, just a cut above slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me the location of this interview. Speaker 2: Of what? Speaker 1: The location of this interview, where the interview is being held. Speaker 2: Oh, the interview is being held in Tuskegee, Alabama. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: The date is September the 4th, ni- 2007. Story_ID: 633004 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color-- Speaker 1: What about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but since I am in Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and their color is crimson and gold, I have adopted that as my second most favorite color. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Seafood, any kind of seafood, I think that that's my favorite. Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination? Speaker 2: Yes we have a time sharing project in the Bahamas, and we, for the last ten years, we have been going to the Bahamas to Freeport [Bahamas]. Speaker 1: And tell me do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: One time, it was in the spring of the year but since I have been travelling and going in these places where they have scenic drives, I have found that the fall of the year is the most beautiful, and those two times of the year are most beautiful, the fall and the spring. Story_ID: 633005 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your mother. Tell me her name. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Anna Eikerenkoetter [Anna Hicks Platts]. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me please? Speaker 2: E-I-K-E-R-E-N-K-O-E-T-T-E-R, Platts. She married a Platts [George Platts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Spell Platts for me please. Speaker 2: P-L-A-T-T-S, and I was born a Platts. Speaker 1: When was your mother born? Speaker 2: I think, if I'm not mistaken, that was around 1872, around that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Beaufort, South Carolina, and the interesting thing is years afterward we went to find the house where she was born. The house that she was born in, in fact the room that she said, was a mirrored room. All around her was nothing but mirrors and that was in Beaufort, South Carolina. After many, many years we went to find the house, we didn't find it but it was right on the (unclear) Broad River and we found, I think it was Broad River, we found a lady who was one of her classmates, and it was so rewarding to see them get together. Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: She shared some stories mostly about when she got married, but as far as growing up she would tell us about the family. And the interesting thing about it is there was only two of them who lived. My mother and my aunt, and I was asking questions about the background because my grandmother [Eliza Eikerenkoetter Hicks] was of Indian [Native American] and German birth. She had--and my father, my grandfather [Anthony Hicks] was an African descendant. My great-grandmother was coming through the woods. Their tribe lived in South Carolina on the river (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do y- do you know what tribe it was? Speaker 2: It was Cherokee--it was the Cherokee tribe and that as she was following her mother through the woods she was kidnapped by the French Huguenots, but somehow she got away and went back to her people which were the Indians. My grandmother--she married, they married and my grandmother was born, she married a Huguenot--no she married a German, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in getting the history my mother said, "You ask your aunt. She keeps up with the history of the family because there were the French, the German, the Indians, the black." In talking to my aunt I said my mother said that the Roosevelts had something to do with this family and being the type of person that my aunt was who don't bring anything into this family that's a disgrace, she said, "We don't talk about those things." So somehow I never got the real truth about the mix up of the blood that we have. Story_ID: 633006 Speaker 1: Let's step back just a little bit so I can get some names. Now your mother [Anna Hicks Platts], your mother's mother, your grandmother what was her name? Speaker 2: My grandmother was Eikerenkoetter. Speaker 1: Do you know her first name? Speaker 2: Her name was Eliza Eikerenkoetter [Eliza Eikerenkoetter Hicks]. Speaker 1: And your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Starry Eye [ph.]. Speaker 1: And she was Cherokee Indian [Native American]? Speaker 2: Yes, she was Cherokee. Speaker 1: And she married? Speaker 2: (Unclear). I don't know who she married but I do know my grandmother married an African American, and that family--from that family when my great-grandfather came to this country-- Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, he came from Ghana and he settled--he went to Liverpool [England] and he knew he had family in the New World as they called it. And this great-grandfather wanted to come to the New World but he heard that they will take you as a slave or they will kill you unless you belonged to somebody, and he was one of the great builders at that time, and even though he was in Liverpool he was working as a builder, which now we call a contractor. He saw or became acquainted with a white guy and he said, "Would you like to go to the New World?" And he said, "Yes." He said, "Well, I'll pay your way, but I want you to do--we're going to get contracts and I'm going to do some building, and if I can't get the contracts, I'll send you to get it." In the event that they want to catch me as not having a master, I'm going to point to you and say that's my master. So they worked together beautifully on the Broad River of Beaufort, South Carolina, there stands yet warehouses, two warehouses, that he built over a hundred and some odd years ago. They still stand, but he was not a slave. Now on my father's [George Platts] side I don't have the information that I should have. All I know is that he died before my father was born and he joined the Union Ar- the Union Army. Speaker 1: Before we go any further on your father's side let's back up just a little bit. Your great-grandfather the African from Ghana what was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Bart, but-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: B-A-R-T. That was his African name Bart and of course the name Hicks, Bart Hicks. Speaker 1: Now he was not married to Starry Eye? Speaker 2: He was married to--I don't know who he was married to. Speaker 1: I'm trying to follow the family tree (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, but Star- Starry Eye was married to, I believe it was a German and that's where the Eikerenkoetter-- Speaker 1: -Koetter. Speaker 2: --comes in. Speaker 1: And then Elijah [sic.] is your grandmother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eliza, she was--she was yes, she was an Eikerenkoetter that's right and she married a Hicks and the Hicks--the lineage that came over from. Speaker 1: So Eliza was married to Bart Hicks? Speaker 2: Say that again. Speaker 1: Elijah was married to Bart Hicks? Speaker 2: Eliza. Speaker 1: Eliza. Speaker 2: No she was married to Anthony Hicks that was the son of Bart Hicks. Speaker 1: I, I guess what I'm trying to establish is you said that Bart Hicks was your great-grandfather-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and Starry Eye was your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: These are both on your mother's side. Speaker 2: Yes. So he-- Speaker 1: So Bart Hicks had Anthony Hicks. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was his son. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And he married Eliza. Speaker 2: Eliza Eikerenkoetter. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 633007 Speaker 1: Were there any other stories about any of the people in your lineage, in your ancestry? Speaker 2: The only thing I know is that we would go out to my [maternal] grandmother's house, Eliza [Eliza Eikerenkoetter Hicks], and she always wore (unclear) seemingly a black skirt and a white waist and she was very strict. She had the most beautiful flowers and she had flowers around the house, a flower garden, and she kept it so clean that if you walked in it, your footprints would be left on the sand. And she didn't allow us to go there and as a rule when--I imagine it was when my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] was having another child, no doubt she would send us to South Carolina to my grandmother. But my grandmother would measure our feet to find out who's been in my flower garden, and until recently I had never seen trees of plums, trees of pears--I think I've seen trees of pears but we have bushes of plum trees, but she had every kind of fruit tree you could think of. She had apples, pears, peaches, a grape arbor, figs but she didn't want us to touch it and something like pomegranate, sweet pomegranates and I remember one time I went in and got a pomegranate that had fallen on the ground and went under the house to eat it. And she, you know she came out there after me, came, came--I was on the ground behind the house and under the house. And she--her curse word was, "You little devil," and every time you'd do something, "You little devil." And I remember once she was talking to some friends or somebody and they were all sitting out on the porch and I came out and I sat there and they were talking and I looked right up in their mouths, just looked. She said get up and go and play don't you see grown folks talking and I went. And finally she heard on the piano, she came in to find out where the music--where the notes was coming from and she said, "You little devil. You--what are you doing in this parlor?" That's what they called it then. I said, "You told me to go play, and I thought you meant go play the piano" (laughter). But see anything you did she would whip you about it, and I got to the place I wasn't in love with her (laughter), but we had to go out from time to time. Story_ID: 633008 Speaker 1: Where did they--did they live in Beaufort [South Carolina] as well? Speaker 2: No, they lived in Ridgeland [South Carolina], and I understand Ridgeland was a part of Beaufort, or Beaufort County [South Carolina], but somehow they separated it. I don't know the county's name, but it's not too far (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jasper County [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: What is it? Speaker 1: Jasper County? Speaker 2: Jasper. Speaker 1: Ridgeland is in Jasper County. Speaker 2: It's not too far from Beaufort. Speaker 1: Beaufort, yes. Tell me about where your [maternal] grandmother [Eliza Eikerenkoetter Hicks] lived. The description that you're giving me makes it sound as though your grandfather [Anthony Hicks] had some wealth. You had a piano in the home and beautiful fruit trees. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me what did your grandmother and grandfather do? Speaker 2: Well my grandfather was also a builder and the house was a two story house and if I can remember I think there were six rooms in that house. Six that were--one, two, three, four. Six rooms and he was building an addition to it when he died before finishing it. But I thought--there were certain things I thought belonged to country folk. They lived in the country, and we lived in the city. And one was that a living room and the front room had wallpaper, and I thought that was for country people. I thought certain flowers like the crepe myrtle and some of the other beautiful flowers; I thought they belonged to the country not to the city. But everything around us--the surroundings were always well kept and beautiful. I didn't realize that they were just maybe a little more advanced, and the Eikerenkoetters are well known. Maybe some of you have heard of Reverend Ike [Frederick J. Eikerenkoetter, III] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Reverend Ike. Speaker 2: That is my mother's [Anna Hicks Platts] first cousin, Reverend Ike, and I think he was the first one to have these big radio programs, and now everybody has it same thing with the TV. But he is my mother's first cousin. Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land that they lived on? Speaker 2: No I really don't, but I do know my mother told me that African Americans owned all the land along the river [Broad River] and as history tells us 15 million plus land, plus acres were owned by African Americans and that's the reason why I think this program--history making program [The HistoryMakers] ought to help our people to realize that they just can't start with slavery and that in their minds they think that the shackles were all we had during emancipation, but it isn't true. Story_ID: 633009 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your mother [Anna Hicks Platts]. How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother went as far as the tenth grade. At that time, the tenth grade was supposed to be equal, I guess, to a B.S. or A.B. But she also had children, and my mother wanted always to be with her children. She was a dressmaker, and I have known her to go, as you know Savannah [Georgia] is surrounded by islands, to Isle of Hope [Georgia], which was one of the islands where we came from there to enter the house that my father [George Platts] built. But she was making a whole outfit for the mayor's daughter who married and for the bridesmaid, and she did--she was an accomplished seamstress, but I have a slight recollection. I must have been--I could have been four or five years old, about four and maybe younger. My godmother lived across the street, and I was given her name, Amelia. She gave me a rocking chair and a high chair. My mother was teaching school in the house where we lived and I remember so many children she had, little children, I guess they must have been preschool kids and one of them sat in my chair, and I was on the back of it rocking it--in the high chair--rocking the chair trying to get her out. So she naturally with all of these kids, they occupied all of the chairs but that's the first thing I remember my mother having done was a school, a little school, and of course my mother was a civil rights activist. And there were times that she would let the folk know whom she was. They didn't take advantage of her; they respected her. Story_ID: 633010 Speaker 1: She [Robinson's mother, Anna Eikerenkoetter Platts] told us about something that happened to him, my father [George Platts]--and he also was a carpenter--that they were in some part of Georgia. She had one child; that's my oldest sister, and my oldest sister was four years old. When my father would go to different places building, he would take his wife and his child with him. So this particular time they lived on--it must have been a street because they had a street light and just across the street a couple of doors down there was also a white family. My father was always a good provider and this lady would come over and ask to borrow things, "Anna, loan me a cup of flour," or, "Loan me a cup of sugar." My mother got to the place she called her Sister Poor Thing, because she was always borrowing. She came over to the house one day to borrow something and my four year old sister opened the door and my older sister was old enough to be my mother and when my sister opened the door she said, "Hello Sister Poor Thing." And she said, "That's not my name." She said, "My mama calls you Sister Poor Thing." She said, "Next time you call me that I'm going to spank you." Then she told mama, "Your daughter called Sister Poor Thing, and if she calls me that again, I'm going to spank her." Mama said, "You put your hand on my child," and then she told her, "Yes, you're Sister Poor Thing. You come over here and you borrow this and you borrow that," and they had a big argument. This lady says, "Yes, my husband is a police and I'm having you arrested," and my mother said, "You won't have me arrested; I'll beat up the police," (laughter). So she was angry and after the feud was over some man, African American walked down the street and saw her and she told him what had happened, and he said, "Ms. Platts, do you know this is the Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] section? Do you know they would lynch you?" "They'll never put their hands on me." "I'm going to tell your husband." So he went wherever my husband [sic.] was working and he told him, and my father told the people who were working with him. He said, "I'm afraid we're going to have trouble." And there was a place, an arsenal, where they had the old ammunition just like they have as you go to Hilton Head Island [South Carolina]; I don't know whether you saw it or not. But my father told these people, and they went to the arsenal and the man who guarded the arsenal gave them all guns. When they came back some of them were on top of the house, some under the house and my mother said--my father said, "I don't want anybody to shoot until I shoot," and they waited. Finally one guy came and stood under the light waiting for the others and then another guy came and finally they said, "Oh nobody is coming." And they started singing and went on their way. My mother said, "Anna, I'm going to send you back to your mother, I can't afford to have you going out and starting riots," (laughter). Story_ID: 633011 Speaker 1: So you said that, go ahead, tell me about your father [George Platts] buying your mother [Anna Hicks Platts] a horse and buggy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And mother. She would take the horse and buggy, and would go--she was well, well-known in Savannah [Georgia] and with the exception of being a dressmaker, she would also--she was a lecturer, a public speaker and she wrote a whole lot of little skits for us and for the class when I was in first grade and when I was in sixth grade. She wrote these little, these skits that were used whenever they had meetings, and she wrote poetry also. Unfortunately, being away from home, I got none of them. But she was very, very outstanding particularly in politics. She would take her horse and buggy and go from one house to the other. I would be in the buggy with her and I would get out and knock on doors and ring doorbells. The women would come out from time to time and she would take them down to the polls, I mean down the registration office first and see that they registered. They didn't have any trouble registering. Then when the elections came up, she would do the same thing. I would be with her, and she would take these women down to the polls and they would vote. And she had quite a bit of clout when it came down to influencing people who you should vote for, and we didn't--Savannah was different from most places. We didn't have racists, and I don't think they had Ku Klux Klan [KKK] then but in order that African Americans would be able to be treated according to the Constitution of the United States and not as I am an American too, that we were all Americans and she would fight for justice. There was a case, and I was in the courthouse at this time, why she was in there I don't know. And whenever people needed somebody maybe just as a support, she would go with them, and whatever it was the judge no doubt did not use the procedures, and she said to him when it was over she started talking to him and she got a little angry or concerned about what it was and she told this judge, "Listen, I have got your job. You just wait until election comes up." I understand when election came up he was not elected now that was in Savannah. Now in 1926-- Story_ID: 633012 Speaker 1: Before we go further in the years, let's go back and talk about your father. Tell me-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) your father's name and we'll talk about your mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and father and some of the things that they did as years went on. But I want to establish first your, your fa--tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: My father's name was George Platts. There was a G, but I don't think it was for any specific name, and he was born, and I think it was (unclear) county--Hampton, it might be Hampton County in South Carolina. Do you know anything about Hampton County? It's--I think it was farther northwest in the State of Georgia. Speaker 1: Georgia or South Carolina? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yes, in South Carolina both of them were South Carolinians, and they had a big plantation. My father's father went to the Civil War, and there he was killed four months before my father was born. Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: He was a Hicks, I mean he was a Platts, but I don't know what his name was except Platts. Speaker 1: So you didn't know your grandmother and grandfather. Well he died before you were born, your grandfather, but what about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother died before I was born also. Speaker 1: Did you know her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Elizabeth and before she was married she was Elizabeth Johnson [Elizabeth Johnson Platts (ph.)] if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: And were both of--were they African American? Speaker 2: Yes, and they were mixed with Indian [Native American] also on both sides, and when you go downstairs you'll see my grandmother's picture it should be on my grandmother on both sides. Speaker 1: So tell me more about your father. Speaker 2: Well, my father was the kindest person I have ever seen in my life. I have never seen my mother and father angry, feuding or fussing, never, and of course it was the same thing with my husbands [Samuel William Boynton, Bob W. Billups, and James Robinson], so I guess it could be done. But one thing about him, he would make decisions only in the event it's all right with my mother. If we were to ask my mother, may we go somewhere she would say ask your dad and if we asked him he would say, "Ask your mother." And I remember something happened in this place Isle of Hope. I had a sister (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eyes of Hope? Speaker 2: Isles of Hope. Speaker 1: And where is that? Speaker 2: That's part of Savannah [Georgia], right outside. All these are little islands like where the Georgia State University [sic. Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] is. It's on Thunderbolt Island [sic. Thunderbolt, Georgia] and the other one is Isles of Hope, and many of those little islands were almost--they were in Savannah. And we, they--we lived in this big house and this is when he was building our house, and there were two little houses on the outside. I imagine they must have been like a servant's house, and we were living in the big one. And my father had some of his equipment out there and my mother--my sister and I went out one night and we had--he had a lamp, a lamp or a lantern and he went out there to get some of his equipment that he needed and my sister, I'll never forget, she had on a big hat and then finally the light went out and she said, "Oh, by George, the light's gone out." My father said, "Geneva [Geneva Platts McCullough], what are you doing cursing?" "I heard you say it," and he said, "Don't say anything I say; say what your mother says." Now that was his curse, "By George" and, "Confound it" (laughter), but anything they thought would impress the children had to be good. Story_ID: 633013 Speaker 1: Another thing about him [Boynton Robinson's father, George Platts], he, he had enterprises. Though he was a contractor, he had a large wholesale and retail wood yard, and it was near the house. Now we would go to South Carolina and carry a crew and cut down the trees, and they were all, that I remember, I think they were pine trees. He would have to haul those trees to the river, wherever the river was, put it on barges, and then the barges would go to Savannah [Georgia] and it would be reloaded on a boxcar, train boxcar or carbox or whatever you call it. Then, there were wagons and finally a truck that would go to the nearest railroad track and unload the wood and bring it to the wood yard. It was just--I look back in those days and I say, "How in the world could he make anything like that?" But he did, and the interesting thing about it is they would close down the wood yard at about six o'clock, and if anybody came in afterward and wanted a dime's worth of wood or fifteen cents or whatever it was, because it was cut up according to the type of wood they used in the stoves, people had stoves then. I would run out there and I would sell them wood, my sister would do it, and we had little banks. They were cast iron I guess and I would put my money in the bank, my sister would put money in the bank just the little nickels and dimes or whatever it might be. And this sister of mine was very, very smart but I called her my stupid, dumb sister, because we got everything--we didn't have to--everything that was necessary. We didn't have to fend to eat or anything like that because my father wouldn't--he didn't allow paper bag groceries. You might have to go to the local stores and get maybe matches or maybe a salt or something like that. But all of the groceries would come from the wholesale store, and he would get the wholesale groceries. We'd have the--or what they called dray in those days and later on trucks and they would come up to the back and fill the closet under the stair steps with such as a hundred pounds of this, a hundred pounds of that, a gross or two gross or three gross of such and such a thing. All of the can goods, lard, sugar, flour, meal, things like that and do you know we would destroy that stuff getting ready for the next month (laughter). Not we, because I didn't do any cooking but whoever it was. Our house had eleven rooms and there were people who had nowhere to stay and like my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] said they were in church and the minister said, "Well now, we have Sister Belle, and you know she lost her husband, and she's going to be evicted. Who will take Sister Belle?" My father's hand or my mother's hand would go up, "We'll take her," and we always had a lot of folk there. People who were of no relation but they had somewhere to stay. Somebody said one day, "What we ought to do is just get a sign and say, 'This is a house of refuge.' Anybody who doesn't have anywhere to stay, go to the Platts." Story_ID: 633014 Speaker 1: But he [Boynton Robinson's father, George Platts] was one of the kindest fellows and even after well while I--before I went to school he and my bro- he was suffering from rheumatism, crippling rheumatism so he bought a new Ford and bought a camper, it wasn't a camper but it was a tent. And where they could pitch the tent and a place for the carport and they were going west in order that they could find someplace that would be kind to his rheumatism, because somebody told him if he went to an arid section, because you know Savannah [Georgia] is right on the ocean and you've got a lot of humidity there. But they were talking about Arizona and in that section where it's dry all of the time. They stayed a year and three months, but I wanted to go then I grew up all of this time and my sister graduated from Georgia State College [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth, Savannah, Georgia] with all honors and I have never been anything but a mediocre person. I never tried to strive for honors, I guess I didn't have sense enough (laughter). Speaker 2: Can you tell me about your father's education? Speaker 1: My father was a third grader. He went as far as the third grade, but he was the greatest mathematician you could find. And he tested it because there was once after having gone and having the wood yard he said to my sister who was about to graduate from Georgia State College he said and her name was Anna [Anna Platts]. He said, "Anna, I want you to tell me how many cords of wood I can get out of the tree. The tree is sixty feet tall," and I'm just surmising this because I have no conception of mathematics, "It's sixty feet tall, it is four yards circumference and maybe thirty-two inches in diameter. How many cords of wood did I--will I get out of that?" She figured and she figured and she took it to school and they figured and the answer they brought back my father said, "That's not right." What you do is you multiply, I know this is wrong, just multiply the circumference by the height and the height by the diameter and multiply such and such a thing and you'll come out with the answer and there will be so many and so many cords of wood. They couldn't figure it out, but he did. Story_ID: 633015 Speaker 1: So he [Boynton Robinson's father, George Platts] was good in math. So is that how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very good. Speaker 1: --how he bought all of the land or was some of the land left to him? Or how did he acquire the land? Speaker 2: No, he bought everything; we didn't have anything in Savannah [Georgia]. See, when he married my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and moved to Savannah, he was a carpenter and my mother was a dressmaker. Everything they acquired, they did it together. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they married--how they met and got married? Speaker 2: I remember my mother saying something about this man, he was ten years older than she, and he came to the house and he said, "I want to marry that little girl." She must have been about sixteen and when they got married she said that they left the house in a horse and buggy. The buggy and the horse had two white horses and she always said this is what--this is the way I want to go to the cemetery when I die. I want to be drawn by horses rather than--she said it's too quick to go by way of cars. But then they moved--they started moving before I graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay well when they got married they were both living in South Carolina? Speaker 2: Well he lived in one section-- Speaker 1: She lived in another. Speaker 2: And she lived in another, yes. Speaker 1: And they got married and moved to Savannah? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now they lived in Savannah with ten children, no because two died early. Story_ID: 633016 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your, your brothers and sisters. You have nine brothers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me finish telling you about my father [George Platts]. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: They stayed in Savannah [Georgia] until all the children were grown and the interesting thing is before he went away some man came up to the house and wanted to see my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and said to my mother that, "God told me to come to this house and to see you." She said to herself, "Well, here is another hungry mouth," and she asked him did he want something to eat? He said, "No I have a message that God gave me to give to you," and she said, "Okay." "God said that your house is going to be divided and there will be your children some will leave here and go to the East or the West, your husband will leave and--but later on you will all be back together again." So that--my father was the first to leave when--no he was not the first because I had a sister who was teaching, then another sister got married this was after this man said your house will be divided. My father left to find a place that would now--that would be kind to his arthritis--we call it arthritis now but it was rheumatism in those days. My sister went to Edward Waters College down in Jacksonville, Florida. I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]; the other sister went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and then the house was divided. When my father knew that he was not going to stay in Savannah and it was during the time that they were affected by the Depression [Great Depression], because they lost money in the bank and I imagine they had mortgages also. But they decided that they would go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to live. So they took what was left and went to Philadelphia and bought a three story house then. Now in that house the family began to come to Philadelphia. In that house there were three stories, six apartments, and the people on the second and third floors would come down and they'd have to come through the hall where the family lived--where my mother and father lived. So he said, "Well, you know I would not--I want to build a porch on the side and let these people on the second and third floors just come by the side rather than have to come through going to the front door." I don't know how long they were building--they were building that porch but at the end some man came by and they were talking. My father was also a very religious person, and in the talk he said, "I know that I have to die. I am ready for the summons to come. Anytime God calls me, I'm ready." And he constantly told my brother, "We got to get this porch finished today. We've just got to, we've just got to do it," and by their having a line in order that they can finish this they met that line and they finished it. Story_ID: 633017 Speaker 1: We had on the back, going out of the back door, the yard was bricked up and they had a--they had a rug on there and s- they called that the summer porch, the summer parlor. My sister and her children, her two or three children were out, and my brother was out there, but see the family was getting back together and then my sister looked out and she saw a light in the kitchen and she said, "I wonder who is that." She went into the kitchen and my father [George Platts] was trying to fix something to eat, and this is after he had finished the porch. And she said, "Papa, what in the world are you doing? With all of your children, you have no right being out there fixing something for yourself." He said, "I just wanted some grits and some ham and you folk were so happy out there I didn't want to bother you." She said, "Well, you go on out there, I'll fix it and when I finish it I'll call you." So when she called him she said his eyes were like two electric bulbs. She just couldn't understand it, and he came on in and he went on into the kitchen and ate and she went into the bedroom, fell across the bed and started crying. When he finished as he was always such a polite person he said to her, "I enjoyed that so much. What are you crying about?" She said, "I don't know." So he went on the outside and somebody took--he was talking about talking too much and he said, "Sometimes I like to talk a lot. Sometimes I just like to listen," and someone took the baby and threw the baby up in the air and the baby came down laughing and he laughed, "Ha ha." Somebody said, "Papa," and he was gone just like that after having finished the porch, and saying, "I'm just waiting for the summons to come." But he was a wonderful guy everybody loved him, everybody loved my mother [Anna Hicks Platts]. My mother talked--she was able to talk a lot but he didn't talk a whole lot. Story_ID: 633018 Speaker 1: Tell me about your sisters and brothers. Tell me their names and if you can do it in progression and tell me where you fit in. Speaker 2: The youngest one who died before I was born and that was my mother's [Anna Hicks Platts]--let's take--was she the first child? I think she was. The first child but she died her name was Alvarena [Alvarena Platts (ph.)] and she died in infancy. Then the second one was Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Platts], and Wilhelmina lived to be grown and lived to be a senior citizen. She was the one who was teaching and finally lived in Detroit, Michigan. The next one was Elizabeth [Elizabeth Platts]. Elizabeth was also the one when I was born my mother gave me to her and said, "Take care of this baby." And she was--to me all of my sisters were wonderful, all of them were people you could get along with, and there were no scraps and feuds and fusses, but occasionally my sister and I would have a falling out. But that was the third child. The fourth was Eloise [Eloise Platts]. Eloise was six years older than I, and the interesting thing is here within the last thirty years I got my passport and they gave me my sister's age and her place of birth which made me six years older that I really am, and when I got ready, when I asked them to change it they said all you have to do is to find somebody who was grown when you were born. Well I said forget it, just forget it so I have two ages (laughter). Story_ID: 633019 Speaker 1: You were telling me about your sisters. Who was the next sister? Speaker 2: The next sister was Anna [Anna Platts] she was very, very smart. They called her the elocutionist of the family. She wrote poetry. I have a book that she has written, and I have a book of poems also. And she actually is the only one in the family who was employed by the federal government--well I was too I forgot me. But the two of us--I didn't continue because after I got married--before I got married I had to stop. All of the others had businesses for instance Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Platts], the oldest one, had the oldest daycare center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. My brother [Harold Platts] had the oldest candy factory in Philadelphia. My sister Elizabeth [Elizabeth Platts] had children when she went to Philadelphia, and she didn't want to leave her children to go to work because her husband was from the farm and he had no particular profession. She asked the company to let her have machines and she had a factory downstairs with about--had about twelve or fourteen machines and she employed other people. They would bring her coats, I remember the coats and she would do just the outside work and then they--the truck would come and pick it up and take it on back to the factory to put the things together, and she would get other people who had children who didn't want to leave them and she would see that they got machines. But she had the factory right downstairs. And the other sister was a beautician. Oh, I came in there, that's right. Wait a minute, wait a minute--now after that sister Elizabeth there was Anna Threadgill Cole [ph.] and she was the one who worked for the eastern region of the [U.S.] Air Force base and she had charge of the secretaries there, those who were inducted and those who were retiring, whether they were colonels or what not. All of the secretaries were under her supervision until they closed, and of course she was ready to retire then. Story_ID: 633020 Speaker 1: Then I worked for the U.S. Department of Agriculture as a home demonstration agent after I taught for less than a year. And I taught--I worked with people in the rural district on plantations, and that is where I got involved in civil rights, human rights, getting people off of the farm with the man who was a county agent who was of--finally we [Boynton Robinson and Samuel William Boynton] married and together we turned Dallas County [Alabama] upside down. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then the next was my sister who was a beautician and the next one was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was her name? Speaker 1: Her name was Geneva McCullough [Geneva Platts McCullough] and the next one was the baby sister Audrey [Audrey Platts Winters (ph.)]. Audrey was a nurse but she also on weekends she and her husband would have barbeque. They way they, they prepared that barbeque went to the graveyard with them. I understand people would be, would be just for blocks waiting to get that barbeque and that was Audrey Winters, she and her husband. And the recipe came from my older sister, she wouldn't give it to anybody else but my baby sister and of course when they died it died with them. The next was my brother--my baby brother whose name was George [George Platts]. I think I gave you Harold's [Harold Platts], name the candy maker. George worked at the Sun Ship [Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock Company, Chester, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania. He also--and he was a blueprint interpreter. He also had downstairs in the basement a concoction making--I don't know whether it was all kinds of beauty preparation on just for the hair but he was the one--it was his concoction that he made and sold it from Washington, D.C. to New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: What was the name of it do you remember? Speaker 1: The name of the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The hair care products. Speaker 1: I--no--I don't know. I'm the only one who did not live in the North. I have been a southern gal ever since I was born (laughter). Story_ID: 633021 Speaker 1: Let's talk about you as a child. Now you told me some of your memories, but what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: When I tried to push the child out of my high chair. Speaker 1: Your high chair or was it a rocking chair? Speaker 2: No it was a high chair. Speaker 1: Oh, high chair (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had both the rocking chair and the high chair and I could have been about three or four years old. My godmother lived across the street [in Savannah, Georgia] and then I asked my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] could I go to my godmother's, she said, "No, one of these days I'm going to send you over there and let you stay." So it was dark and when she knew anything I was dragging the chairs across the street to my godmother, I was going over there to stay, and that's one of the first things that I remember after trying to get this girl out of my high chair. I remember my brother as a young person. He, he said he was going to have a show and he brought in some of the other boys and they had--now I don't know whether they teach things like this now or not but it was a sheet and behind the sheet they would make figures and he was charging them pins. So much for--say if you were a certain age you had to pay one or two safety pins (laughter). Story_ID: 633022 Speaker 1: I remembered the circuses that would come to town. And can I back up a little and speak about the circus? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: My brother [Harold Platts], the one who made candy and had the oldest candy store, he started in Savannah, in Savannah [Georgia] and he said that a circus was passing and he was eating a piece of an apple, and he decided when he heard the music he threw the apple back of him to stand on the outside to see the circus and when he came back he found out that the apple had fallen in the vat of candy and he took it out and it crystallized. And he said, "Oh boy, this is something different," and when he tasted it he found out it was good. So he said to his partner, "Let's make some of them and take it to the circus." That was the first candy apple that he made. And that--I'll never forget the circus. My father [George Platts] would usually take us to the circus, and I remember of course riding on the merry go around and the Ferris wheel and I got lost (laughter). Somehow I got away from them, and I got lost. But this is something that we always did, we'd go to the circus and one time my mother and one of the other neighbors who had a child or children we all went to the circus and as we were coming out there were the Indians [Native American]. They had just the little flaps on and face painted and as we passed--now my sister Anne [Anna Platts] was older than I they say she was so much like the Indians because there were Indians on both sides and they called her papoose but while we were coming out of the circus and these Indians were talking one of them said to my mother [Anna Hicks Platts], "Give me one." She said, "Which one do you want?" And the Indian pointed at me, "I want that one." And when they said that--as my mother and the others walked I wouldn't walk fast, I was trying to get back where the Indians were. And finally they looked around and I was ever so far back because I was trying to get back to the Indians. And my mother said, "Why don't you come on? Why are you doing that?" "I want to stay with the Indians." I thought I wanted to stay with the Indians, but the reason was I wouldn't have to wash my face. They had all of this paint on (laughter) and I thought if I stayed with the Indians I wouldn't have to dress and I wouldn't have to wash my face, and I very well remember that. Story_ID: 633023 Speaker 1: I remember one time as a child (laughter) I played hooky from school. They had, they had truant officers, and then when the bell--at nine o'clock the last bell would ring, the door would be closed, and if you weren't in line or hadn't gone into the school, you'd have to go around to the front and you would have to--they'd have to find out why is it you were late. But at this particular time I was, I was crying. I was in the first grade, I was crying because the door closed before I got into the school, and there was a bigger girl who said oh you don't have to cry come on and go with me and I followed this little girl, and we went everywhere that I thought she--we could go. We went to the ten cent store, and she started trying on everything that she could reach, she must have been about ten or twelve years old. And she tried on the rings, she tried on some of everything that she could and nobody bothered her and when we started back she had two or three rings on her finger and then I got scared, I said, "You stole the rings." But my people didn't know anything about it. But I guess I talked a lot in school, I guess I did. I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What elementary school did you go to? Speaker 1: This is Cuyler Street School [Savannah, Georgia]--Cuyler Street and it was on Anderson Street--Anderson and Burroughs [Street] I believe. They have moved it since then a little closer to where we stay but I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before we talk about school tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived. Now you just said that you went to the ten cent store and you were able to try on things. Speaker 1: That was downtown. Speaker 2: That was downtown. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So was it far away from the school? Speaker 1: Oh yes, far enough-- Speaker 2: How did you get downtown from the school? Speaker 1: We walked (laughter). We walked. Speaker 2: Well, tell me, tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived. Speaker 1: The neighborhood was a quiet, very quiet neighborhood. There were children in the neighborhood, and we just entertained ourselves. Now the girls across the street, they would go to the movies every Saturday but we had no, we had no desire, I didn't have any desire to go to the movies, because the kids would come and we would play games like jackstone, old maids and I liked to ride the horse when the man, when the guy came in, the young man and bring the horse when mother [Anna Hicks Platts] came in. I would say, "Let me have her." At that time I was about ten, eleven or twelve years old, give me the horse before the horse ate and then I would ride her and I'd put as many people on that horse--many children to ride with me, and if not I'd just take her just ride her and just enjoy it. We had skates, bicycles and I'd tear up everybody's bicycle, mine and everybody else's by putting other kids on it. For instance my uncle came from Jacksonville, Florida, and he rode the train but he would bring his bicycle and it was an adult's bicycle and I call the kids, "Let's ride." I had them on the seat and the back on the handle bar I have one or two. When I knew anything one of the wheels went down, because some of these kids were bigger than I and after I got through breaking up his bicycle, I sat it aside, just as though it was all right. Story_ID: 633024 Speaker 1: Describe the neighborhood. You said there were a lot of children. What were some of the professions of the parents that lived in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: I don't know. We weren't allowed to go into the homes. My mother [Anna Hicks Platts] said, "Let the children come here. I can take care of them, but if you go to somebody else's house, you may do wrong and I don't know anything about it. You let the children come here," and they did. I remember one time there was a girl, she was much older than we were; she must have been a teenager--late teenager. She disappeared, and we didn't know where she was and I guess we just forgot about it, but I understand that girl got pregnant and they got her out of the community. Because the community was one where everybody wasn't professional, maybe none of them, a few of them. But women stayed at home, most of them. They didn't have to work and I didn't know anything about people working in the homes as servants, as what else? Whatever. I didn't know anything about it until, oh gosh, I was almost grown. You know people being maids and nurses and what not. I don't know of anybody, I'm sure they did it but I don't know of anybody who did. Speaker 1: So where you lived, was it considered the country or was it part of the city (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. It was 3204--I think 3204, 32--33--3204 Burroughs Street. It was right in the city, but as I said the city was like New York [New York]. This was Dittmerville [Savannah, Georgia] I think, Cann Park [Savannah, Georgia]-- Speaker 1: You said little--say (unclear)? Speaker 2: Dittmer- I think it was--no I better not say that, because I don't know. But it was something; it was either Brownsville [Cuyler-Brownsville, Savannah, Georgia], Dittmerville, Cann Park or something. Speaker 1: So describe the house that you lived in there in Savannah [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Did you have the--did you have the--? Speaker 1: Because--'cause you said that-- Speaker 2: Did you see the picture? Speaker 1: Yes, I did. Speaker 2: Well it was--my father [George Platts] built this house when I was around four or five years old. That's when we moved into the house, and we had, he had eleven rooms in that house. We had the first telephone, the first running water, the first bathroom and the first electricity, because he built it and of course he wanted his house to be just like anybody's else's and that's the way he reared his children. He didn't want them to go out and find pleasure anywhere else, the same way with my mother. Speaker 1: How much land was the house on? Speaker 2: We owned, I guess it was--it must have been a block. In that block there was the church, so we owned the rest of it so it wasn't any land. Speaker 1: But it was big enough because you had horses so there was a stable. Speaker 2: We had one horse. Speaker 1: Just one horse. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. We had one. Speaker 1: But there was a stable. Speaker 2: We had a stable, and then we had the wood yard in that block so it was a whole block but that was all to it. Story_ID: 633025 Speaker 1: What else was in that area? Speaker 2: I think they owned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it all residential? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was it all residential, where you lived? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but I think my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and father [George Platts] did buy a farm somewhere. Somebody was losing it, but I don't know, and they--but I never saw anything from it. I mean, I saw no vegetables. People would come in and bring vegetables but they were huskers--hucksters. They--we would have--people would come up and down the streets selling seafood, because they had the river not too far from there and they would have baskets on their heads as, no doubt, you have seen pictures of and buckets in their hands going down the streets selling oysters, shrimps, fish and I believe crabs. I don't remember the crabs. If so--if that's so they must have been dead, I mean they must have been cooked because you can't carry crab--if they die, you can't eat them but I know the shrimps, the oysters and the fish. Speaker 1: So this was about 1915, 1916? Speaker 2: That was after 1911. It was about yeah, about '15 [1915], '16 [1916], something like that. Story_ID: 633026 Speaker 1: Tell more about elementary school [Cuyler Street School, Savannah, Georgia]. Were there any teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: Do you know what? I remember almost all of my teachers. In my first grade it was a Mrs. Rogers--Ms. Rogers; in my second grade it was Ms. Blyler [ph.]; in my third grade was Ms. Owens [ph.]; in my fourth grade was Ms. Byrnes [ph.]; in my fifth grade was Ms. Ellis [Helen M. Ellis]; in my sixth grade was Ms. Jackson; and then seventh grade you had a whole lot of teachers, and I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there one teacher that stands out in your mind that maybe encouraged you or was just special to you? Speaker 2: I think I used to fight with them (laughter). I, I think Ms. Jackson, Eureka Jackson and she as my sixth grade teacher. I thought a lot of her and an interesting thing is when I got in high school [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth, Savannah, Georgia], I was fond of one of the teachers. At that time she wasn't teaching me, but I thought Ms. Lee was a very--Ophelia Lee, I thought she was the prettiest lady I had ever saw in my life. She was tall, skinny, beautiful dark brown, and I don't know why I was stuck on her. Now, when I got in high school I used to do such stupid things. I don't know what she did and maybe she was one of my teachers but whatever it was, I turned right against her just like I liked her, and I was very stubborn. Anything she asked me to do, I'd do just the opposite. But now there was another teacher, I believe her name was Ms. Simmons [ph.], you know that's been a long time ago. This lady was teaching clothing. Let me see, what did they call it? Domestic science and foods and clothing, I guess that's the way they called it, and of course you have to bring something to sew. Ms. Simmons--the kids were saying, "You know, Ms. Simmons was arrested for stealing," and I said, "Arrested?" "Yes, she was arrested for stealing. She went to Piggly Wiggly and she stole." Well somehow she was my teacher in clothing and I thought I was doing fine and when I got my report card, she gave me fifty and when she gave me fifty I was so angry, because I knew I deserved more than fifty and I started crying. And the kids--she gave me fifty and they said I wouldn't let her get away with that and she was not in the room at that time. When she came in I got up on one of the drawing tables where you cut out material, put my hand on my hips and said, "Ms. Simmons, what do you mean by giving me fifty? Why did you steal my mark? If you wanted to steal why didn't you go back to Piggly Wiggly and steal?" I st- I broke down and started crying and she said, "Sit down. Sit down." And I looked back at those days and I say to myself I must have been a holy terror. But I better not be at home, my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] just said, "You do this or you don't do that and you didn't do it." But that foundation that they gave us even when I started teaching as an adult. In many cases you know where the teachers would get together and smoke and drink, and I would say, "Unh-uh, my parents would not approve of this," and I wouldn't do it. Story_ID: 633027 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. When you think about that time while you're a s- you know, young, young woman and thinking about Savannah [Georgia] at that time, what sounds, sights and smells remind you of that time? Speaker 2: After having--I don't think any of 'em, any sound, sight or smell. I can't compare that with anything or relate it to anything after I left there. I had been--really I had been trying to find a church like the church that was next to us on our street, because I used to like to hear the songs. It was a Methodist church and they would have watch meeting. That was very impressive. I've tried to find that type of watch meeting. That's on New Year's night. People (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So would that be one of the sounds that you remember from that time? Speaker 2: Yes, on New Year's night the people would come into the church. The Christians, the sinners, the liquor heads, the dope addicts--they didn't have dope addicts in those days, but you could smell the whiskey, the drunks. All of them would want to be in the church when the new year rolled around. And to me, the service most impressive and it would be somewhat like this. Let's say five minutes before midnight, everybody would get on their knees. They would have a watchman at the front of the pulpit, and in the back I think they called him a teller and the guy in the back would say, "Watchman what is the hour of the night?" And I mean that voice was just something that--it envelopes you; you just had to stand up and listen. And the watchman would say, "It is three minutes of midnight," and then they might sing a song and then again he would say, "Watchman, what is the hour of the night?" And then he'd say, "Twelve o'clock and all is well." Everybody would jump up and start singing (singing), "Happy new year, happy new year, happy, happy, happy new year." They'd shake hands and hug each other and it was very impressive to me of how they--sometime during that, people would make resolutions and my sister and I used to say every year, "I'm not going to tell anymore stories," and before the day is over: "You told a story," (laughter). But now our church was different. The church that I attended was the Church of God, and the impression that church and that home gave me I'll never leave it. It guided me; it caused me to realize that there is a heaven and there is a hell, and the thing about it is folk don't know anything about that now. And when I say that I think about how the respect you had for the church, for the elderly people, and for even the youth that were older than you. And I'll never forget, when we were small, I had a pair of new shoes on and we were in church and one of the little girls looked down and she said, "Oh you've got on new shoes." I said, "Uh-huh." "How much did your mama [Anna Hicks Platts] pay for those shoes?" And I said--I took her outdoors, away from the church: "My mama paid ten dollars for my shoes," (laughter). Rather than disrespect the church, I took her on the outside to tell a lie and I knew I was telling a lie, 'cause I didn't know anything about how much it cost. My father [George Platts] would take us down to the place to get shoes--one place and he was just get our shoes and sometimes the interesting thing is--I remember in getting the shoes they were Buster Brown shoes and it had little tassels on it, and I thought they were very pretty. When I put them on my father said, "Now if they hurt, let me know." "No, they don't hurt," and of course we rode the streetcar and on the way to the streetcar, I started limping and he said, "What are you doing limping?" They just pinch a little bit right here and the things were killing me (laughter), but I didn't want to get rid of the tassels on the shoes. Story_ID: 633028 Speaker 1: Now, we talked about the sounds. Can't think of any smells or aromas that remind you of that time? Speaker 2: Any what (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was your mother [Anna Hicks Platts] a good cook? Smells? Speaker 2: No, no. I don't know whether my mother could cook. I remember coming from school, and she was in the kitchen one time and I went into the kitchen, "Hi mama," I thought she was cooking. She said, "I'm showing you folk how to clean this kitchen up" (laughter). Nothing to eat. Speaker 1: Who prepared your meals? Speaker 2: Well, we always had people. We always had somebody we picked up out of the street or some elderly person who didn't have anywhere to live, and when I left home to come to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], my sister followed my brother--my father [George Platts] in the woods where he would go in the woods and mark the trees that he was going to have cut down. And they stopped at a house where there were three children, and to find out that the mother had died, and the father was at work wherever he worked, but the children were there and my sister said it took her ever so long. She--my sister was about fourteen I guess and it took her so long to try to comb this girl's hair, and she told my father, "Why don't we take them home?" And of course my father and my mother had a conversation and when I knew anything these three children stayed with us. And when I left to go to Tuskegee, I left the three of them there. And my mother--also an elderly woman who was there for many years, and my mother said that the one thing that disturbed her when we left and went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was that she could not take Mother Belle [ph.]. Mother Belle must have been a hundred years old and they said that she couldn't stand the trip and they had to send her to a poorhouse. Speaker 1: You mentioned that your father cut trees, and, you know, you told us the process about how he delivered the trees. The land that the trees were on, was that land that your family owned? Speaker 2: No, I think it's a matter of the same thing they do now. These loggers, you sometime see them on the road, these big old long pieces of trees. I, I--it would be--he would have to buy the trees and imagine it's similar to what it is now. You buy so many acres of trees and of course you get people to--who know and there were people who were professional, I'm sure who knew how to cut those trees down and how to cut them in cord--what they called cord wood. Because when they got home, it wasn't a tree, it was cord wood. Story_ID: 633029 Speaker 1: So now, you go to high school. Tell me what high school you went to. Speaker 2: I went to Georgia State College [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth, Savannah, Georgia]. You know, in those days we didn't have all of these degrees that they have--that they have now, and I found out that what they are getting now--let's say if they are working toward a B.S. they had (unclear) grades (laughter). So it--when my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] finished tenth grade, well oh my gosh, it was almost like you get a Ph.D. Speaker 1: So what year did you go to high school? Speaker 2: In the '20s [1920s], early '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: And during this time is when women got the right to vote in the Roaring '20s [1920s] is what they called it. You want to describe some of the times that you had in high school? What were the dances that were out? Were you allowed to dance? Did you got out to--? Speaker 2: No, you see we were at Georgia State College, we lived in Savannah [Georgia]. Georgia State College was in Savannah but on the island on part of Savannah. Speaker 1: On which island? Speaker 2: You had to use streetcars. Speaker 1: This was on the Isles of Hope [sic. Isle of Hope, Georgia]? No? Speaker 2: No that was on Thunderbolt [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Thunderbolt. Speaker 2: It's still there Thunderbolt that's where the state college is, state university now, Thunderbolt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As I said all of them had different names. We would just take the streetcar so I don't know what kind of socials they had because I'm sure that was for those folk who were on the campus--lived on the campus. Now, at--when I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], they were very strict. Speaker 1: What--well, before you go to Tuskegee tell me about--was there anything that you want to talk about as far as high school? Speaker 2: No, that was a part of high school. That was a part of high school. When I went to Tuskegee-- Speaker 1: Oh, you went there for high school, also (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I was a junior one year-- Speaker 1: One year, okay. Speaker 2: --and three years of junior college. That was the highest they went. The year that I finished then they put on the college course. No, I didn't get--but I have attended courses a number of places since I left Tuskegee. I went to-- Speaker 1: So you graduated from Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927], and I attended Selma University [Selma, Alabama]. I took a course in sociology and psychology. I attended Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Story_ID: 633030 Speaker 1: You graduate [from Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in 1927 and then in '29 [1929] the Depression [Great Depression] starts. You alluded to the fact that your family really didn't feel the wrath of the Depression. Is that right? Speaker 2: I said I believe they did-- Speaker 1: They did. Speaker 2: --because they lost money in the bank. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, they did and I think they felt it before it became countrywide, it's--because I just think that's the way it was. Speaker 1: But you said you were never personally as a young adult, never without food. Speaker 2: Oh no. We didn't know what that was to be without. We would try to--unfortunately we tried to get rid of all the food for the next month when the wholesale truck was coming in, which is terrible. But do you know what as much as we threw away anything and everything, the--when I started working, working with people who had nothing, living in houses that had no walls only the outside, not having any food worth anything unless they could raise it, I guess I got to the place where I am very conservative, very conservative. Speaker 1: Why didn't your family--was there no families that you could give the food to? Everybody had an abundance of food in the area? Speaker 2: I guess so, but what we would do. We had a guy who would come by every week to pick up what they called slop, swill some people call it swill and some people call it slop. But we would have a big container and as I said I didn't do the cooking, but they would bring out food and just take it and throw it out into this big container, and go and start cooking again. And this guy would come by and pick it up for the hogs. So no we never had to bother about being hungry, which I thank God for that. Story_ID: 633031 Speaker 1: So when you graduate, what happens after you graduate in 1927? Speaker 2: I'm trying to find out--let's see now. In 1920 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go to work? Speaker 2: Oh, 1927 I was asked to teach at a small place, and it was an island known as St. Marys, Georgia, St. Marys. Now this was a new Rosenwald school [Camden County Training School, St. Marys, Georgia]. There were eight teachers, and I was the only outsider. I guess that's the reason why I had to fight so hard. Everybody--all of the teachers were either sisters, or they were cousins or nieces to the principal [Toler Harris (ph.)], and they were all related. But there was one lady who was a cousin and she and I would get together and talk about the family (laughter), because the kids--this is my first time and I was just so I wasn't much older than some of the kids, but they were so well behaved and they thought a whole lot of me. They would come down to the house when it was time to go to school and escort me to the school. They would cook things like candy and cookies and things. They were, they were wonderful; they were just wonderful. There was a home ec [home economics] building--I mean a home ec room but I never had a chance, I was teaching the fifth and sixth grades. Speaker 1: You were teaching them what? Speaker 2: Everything, everything and of course that was reading, writing, arithmetic, and that was the biggest thing, history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you so with your high school diploma you were able to teach? Speaker 2: Oh yes, in those days that's why so many people would go back to school because-- Speaker 1: How long--? Speaker 2: They--I don't know you would have to go out of the state--I don't know I imagine in Atlanta [Georgia] you had some colleges but I think most of the schools were junior college. I don't think there were--you can look that up and see, but I don't-- Speaker 1: So you--but it wasn't a college degree it was a high school diploma right? Speaker 2: Junior. Speaker 1: Or was it junior college degree? Speaker 2: Well I finished junior college at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: So what type of degree did you get or was there one or was it just a diploma? Speaker 2: No, I only got an honorary degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I didn't--I've got an honorary degree, Tuskegee honored me by--well so many times they had--what do they call it? They had an honor that they gave their outstanding graduates and my husband [Samuel William Boynton] got that honor, the highest honor, in 1955 and in 1965 I got it. Speaker 1: Where did you live while you were staying or who did you live with when you were teaching at St. Marys? Speaker 2: I lived with a lady by the name of Mrs. Felder [ph.]. You had to live in the house--in the home and I was the only outsider. There were no other teachers. Story_ID: 633032 Speaker 1: How long did you teach there [Camden County Training School, St. Marys, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I was fired (laughter). I was fired, and I was fired because, as I said, these kids were wonderful. It was a new school, and they had no playground and having graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where I played on the varsity team in basketball, I wanted to see--I wanted these kids to have some type of recreation that they could enjoy. So I had the kids to form two clubs, Busy Bee Club [ph.] and Willing Workers Club [ph.]. We're gonna--we want you to raise money, because we're going to get a basketball court and we're going to get a tennis court. They raised the money and when we got the basketball court and the equipment, the principal [Toler Harris (ph.)] wouldn't even put it up, and I think the principal was mad at me because the only eligible bachelor who was there was his sister's girlfriend, boyfriend and he liked me. That, that or something (laughter). But anyway I think that caused me to be fired, the two things. Number one is that he had a pen this man's name was Mr. Nickens [ph.] and he was a cook on the boat. They had a factory where the boat would go out and get boat loads of fish and bring it into the factory, and it was a fertilizer factory, make the fertilizer out of the fish and he was a cook. He loaned me his pen--his fountain pen. Well, I didn't know anything about equipment to go out and teach; I doubt if I had a pencil. So he said, "I'll get one for you. You use mine, and if I go anywhere I'll stop and get one for you." And he got it, and I gave him his pen back. Now, the teachers all would get together even including this teacher who was a friend of mine, and she'd bring back to me the things that they said or the attitude--even the attitude that they had and the children knew it. They felt it and one of them said, "Ms. Platts [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson], you know Ms. Harris [ph.] went into the home ec [home economics] building--home ec room and cooked a cake, and they didn't give you any of it," and that's the way the felt. They could feel the way they felt about me, because I did so many things. When they got ready to have a parent teachers association [Parent Teacher Association, PTA] I said, "Well, let's make it a feast in the wilderness." I got my kids to go out and get limbs and make it so that it would stand--the whole place looked like, looked like a peach orchard. They took crepe paper and made little flowers and put them on there, made it look like blossoms. The thing about it is I--they would not cooperate, I couldn't get the cooperation of any of them. We were sitting in the room all the teachers and I looked around and I saw the pen that Mr. Nickens had loaned me and one of the ladies, his girlfriend was--she had the pen on her and this friend of mine though she was some cousin she said, "Why don't you get his pen? Get that pen back." And I looked around and said, "Does anybody have a pen that I can borrow?" Nobody said anything. I walked up to her and I said, "Oh that's Mr. Nickens' pen. Give me Mr. Nickens' pen; I'm going to give it to him," with my left hand; I'm left handed. And the principal didn't like it, because as I said this is the only eligible black man that I guess he could have had any of the ladies that he wanted. Then he came to me and he said, "Give Ms. Lyles [ph.] her pen back," and I said, "It's not Ms. Lyles' pen. It's Mr. Nickens' pen, and I'm going to give it to Mr. Nickens." My mother [Anna Hicks Platts] said, "You're crazy," (laughter). Story_ID: 633033 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when it came down--when I had done all of these little things we put--had somebody to put the basketball court up and whatnot, people would come in, principals from other schools, and they would praise our principal, "Look what you've done. You have given your children decent educational, physical education," and they would just praise him. So it wasn't long before they had teachers association. All of the teachers throughout the entire county, around a hundred and some odd, and at the end the emcee said, "Do any of you have anything to say? If you do, stand up, give your name, who your principal is and where you're teaching." There goes my left hand, "My name is Amelia Platts [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson] and I work at the Camden County Training School [St. Marys, Georgia]. The teachers, they don't give me any cooperation." Oh they told me to name the principal. "My principal is Mr. Toler Harris [ph.]," just as disdainfully as I possibly could say it. But they don't give me any cooperation and then I sat down. On Monday morning--that was on Saturday--on Monday morning the principal came into the room and said, "Ms. Platts, why did you say what you did?" "Because you know it's true. You don't cooperate with me." "Ms. Platts, you're fired" (laughter). And I said, "I don't care" (laughter). Story_ID: 633034 Speaker 1: So you stay at Camden County Training School [St. Marys, Georgia] for about three months (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About three, yes. Speaker 1: What was your salary like back then? Speaker 2: Well I made fifty-five, fifty-five dollars. Speaker 1: A month? Speaker 2: Yes that was better than when I started working for the government, not what I made but the teachers made twenty and twenty-five dollars. If you had a degree you might make twenty-five dollars. If you didn't you made twenty-dollars a month. Speaker 1: So after you left that school, where did you go next? Speaker 2: When I left there I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where my family was and stayed a while long enough to do some visiting. In Washington [D.C.] I visited my sister, in New York [New York] I visited the other sister and my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and my father [George Platts] were living then, both mother and father. Speaker 1: Now you said earlier that right before the Depression [Great Depression] that they took what money they had left and that's when they moved to Philadelphia and they bought a house (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They sold-- Speaker 1: They sold everything? Speaker 2: Yes, cleared out everything. The money in the bank was gone so whatever they had, they sold it. Speaker 1: And they bought property in Philadelphia. Speaker 2: They bought--yeah, they bought at 912 44th Street in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 633035 Speaker 1: So when you finished your visiting, what was your next job? Speaker 2: Well, when, after--I said I have-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: I had decided that I was going to just teach so the principal of a school in Pelham, Georgia accepted me and wanted me to teach there in Pelham, Georgia. That's while I, I got the information about teaching before I left, I left Camden [Camden County Training School, St. Marys, Georgia]. Now (clears throat), I knew I had three months before the school in Pelham opened so I said I want to work, I just want to work, I just can't, you know, just expect my parents [Anna Hicks Platts and George Platts] to take care of me. So I picked up the paper and saw, "Wanted: intelligent, bright, young colored girl to wait tables." So I said, "Well I'll apply for this," and this is at one of the hotels. So I went to the hotel the lady looked at me, she says, "You're not bright enough" (laughter). So I didn't get that job, but I kept just--somewhere else they wanted somebody to take care of children. Speaker 1: But before you go on when you say bright you thought she meant intelligent but they were looking for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I couldn't remember, I couldn't think of anything else but being intelligent, and I knew having finished from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I was intelligent enough, I was bright to know that this is a cup and that's a saucer and whatnot, but they were talking about the color of the skin. And the folk (unclear) they just teased me like everything. My brother-in-law was, I used to call him a nappy head (unclear) and he started teasing me about what you need to do is just fall in a barrel of flour and you'll have it made. But I didn't feel badly because I was just going to do it for a few weeks anyway. So this other job, I was supposed to take care of some children, and I went on Friday and of course on Saturday or Sunday--on Sunday you have the day off, whatever it was. But anyway I went on Friday, and I worked on Friday mo- Friday and Saturday, taking care of these children and of course go on to my parents on Sunday. As soon as I got there they said oh you've got to leave, you've just got to go down in Georgia. I said, "What is this all about? "Mr. Lampkin [F.R. Lampkin]--Professor Lampkin, Professor Lampkin says that he needs you to teach home economics." I said, "But I've already decided that I'm going down to Pelham." "No, you go on to Americus Institute." This is Americus Institute, Americus, Georgia. "You go down there because Mr. Lampkin--you know we know him and he was very friendly with the family and he'll take care of you. He won't let you get into any trouble" (laughter). So like an obedient child I went down to Americus, Georgia and I taught there from September. I taught there about six months, and I had charge of the basketball court; I was teaching home economics. One teacher left, and I had to fill in there and teach something else, and then another teacher left and the principal came to me--president in fact and said, "I'm going to send the Latin class to you." I said, "Send a Latin class? I don't know Latin." "Yes, I taught you at Georgia State College [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth, Savannah, Georgia], and I know you know it, and I'm going to send you." I said, "Mr. Lampkin, I don't know anything about Latin. I just sat up in your class." "I'm going to send them." So he sent the Latin class to me and I said, "Class, you have a study period," and I was not going to mess those folk up (laughter). Story_ID: 633036 Speaker 1: Anyway--now this is just the next year that I had--after I finished Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and the basketball team in Tuskegee invited us, my team which was a high school--this was a high school [Americus Institute, Americus, Georgia]. They invited us to play Tuskegee. I said, "My goodness, some of the kids I played with, they're still on the team," and I was going to Tuskegee to play when the mail carrier came. I said, "Let me see (unclear). Wait and let me contact the, the postman," because I was thinking about maybe I got a letter from my boyfriend whoever he was (laughter). I wasn't even thinking about business. So I got this letter from a Mr. T.M. Campbell [Thomas Monroe Campbell] who had charge of the seven southern states in extension work. He was an agriculturist, and the letter said, "Contact my office," and rather than to write them when he knew anything, I stepped up and there I was right in his face. And I told him well, I'd already gotten my students straight. I brought a basketball team and whatever they are doing there under supervision of the matron. So he asked me to fill out an application to work for the United States Department of Agriculture as a home demonstration agent. Well I took home ec- home economics and I was (unclear)-- Story_ID: 633037 Speaker 1: So we're still in 1928 when you fill out the application for the department of [U.S. Department of Agriculture] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1929. Speaker 1: Twenty-nine [1929], okay. Speaker 2: This was about February, 1929. I filled out the application, next two or three days and they wrote a letter and said, "We don't have any opening, but we'll consider your application," and right on the heels of that came a letter saying, "Report to Tuskegee [Alabama] to the state agent's office the 1st of April." Well, I told the head of the--in fact Mr. Lampkin--President Lampkin [F.R. Lampkin]. He said, "You can't leave; you signed a contract." You know, we had some rough places to go through with that school [Americus Institute, Americus, Georgia] because it was a Baptist school and they only raised money to pay the teachers, and if they didn't raise money you didn't get paid. They offered me seventy-five dollars with board and lodging, and I thought that was good because they had dormitories. And the first month I got the seventy-five dollars, the next month I got maybe about seventy dollars, the next month nothing. They just hadn't--had not raised the money, so. And then there were feuds between the principal and the teachers, because the male teachers, a couple of them liked a couple of the girls, the high school girls. They were in high school, and the teachers had just finished college, so it wasn't much difference between the ages and we had some feuds and run-ins, because he wanted me to take their classes. And when I told him that I'm leaving, I said, "I'm leaving the 1st of April." He said, "You can't leave; you signed a contract." Among these feuds he told all of us we were fired. I said, "Well, you forgot about the contract when you fired us--fired me." Anyway he said, "You can't go," and I said, "Yes, I can." Anyway I left and went to Tuskegee and was, was offered a position in Dallas County in Dallas County, Alabama. The county seat is Selma, Alabama, but having--you know those were two principals that I worked under. Story_ID: 633038 Speaker 1: I'd like to back up just a little about that first principal who fired me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Is it all right? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Many years afterward, he had a family. It was during World War II [WWII] when I was out of extension work [with the U.S. Department of Agriculture] and had my own business, real estate and insurance, and my husband [Samuel William Boynton] was in the business and we were working together. They had--it was during World War II and we had Craig Field [Craig Air Force Base; Craig Field, Alabama]. Now, the African American men if they had a family they could not live on the base they'd have to go out. Well, being in the real estate business we furnished homes for the servicemen, and there was a guy who went to the office and said his wife was coming in and he needed a place to stay. My husband said, "We don't have any vacancies, but there is a room at home and if my wife would accept you, and if you like it, well she might take you." So the guy was to meet me there at five o'clock in the office, the insurance office. So I said, "Okay, I'll take you out there," and he seemed to have been a pretty clean looking fellow. I took him out and he said, "I'll take this room." I said, "Okay then." He got his wife, and he took the room. About five--six or eight months afterward, he was out there a long time. He said to me on the way, in fact, of taking him back to the office I said, "What is your name?" And he said, "My name is Harris." "Okay where do you stay--where do you live?" "Well, I'm living wherever they send me on the base, but I once lived in St. Marys, Georgia." I said, "Oh, I taught there [at Camden County Training School, St. Marys, Georgia]." "Well who was the principal?" And I said, "Oh, Toler Harris [ph.]." "That was my father." And when he said, "That was my father," I said, "Oh my gracious." So a few months--a couple of months after that he said, "My father would like to come to see me. Is it all right?" I said, "Sure." I didn't have anything against him; he fired me because he wanted to. And his father came. I had dinner for him, his father and his sister and he said, in the course of talking, he said, "You know, I just retired. I could have stayed on, but I never could get another teacher as good as Ms. Platts [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson]"--that was my name--"and I retired." Now he was lying; he retired because he had to (laughter). But it was fun to think that twenty-five years afterward, this man who fired me had to come to my house, and--to be with his son. I had no animosity or anything, I was just glad to let him know that it was okay, I didn't fall and I didn't die. Story_ID: 633039 Speaker 1: You talked about receiving--looking for a letter from your boyfriend. Speaker 2: Yes I thought--I was thinking that maybe my boyfriend was-- Speaker 1: Who was your boyfriend at that time? Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh you don't remember? (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes I do. This fellow who graduated with me, his name was Sheffield, Robert Sheffield, that's right, but-- Speaker 1: So let's go back to 1929 and you're at Tuskegee--at the Department of Agriculture. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How long do you--how long do you work for that department? Speaker 2: I worked, not in all states but in some southern states you could not get married--women could not get married and continue extension work. I worked seven years, and then I got married so I had to resign. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the work, extension work. Tell me what entailed. Speaker 2: Extension work is where an agent goes out who is employed by the United States Department of Agriculture. In all, you have to work in the rural district. In this case, we had to work with people who lived on plantations, mostly. We couldn't say the others can--worked, but Dallas County [Alabama] was a plantation county. Most of the people lived in houses that were--that their forefathers were in when they came from Africa, houses with no- nothing but the top and the weather boarding on the outside. Some of them had floors, but there were, there were cracks in the floors where, in some cases, a small child could slip through. In the kitchen--in some of the kitchens they had no floors at all. They--the houses were usually two rooms with a hall coming through it. The outside was, I guess you would call it, weather boarding on the outside; on the inside all you had were the studs where the weather board was nailed to the studs. Most of them had kitchens, and they had stoves, but some of them had to cook on the fireplace; they didn't even have stoves. They lived on these plantations. Some of them had eight and ten children. They'd go to the field in the mornings, sunrise, come out in sunset. They (unclear), the head of the family did not know what it was to receive money. They would work those children when it was planting time, harvesting time, preparation time, and the--they didn't have any schools worthwhile. Some of the Rosenwalds in the county--they had a couple of Rosenwald schools, one I know, maybe two. But the schools were three months long and if the boys, teenagers would go to school, and if they needed them before the three months was over they would have to come out of school to either cut down the branches or whatever needed to be done before they planted. They--the schools had shuttered windows, a potbelly stove. If it rained you'd have to close those windows. If it's cold the potbelly stove and those that I went into would smoke and here the children are trying their best to read in a smoky room with no light. It was very pathetic. Story_ID: 633040 Speaker 1: During the, the--just before Christmas the plantation owner would tell the head of the family, "Come to my house," or, "Come to my store," if he had a store and, "we're going to make a settlement." Now, this is supposed to be the end of the year and the settlement would be like this, "Well John, I see you made seven bales of cotton. I'll give you three bales and I'll take three bales. Well John, you know you can't half a bale so I'll just take that bale. Now John, you know the old mule died and we had to buy another mule, got to take that out and you had to have seed, fertilizer, and you had to take that out. And John you know the boll weevil were very bad last year and we had to poison them, had to take that out. Now, your child took sick and you called me and told me that you needed a doctor. I had to see about that doctor, so I'll take that out and then just before Christmas you came to me and said you needed some money to give your children Christmas and I let you have some money got to take that out--," and he's supposed to be just figuring. "Well now John, you don't owe me but $250. Do better next time." That was the pay. That's the plantation if you ever heard of plantations. That's what went on on plantations. Here poor John, at the end of the year, found that he's deeper in debt than he was before. That was a terrible situation. Okay, here I am still fresh from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. The guy who was a county agent lived in Georgia, and they owned a hundred and some odd acres, a hundred and some odd acres of land, and here these people had nothing. So we worked together beautifully. He said, "Now, you know, we ought to do something about that." He said, "Here I am scientifically teaching people how to grow better crops and make better cotton and I'm not doing anything but cementing their feet in this, this earth. Uh-huh. We've got to do something about that." So we decided that we would try to get them--instill in their minds that they're making a livelihood for the plantation owner, but you're sacrificing your entire family. So we said, "How would you like to own some land?" Oh, there were so many who said, "Yeah but how?" "Okay, we'll help you to find some land. You got any relatives anywhere who are working and they are in some other--in the North or somewhere? You find out whether they can let you have some money." We found land in many places, some of it not in the cou- in our county [Dallas County, Alabama]. Then we found a man, a white guy, who had an implement store and he had worked with these people and sold the plantation something, whether, I don't know whether--well different kinds of implements that they need and he said, "If you find any people on your--in your business that would like to buy land, I will loan them money with no interest the first year." And oh we had so many people who got offers of plantations. Well now, the racists looked at us as being disturbing--as they said, "Disturbing our way of life." "We don't need anybody to come and take our good Negroes off of the farm. You better go." And we realized that you--you're not a first class citizen; you've got to learn to vote. Story_ID: 633041 Speaker 1: So in your job, it wasn't part of your job description, but because of the plight of the people you felt that you needed to help them find their own properties and so what happened? You said there was a problem once you started getting-- Speaker 2: As long as we were helping them to improve their homes that was my job, and the county agent helping them to produce more cattle, produce more crops and better crops, oh it was great; they thought a whole lot of us. But as soon as they found out that these good farmers who were doing the producing that they were leaving their farms where they had nobody, because they didn't know anything about farming, then we became as nothing. And they said, "Boynton, you're doing the wrong thing, trying to teach--trying to help these people to get off the farm. They're satisfied by the way we live." Yes, they were satisfied because they knew nothing else. Their children couldn't go to school--three months in the year. They had no recreation or anything; it was just work, and then two and three of them would sleep in one bed because they didn't have any space there for them. And they didn't like it because some of the people were moving off of the farm. Then we told them, "Well, you know you have to keep from being taken advantage of. You've got to be a first class citizen." Now the men would have to work the roads for three days. That is in the place of paying income tax--no, not income tax, poll tax, and poll tax is the tax that they used to pay to be able to vote. Now these people couldn't--they had no money so they had to work the road but they couldn't vote so it was just a matter of using them to work the roads. And they got--we told them you just have to be where you can rise up and be somebody. As it is now you are not a first class citizen; you're chattel. Well what can we do? We're going to show you how to fill these blanks out, so you can register, and oh the racists got up in arms. No, you've got to go. Story_ID: 633042 Speaker 1: So my husband had two or three strokes. He had three strokes. Speaker 2: Well you're talking about a husband but we hadn't talked about when you got married. When did you get married? Speaker 1: Oh yes, we did get married, didn't we (unclear)? Let me see now I'd have to go--we got married in 1936, but I'm trying to find out-- Speaker 2: You met in 1930 though is that right? Speaker 1: No, we met in school in the '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: At Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And what was his name? Speaker 1: I think I'll tell you that story. It's funny to me now. When I went to Tuskegee, I wasn't old enough, and I guess I was naive enough to think that the difference between the boys and the girls is, the girls wore dresses and the boys wore pants. I wasn't interested in boys; I didn't see--I had no idea that boys were boys (laughter). But I lived in what is known as James Hall [Ellis Curtis James Hall]. I had a roommate, and this roommate had a brother, and she said to her--me, "I want you to meet my brother." Well, I said, "Okay," but I told her before I left home, the lady who lived on the same block that I lived on had gone to Tuskegee, and she told me that if I wanted to enjoy life in Tuskegee, "Get a boyfriend behind the slide that is in the kitchen, and he'll see that you get good meals. Get a boyfriend that is taking agriculture, because you'll make the agriculture social, and get a boyfriend in the mechanics department, and you'll able to make the mechanic social." I said, "Okay, all right and I'll not forget." The fellow behind the slide was an African and he said, "I'll get for you a ticket to go to the movie that's on the campus." I said, "I--no thanks because So and So has already given me a ticket and I don't need your ticket." And he flew off and he said, "That's what I say about you American girls." But anyway this guy--my roommate said, "I'm going to have my brother to come by the table." And in those days you would sit at the head of the table or the side, and whoever your, your, your friend was would sit at the front--at the head and you're there sitting beside him. They call that taking it out. I don't know whether any other school had that name or not. But then, he went--when he comes in he will stand at your table waiting for the grace to be sung, and after you sing the grace, he's supposed to sit down and entertain you. Well, this long, lean and lanky guy came in and he was so tall it looks like he was bending over. It wasn't like that, but I thought it. And my roommate said, "This is my roommate, Amelia [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson]." He said, "How do you do?" After the prayers were sung I looked around and he was gone (laughter); he was gone. And I--she said, "Well I guess he's going to see his old girlfriend," and he did. But I made these social with somebody--some student. They had more boys than they had girls when I was in school. So they were all looking to have a girl, and the girls were looking for an escort and there were times when I would go to the agriculture social, but he'd be there with his girlfriend and I'd have my boyfriend, I guess. But I didn't think anything of it because I didn't--well, they call it in love--I wasn't interested, I'll say that I wasn't interested. So we went on, I graduated, taught at these schools. Speaker 2: Well tell me what was your roommate's name? Speaker 1: Annie Mae Boynton. Her-- Speaker 2: And her brother's name was? Speaker 1: Boyn- Samuel William Boynton. Story_ID: 633043 Speaker 1: Since we're back at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], tell more about campus life. What was it like for you? You said you played basketball. Speaker 2: I played basketball (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is the lights too much for you? Speaker 2: No, no it's not too much; I was just looking at you. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I played basketball, I waited on tables, and I was kicked out. I sang in the choir, and I stayed there until I finished. Speaker 1: Did you have a good voice? Speaker 2: I, I think so. I think. Speaker 1: What did you sing? Speaker 2: I sang lyric soprano until I was gassed and then when I was gassed in 1965, it took my breath away. It took my--it actually seared my esophagus and ever since then my voice is nothing like it used to be. But when I first entered the campus, this lady had already told me that you couldn't go anywhere. You have to stay on the campus. The roommate, one of them, we had two or three roommates. One of them I said to her, "Let's go around the campus," because they say you can't roam around when you register. So she and I started out, and we went to different parts of the campus. We went down on the farm and coming back it was dark, and I heard these most, this most beautiful music. I said, "Where is that music coming from?" And we came up on the chapel and we went in the chapel and sat in the back and Mrs. Jennie C. Lee [Jennie Cheatham Lee] who was the director happened to look around and she stopped everything. "Would you like for us to sing some special song?" "Ma'am?" She said, "Who are you?" "Ma'am, my name is Amelia Platts [HistoryMaker Amelia Boynton Robinson]." "What are you doing sitting down there? Come up here and get in this choir. If you don't get in this choir, I'm going to have you sent home." That's the way I got in the choir, and I sang in the octet, the quartet and in the choir. I led some; I had a good voice. Well, well, that was the introduction to Tuskegee. You don't go anywhere. If you want to go one of the dormitories, you have to go to the White Hall, which would be something--it's not the administration building but it was that to the women, and you get a permit and that permit will say that you can go to James Hall [Ellis Curtis James Hall] or you can go to Douglass Hall [Frederick Douglass Hall]. And that was--it was all right with me, because we were sheltered when I was home [Savannah, Georgia]. We had a good time with the kids coming in all of the time, seven o'clock in the morning, "Let's play jackstones," or some game. And I--if you're sheltered somewhere else, you don't feel badly and some of the kids were raising Cain because they couldn't get out and ram- ramble about. Story_ID: 633044 Speaker 1: Then, I told my mother [Anna Hicks Platts] and father [George Platts] that I would work out a part of my board and lodging [at Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. I think it was eight dollars (laughter), eight dollars and the tuition was eighty dollars, and then the board and lodging went up to fifteen dollars, all during the time that I was there. And I decided--I said, "Well now, I will wait on tables." So they put me downstairs in the teacher's dining room and you had to be on your Ps and Qs. And you had to get your trays and on the trays you would have your meat, your vegetables and your carbohydrates and whatever else you'd have, and bring it to the side table, put it down and then go to the table and put it on the table where I think we had about four or maybe six people at the same table. In that dining room you had about over a hundred stu- teachers, so you had all these tables, and you had somebody waiting on all of them. And I would have to go to either octet rehearsal or choir (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You said octet? Speaker 1: Yes, four--eight people. Speaker 2: Eight people. Speaker 1: Yes, eight people. You--we had three departments the choir number one, the octet where we had eight people and your quartet where they had four. And I--when we, when I was waiting on tables I would have to set my table up. Everybody set your table up, and then you leave but I would be anxious always to leave because we had to go to rehearsal and that would be after dinner. They served at twelve o'clock I think, noon that was dinner. And I had set my table up, ready to rush out to go to rehearsal, and here comes one of my guests, late. Everybody had been served, and most of the folk had left, and here she comes sauntering in with the most beautiful dress. It was white flannel, I believe, and I said, "Oh my gosh, I've got to go back," go back to the slide and start serving just like I would if this was the beginning and I had this tray and had all the stuff. I remember I had gravy on there, and everything is separate--in a separate container and of course being one person instead of putting it on the side table, I just brought it on the table and when I knew anything down came the tray on top of the lady's head, all the gravy and whatnot (laughter). Oh, it was so terrible; it was terrible. And then Dr. Carver--George Washington Carver his table wasn't far from mine, he said, "See that's not the way to do it. Haste always makes waste, and you ought to do one at a time." Anyway, they ran me out of there, "Get out of here. Don't you come back any more." Speaker 2: Who--who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I got kicked out (laughter). Then the next place they put me was in the laundry. They put me in the laundry, and those kids were--all they had was white shirts. That's what they were ironing, white shirts. And my father used to put his laundered shirts in the laundry--in the Chinese laundry; we didn't do any ironing. And the people--those young people were ironing from seventy-five to eighty or eighty-five shirts. You know how many I had? Eight. They said, "Get out of here," (laughter). Story_ID: 633045 Speaker 1: Now, you talked about George Washington Carver. Tell more about him and who else was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at that time. Speaker 2: Oh there were so many people that were nationally known, B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.]. Speaker 1: B.O. Davis? Speaker 2: Yes, General Davis--I think it was general, and I know the names of them. I don't know how popular they were at that time. But there was Mrs. Washington--Mrs. Booker T. Washington [Margaret Murray Washington] was living. Hattie Kelly, and oh there were very many of them, because that was when Tuskegee was at its height, particularly the industries that made them well known, agriculture, home economics and nursing. Other things too, but they were worldwide as far as that is concerned, and we had a lot of people from Africa and many foreign countries. But now Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver] was a guest--one of our guest instructors in home economics. He would tell us what is best to do. He was the type of person that you could listen to all day, and--but to my husband, he was one of his regular instructors. So when we were doing extension work [with the U.S. Department of Agriculture] down in Selma, Alabama, we had what was known as the farmer's conference the same thing they have here. We would be responsible for getting a guest speaker. So during that time we asked Dr. Carver to come and be the guest speaker and he was. Then later on, when S.W. Boynton [Samuel William Boynton] and I married, and when I found out that I was going--I was pregnant he said to Dr. Carver, "If I have a son, I'd like for you to be his godfather," and Dr. Carver said, "Yes, I would." So we had a son [Bruce Boynton] and Dr. Carver was the godfather. He sent a check for five dollars, and said start his bank account, and when he was one year old he sent one dollar, when he was two years old he sent two dollars, when he was three years old, of course he was sick and then he died afterward. But Dr. Carver was--there's so many of things that he has done that I used in my demonstrations, and if you noticed downstairs you will see that two dollar check and see some of the--I think there are two, maybe three letters that we have and I kept, but he was very outstanding. I, I don't know whether the masses of people or us know that he was one of the biggest and outstanding scientists that this country had. He extracted out of peanuts what we're eating now, and I notice that almost everything, they use peanuts in ice cream and everything else. So he taught that. Story_ID: 633046 Speaker 1: He taught a number of other things as extension agents, and we carried it to the country, because you don't have to have a whole lot of money. Take for instance the fireless cooker that he taught us how to make. It's actually the forerunner of the microwave oven, because you don't have to have heat. You start off with a brick. Speaker 2: You start off with a brick and then-- Speaker 1: You start off with a stone, rather. We used stone and heated them as hot as they would be and then we made the form of a cooker. Speaker 2: How did you make the form? Speaker 1: Well, we had--at that time, you had tobacco barrels about this high. They, they weren't tobacco--yes, tobacco barrels, you got cigars and things like that in 'em, and we would take that and line it with sawdust, and you take a ten quart bucket and you put it in there and then you get three little pots. You could get them either where they are in a circle or one on top of the other. We would put your meat and one vegetable in the other and your carbohydrate, rice or grits or whatnot in the other, and you heat a rock and usually you can find almost any kind of rock that they needed the shapes of. You heat it very, very hot, and then you put it in the bottom of this ten quart bucket. You put each one of those pots in the bucket and then you have a top that you put on the bucket and on that you put a--I call it a pillar that's made of, also of sawdust and put that on top because it holds heat. Speaker 2: You're saying sawdust? Speaker 1: Sawdust and then you put a top and you hinge it. You make it like a top that's--with a hinge and a latch, and when you close that up six o'clock in the morning or seven whenever they go to the field, they take that with them. And then at noon when they open it they have a hot meal because it's raw when they start it, and at noon when they get to the field everything is hot and well cooked. Speaker 2: This was something that Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver] invented (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. Carver, yes. Now that's a forerunner I feel, I haven't heard of anything differently. That's a forerunner of the microwave oven, because you do the same thing with the microwave. Story_ID: 633047 Speaker 1: What was George Washington Carver like as a person? Speaker 2: He was a man that was very unassuming, very quiet, odd looking in a way. To me he was a little odd looking, because he was so small and then he would always be to himself most of the time. However, that last year I was here [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], there was a white guy who would be with him it looks to me like every time I saw Dr. Carver, I saw this white guy. And I know I said to one of my classmates one time, "Why? Why is this guy following Dr. Carver?" Anyway, afterward I heard that this guy or some white guy told Dr. Carver, "If you give me your secrets, I will have a factory," and Dr. Carver said, "No, because I want my people to have jobs." And this guy said, "Well, I'll see that they have jobs." So they opened up Tom's Toasted Peanuts [Tom Huston Peanut Company; Tom's Foods, Inc.]. You've seen that I think, and African Americans had jobs. Then they went bankrupt, and everybody lost this job, but then it's up and well now, Tom's. Not only that, you can get peanuts in all forms now. Story_ID: 633048 Speaker 1: You were telling me how you met--well not--when you and Sam Boynton [Samuel William Boynton] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he picked me up--when he came to the house and he picked me up. And we went on to the office, and I was still hurt and didn't know how to tell him I'm sorry. So when we got in the office I just--I said, "Mr. Boynton, I want you to forgive me. I'm sorry I did what I did," and I gave him a peck on the chin--on the cheek and when I did that he grabbed me (laughter). Speaker 1: So that was the start of your romance? Speaker 2: That was the beginning of a romance (laughter). That was the beginning, and I don't know what happened to his girlfriend, and I don't know--yes I do, I think my boyfriend decided he would marry, and that was the end. But he was just as I wouldn't expect, and wouldn't have liked to have a gentleman any nicer than he was as a husband. We worked through all of our problems and everything, and he died fighting for justice and fighting for the right of these people to vote. Speaker 1: So tell me more about the things that he did. He was the president for registration and voting for the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh gosh, yes. Speaker 1: --4th Congressional District is that right? Speaker 2: He was the president for the 4th Congressional District. He was the civil rights chairman of the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and I was a civil rights chairman of the Daughter of Elks [Daughters of the Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World]. He was the president of--I would have to look and find out. I don't remember now. Story_ID: 633049 Speaker 1: Did he [Boynton Robinson's husband, Samuel William Boynton] encourage you to register to vote? Speaker 2: In--yes. Yes, I started--you see when I was twenty-one, you had to be twenty-one before you could vote. And when I was twenty-one years of age he said, "You know you can register and vote now." I said, "Okay." So I had no trouble at all and the applications were just a page and a half, and that was just about all there was to it. But now from a page and a half to the time that we got people aroused and demonstrating and whatnot, George Wallace saw the page--that the registration application was ten pages long, and ten questions on each page. That's a hundred questions and the registrar really didn't know how to read and how to pronounce some of the words that were in the application--that was on the application. Then we talked to several attorneys and they said, "Well, I have to take this and get the attorneys dictionary to know what some of these things are that he's saying." And it, it was harassment, that's all it was. Speaker 1: Well after you learned--oh I'm sorry, after you registered to vote, you were one of the few African Americans that was registered to vote at that time so you were able to vouch for people. Tell me what that actually entailed. Speaker 2: I wasn't supposed to do it. Well, after having registered to vote, we would vote, my husband and I. We would study the characters. All of them were racist, but you just study whoever you wanted to vote for so we would, would vote together. When, in 1964, before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came in, we--I ran for U.S. Congress. This was right after my husband passed. Now, when my husband passed was not because of the fact of old age or anything he did, but because we had gotten people to demand that they become registered voters. We had gotten people off of the farms; some of them bought ten acres of land, fifty acres of land, and the largest number of acres was 780 acres I think that two people together bought. But they were so angry with us, when we walked the street, actually we were afraid, because the telephone became a nuisance. "Get out of town." I mean it would start at seven o'clock in the evening until seven o'clock in the morning, "Get out of town. Your house is going to be bombed. You'd better not be caught on the street," and they shot in the house (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are we in the '60s [1960s] or are we still in the '30s [1930s] because (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we jumped ahead-- Speaker 2: This was in the first part of the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 633050 Speaker 1: What I actually wanted to know about before we get that far ahead. I'm still in the '30s [1930s]. When you registered to vote, for another person to be able to register to vote, did someone have to vouch for them to be an applicant (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the, the qualifications was, if you want to register to vote you have to be twenty-one years of age; you have to have property with no encumbrance, no mortgage; you have to have two white men to vouch for you, two white men. Now, you weren't going to get the white people to go against the system, and the system was: we will vote for black people. They don't need to go to the polls, because we've been doing it all the time. The people who were registered--eighty-eight that's all. Out of fifty-two thousand African Americans, eighty-eight of them were registered voters; that was the lowest ebb. Then finally they began to register maybe their cook, because they wanted her to vote for them if they were running for an office. But it was all--my husband [Samuel William Boynton] had three strokes but the last stroke he had was in about 19--1963, 1963 and a man came into his office to beat him up and I happened to be there. Speaker 1: Well, I'm, I'm going to get you to tell me the full story about that when we get to the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 633051 Speaker 1: In 1936, you wrote 'Through the Years' [Amelia Boynton]. Tell me about 'Through the Years.' Speaker 2: Oh. In these cities like Selma [Alabama], which is a county seat, is a county seat, people will come from the rural district and even adjacent counties, and they would--they had certain street that they would walk up and down this is on Saturdays. Saturday was their day, and they would come to town--what they called come to town, and it was, it was fascinating to me because I'd never seen so many people congregating. They would come and see their friends, and spend whatever money they had. They would make acquaintances and see their relatives because some might live on one side of the county and some may live on the other. It was a meeting place for them. Every week they would come in their wagons, some of them might have had trucks, some of them would walk, but all day there were two streets. The street [Franklin Street, Selma, Alabama] on which our office was on which was across from city hall, and the street that was adjacent which was Alabama Avenue and all Saturday they would be going up and down the street. They did not have a toilet; they didn't have a seat; they had no place. I have seen women who would sit on the sidewalk and nurse their babies, because there was nowhere for them to sit. Our office was filled all the time going in and out but that was nothing to the thousands of people who would come, and my husband [Samuel William Boynton] said, "You know, these people need someplace that they can rest." If it is hot they would have no water to drink, they had nothing. If it is cold they would just bundle up and do the best they could. If they went into a store, and the stores were crowded. These little, little, half--I call them half-done stores they were always crowded. The storekeeper would look around, "What do you want?" And you might say, "Well, it's raining out there," and he would say, "Get out and let somebody come in who is going to spend some money." That was the attitude. We said, "Now these people don't have anywhere to go. Let's try to do something to get a place for them at least a shelter." Then we came up with the fact that it might be a good idea if we have a community sing, and we got the people in different parts of the community because--the different communities because Dallas County [Alabama] is 780 square miles. And we would ask them to just have a chorus or something and then we're going to have a big sing out. Okay they practiced and we had--they let us have the ballpark, and when we had the ballpark we were giving a trophy but we got William L. Dawson who was one of the outstanding and nationally known or internationally known musicians, and he was head of the choir here [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. We had him and he brought some judges. Now, it was beautiful, it was really beautiful, but the racists said we can't have it next year. Why? Somebody might get killed going back home. That was a very foolish excuse, but what can you do? Story_ID: 633052 Speaker 1: So I said to my husband--I mean he wasn't my husband then--I said to Bill [Samuel William Boynton], "I'll write a play ['Through the Years,' Amelia Boynton]." So I thought about, why don't I write a play of history? And I sat and wrote this play. It's two hours long, and in it there are twenty Negroes spirituals, and all the scenes are related to spirituals. So we had--we played it and we got some--we did fairly well. People didn't have any money. That's one thing. It was during the Depression [Great Depression], and they had no money but they did come--some of them did come to the play. My mother [Anna Hicks Platts] said, "Bring it up here to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I'll see that you have it played where you can raise some money." We did and we raised some money. Okay now we're going to Washington, D.C. and plead with the agricultural department [U.S. Department of Agriculture] to appropriate money that we might be able to build a community center. Speaker 2: This was the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] that you were asking for the money? Speaker 1: Well we--yes, either the WPA or PWA [Public Works Administration]. And my husband went twice they turned him down by just some frivolous thing. "Well, we're running out of money," or, "We don't have any more applications." And so he came up with the idea, "I'll tell you what. Let's get a white man to go up there." So we did, we said, "Well, we'll get Reverend E.W. Gamble." He was a minister of the white Presbyterian [sic. Episcopal] church and he said yes I'll do it if you pay my way. So we raised some money and we paid his way. And he went up, and we got it just like that. We had to do like Jews do, had to have somebody to front us. So we got it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Though you-- Story_ID: 633053 Speaker 1: Though you said the play ['Through the Years,' Amelia Boynton] was Negro spirituals but it told a story of Joshua Terrell is that right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's (unclear). He was the main character. Speaker 1: The main character, and who was he fashioned after? Speaker 2: A part of it after some of my relatives. Let me see now the baby--the part was being in the service. Speaker 1: Well what I was-- Speaker 2: Have you heard that story or you got it off of the Internet? Speaker 1: Yeah. What I was wondering about it, I--well you can tell me if this is right that your [maternal] great-grandfather Anthony Hicks he had a half-brother named Robert Hicks Smalls. Is that who Joshua Terrell in your story is the character of? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now tell me about Robert Hicks Smalls. Speaker 2: Roberts Smalls was a slave, and that's the reason why my great-grandfather because of the family, not Robert Smalls himself, but that's the reason that part of the family induced Bart Hicks to come from Liverpool, England to the New World, because that was his relative. But Robert Smalls was a slave and he was trained in fact he knew something about boats. He was the type of man who, when they wanted some of the servicemen or even the citizens, the white citizens, needed somebody to either man the boat or whatever it might be, they'd call on him. Story_ID: 633054 Speaker 1: And he got his freedom--he bought his freedom, and he was buying his wife's freedom when he got on the idea of, well we don't have--why don't we do something else? Why don't we try to get some of these slaves to fill the gunboat that the South had? And this boat was known as the planter. It was one of the gunboats that belonged to the southern side, and if we can get them we will take a number of families over to the northern side. So he didn't get but--I think he had eight people. I don't know whether they were singles or whether they were eight families, but he got them in this gunboat known as a planter. That was one of the boats, one of the biggest boats that the South had to fight with, the gunboat. And he manned that boat. Of course, he knew everything about a boat that they had and he started off and some of the soldiers saw the boat moving, they started shooting and he took, through a rain of bullets, he took that boat from Beaufort, South Carolina carried it over to Charleston, South Carolina. That's where he was greeted by the Union [Union Army], and then these people who were in the boat were set free. He was already a free man. And he--they sold the boat, gave him a certain amount of money and gave each one of them a certain amount of money, and they kept a certain amount of money. And then Robert [Robert Hicks Smalls] decided that he wanted to go into politics, and he went into politics and he became one of the representatives of the county, the state--the county first and then the state. And after that, he decided he would run for U.S. Congress and he ran for U.S. Congress and became a congressman. Now he at the beginning couldn't read or write. However he gave every opportunity he possibly could to his daughter and she assisted him in teaching him how to read and write. Speaker 2: So he became one of the first African Americans elected to the U.S. Congress. Speaker 1: Among, among the first ones, and these people don't know but we had by the thousands. Speaker 2: And this was during Reconstruction? Speaker 1: Yes, '68 [1868]. In '68 [1868], I think that '68 [1868] was the first one. But it isn't anything new that we did. We fought so hard to get the right to vote and only after then we've been able to get into the different political offices. Speaker 2: So you used his character for your play ['Through the Years,' Amelia Boynton]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 633055 Speaker 1: Now, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] you, you had the play ['Through the Years,' Amelia Boynton] in Philadelphia, and you raised money. But the mon- you did get the money from PWA [Public Works Administration] to administration to be able to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). You see the money we raised we couldn't hardly raise--we didn't raise enough to send people to Washington [D.C.] to plead for us. Speaker 1: So, so you--but you did get the money is what I'm saying to build a community center from the PWA? Speaker 2: Oh yes they built it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The built the community center right next to city hall [in Selma, Alabama]. Our office was across from the city hall, and of course they took binoculars and would look into our office, and everybody who came in and out they knew and they kept them from--they brainwashed them. Let's say that. Speaker 1: So tell me (pause), where else did you perform the play, because it became very popular is that right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Oh, yes, after (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In different communities--you played in different communities. Speaker 2: Oh no, we didn't play--we played a few times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A few times, but back in the '90s [1990s] Schiller Institute looked at that play and some of the members said, "Well, why don't we give this play?" So it was beautiful the way that they portrayed it. They had professional people who portrayed it--portrayed the characters, and it was, it was just wonderful. When we went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I noticed one of the guys--one of the Schiller Institute folks said, "Oh just look at the folk coming in." Well I didn't look, I just figured that they had enough seats for them but they had to turn back between seven hundred and thousand people, and when they did that then those who--I didn't have anything to do with the directing and whatnot. See Schiller Institute had professional people (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah this was later on in the '90s [1990s] though? Speaker 2: Yes, because after we got the community center we didn't bother with it so it just laid dormant until the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: The community center just stayed dormant until the '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From the '30s [1930s]? Speaker 2: We didn't--we didn't have it anymore. Speaker 1: Oh the play. Speaker 2: The play. Speaker 1: Oh, I thought you meant the community center, all right. Speaker 2: No the people--I mean the play. When so many people were turned back because there was no room. Howard University's auditorium was filled. The overflow crowd had to go downstairs; that was filled so they said well we won't have these not to see the play and then they gave, they gave it fifteen times in Washington, D.C., Maryland and Virginia. Story_ID: 633056 Speaker 1: We're in 1936. You have the play ['Through the Years,' Amelia Boynton]; you--the community center is built what happens next? I know that you marry, you call him Bill Boynton [Samuel William Boynton], and tell me what happens next? Speaker 2: From 1936? Well, 1936 after the extension work for seven years [with the U.S. Department of Agriculture], we got--I--we were having a meeting in Selma [Alabama], and we had the director of the seven southern states and were talking about the plans for the future, projected plans for extension work and I said to him after everything was over I said, "Mr. Campbell [Thomas Monroe Campbell], I am going to have to resign because I'm going to get married." He said, "Why don't you wait?" We had already started on the building of the community center. I said--and this was--we were working on that I don't know whether we had started it or not, but we were working on getting the community center. That's the way it was. So I said well I'm going to get married and he said, "Why don't you wait?" But I said, "But I can get a job anytime, but I can't get a husband anytime" (laughter). So he said, "Well, I hate to have you get out of extension work," but I did. But the house in which we lived is a house that housed so many dignitaries who came through Selma. Before we bought the house there was a state agent, extension agent and Mrs. Booker T. Washington [Margaret Murray Washington] went there to visit, and after we bought the house, just because of the fact that--when people came from Africa or from the Middle East interested in agriculture, the department would send them to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Tuskegee would send them to Dallas County [Alabama]. Consequently we had many, many outstanding agriculturalists by the way of the extension, by the way of the agriculture department. Then we had people who had nowhere else go to. We then--we invited a lot of people like Dr. Carver [George Washington Carver], Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, people like that, and if you notice in my book, I don't know whether you have read my book, I understand you can get it over the Internet. We had fifteen congressmen who came down that had nowhere to go but there. We had Mrs.--Dr. George Washington Carver and of course we had Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Nobody would let him stay there in their homes because they feared...