 Story_ID: 37005 Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today for the HistoryMakers. Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Jerome Craig Revish, J-E-R-O-M-E, Craig, C-R-A-I-G, Revish, R-E-V like Victor, I-S-H. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Revish? You don't hear it very much, but where, where does it come from? Speaker 2: You know I did a little digging about that and my grandfather's name was Revis, R-E-V-I-S. He put the H on it I understand, just to make it different. So it's not like that's the true root name, Revish. Revis is the root name. Speaker 1: Okay, you have any idea where Revis comes from? Speaker 2: I really don't. I, I just--I'd say the past ten years found out that he--there was an H put on it and we all thought it was sort of eastern European, something like that, but really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 15, 1949 in Youngstown, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an Evening News Anchor for the CBS affiliate in Columbus [Ohio], WBNS-TV. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date would be April 3rd, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Dublin [Ohio], in my home at 4413 Beach Wood Loop. Story_ID: 37006 Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Meatloaf. Speaker 1: Okay you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Never give up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37007 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Estelle Saunders, E-S-T-E-L-L-E, Saunders, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well she was born in Farrell, Pennsylvania and I don't recall her birth date. Speaker 1: How do you spell Farrell? Speaker 2: F-A-R-R-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay and so you don't--you suppose she was born in the '20s [1920s], or-- Speaker 2: Probably thereabouts. She, she died young, she died at--I think Mom was sixty-one [years old], 1981. So what is that, yeah probably around 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. And well what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: They have their roots in Beckley, West Virginia. I know that because I have an uncle who used to go to a reunion down there in Beckley and see a lot of family members there. I don't know when they moved up into Pennsylvania, but that's the roots of the family, in Beckley. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did they move up to Pennsylvania during your mother's lifetime? Speaker 2: I think so, yes I do. I, I don't know how old she was when they moved up, but yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well I guess they, yeah--so she, she, she was born in Farrell and I guess they were, they had already moved when she was born. Speaker 2: Right, right. My grandmother was down there in Beckley, so I do believe that she was born in Farrell. Speaker 1: Okay so sometime around, in the early part of the century they made the move. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So what were your ancestors on your mother's side doing you know? Is there any memory of slavery or Reconstruction or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, I just remember they were very fair skinned people. They worked as domestics, even my mom did for a little while. Then she got into retail when she was in, in Youngstown [Ohio]. But I don't know what, what they did. Don't know. Speaker 1: Okay so they, they basically lived in town. They, they weren't farmers. Speaker 2: No I, I suspect West Virginia, I wouldn't be surprised if there was some, some coal mining in there, you know, but I don't know that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37008 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your mother's [Estelle Saunders] side that are passed down about the relatives? Speaker 2: Oh, my, my mom grew up in a unique church called the, the Triumph Church of the New Age. It was sort of a holiness, Pentecostal kind of church, but some of its tenets were just a little off the mainline religious conventions. But I, I was so young that I don't, I don't remember what the differences were. My dad [Dewey McKinley Revish] was a Baptist, so we--I would go, my brother and I would go to his church on one Sunday and then hers on the other. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were they, they were vegetarians in this church and they kind of promoted that for healthy, health reasons. And a lot of people ate vegetarian fare. Speaker 1: That's--so this is in the, in the '50s [1950s] that you remember, right, basically? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So it's interesting. It's a lot like--almost like the Seventh Day Adventist. Speaker 2: There you go, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, all right was there any particular leader of the church, a national leader that they-- Speaker 2: No we just--it was a very small church on the, the north side of Columbus [Ohio], Youngstown [Ohio], north side of Youngstown. A small church. But I always, always remember it as a very warm place, very welcoming place and they always would serve a meal on Sunday after church, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother talk about going to school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: She wanted to, she, she worked for a doctor when she was a young woman and he moved his practice to somewhere in New York. She went up there for about a year or two and, and worked for him. But then decided to come back to Youngstown. Avid reader, just an avid, avid reader. Book of the Month Club, the library. I think I got my love for books from her. Had a library at home. She was a manic depressive though, I say that because even now I don't--when I was younger I didn't realize what it was, but she was always sort of--some days she would have bad days. She'd have to sit in the room with the blinds closed and, and very dark and quiet in there. And she just--she struggled emotionally in her life a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37009 Speaker 1: Do you remember you grandparents on this side [Revish's mother, Estelle Saunder's side]? Speaker 2: My grandmother Hattie, Hattie Saunders. I do remember her, I was so young then. Full head of white hair. She died in our home in Youngstown [Ohio] on the living room couch. I remember her being stretched out on that couch and I went in there to see her body that night. I was probably eight years old, nine years old, something like that. But I do remember her. She used to when we were little, my brother and I, she used to wash us up in the sink and get us off to church, yeah. But that's about all I remember of her. Speaker 1: And your, your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather I never knew him, never knew him. And I think he died before probably I was born, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37010 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Dewey McKinley Revish. Dewey, D-E-W-E-Y, McKinley, M-C-K-I-N-L-E-Y and Revish. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know I have his obituary around here somewhere, I could probably get that for you. Dad was probably, let's see he was older than my mom [Estelle Saunders] by twenty years, so what's that-- Speaker 1: About 1900. Speaker 2: She [unclear] 1920s, he's probably around 1900, 1901, somewhere in there, his birth date. Speaker 1: All right and where was he born? Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I remember hearing him talk about his father. I remember that there was him, his brother Joseph and a sister Coney [ph.]. They all three grew up in Middletown, Ohio and I don't know what his dad did for a living. He might have been, you know into manufacturing 'cause most black men were in those days. He was married twice, married before my mother. His first wife died, had two children by her, Minnie and Dewey. Dewey spent his years in the [U.S.] Navy as a career Navy man. And Minnie was a beautician, had a salon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he met my mother and she had already, she already had my oldest sister Francine. And I don't know how they met but they got married and he--when she passed in 1981 he passed ten months later, ten weeks later, excuse me, ten weeks later. We like to say it was of a broken heart, he really loved Mom. Speaker 1: Okay so he, he would have been eighty-one years old. Speaker 2: Yes he was, he was in his eighties for real. Speaker 1: Okay. So you don't know how, how they met actually? Speaker 2: No I don't. I, I don't know, really don't. Story_ID: 37011 Speaker 1: Now had your father [Dewey McKinley Revish] served in World War I, or-- Speaker 2: He didn't serve in any, any military position. He was always into manufacturing. He was a steelworker in Youngstown [Ohio] and he worked there for Youngstown Sheet and Tube and Raymond Concrete for thirty-eight years. Always a, a working man and he had a good job when he went, met my mother [Estelle Saunders]. I think she was concerned about her daughter [Francine Revish]. She wanted to make sure her daughter was taken care of. He had a, a stable life and he was a stand-up guy. And they bought a house on Fruit Street in Youngstown. And, and that's where they spent their life. And in his retirement years, he even worked in his retirement years. He worked at Kentucky Fried Chicken, he was a cook there for like probably ten, fifteen years after he retired. Him and his brother Joseph used to paint houses on their--in the steel mills you used to get what's called a thirteen weeks' vacation, or like a layoff or furlough or whatever it was. They got paid for it but during those weeks they would paint houses. I mean they never took time off for a vacation, vacation or anything. But I do remember long drives on Sunday. We would go visit my mother's family in Farrell [Pennsylvania]. We'd get in the car and, and drive over there in early evening and meet with her family members and just enjoy that sort of family time together. My mom had I think five sisters and one brother. All of them are deceased now. One of her sisters committed suicide, Myra. I don't know if it was like something that ran in the family or what, but there was, you know mental health issues with some of them, yeah. Story_ID: 37012 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' [Estelle Saunders and Dewey McKinley Revish] personalities and their talents and their looks and everything else about them, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my mom, I do. You know a thirst for knowledge, she was always curious that way. She enjoyed home, she enjoyed cooking, she enjoyed gardening, and I do those things too. I think I got some Dad in me too. I mean he was a hard working, industrious kind of guy, always wanted to keep a job, always worked, futzing around the house, doing that sort of stuff, keeping everything on the up--and I learned how, learned how to do electric, electrical work, little plumbing work from my dad, watching him do things. Learned how to paint, learned how to do some things under the hood of a car because he was always tinkering with something. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37013 Speaker 1: Who lived in the household when you were growing up? Who--what did the household consist of [in Youngstown, Ohio]? Speaker 2: It was my, my oldest sister Francine, me, I was the firstborn boy of my mother [Estelle Saunders] and father's [Dewey McKinley Revish] union, my younger brother Joseph, Joseph Emanuel, then my baby sister Rachelle. The four of us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and do, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I used to love to be outside all the time. I was very rambunctious that way. Got a lot of whippings when I was young because I was just pretty precocious that way. We--our street was very ethnically rich. We had Puerto Ricans and Jews and Pollacks and Italians and a lot of black folks on the same block. We were all cool with each other, we were just really nice that way. Had a corner store we'd all go to, Eunice Toffler's store and I always remember when she would--people would come in there and buy their groceries, she would, she'd keep a ledger and she would write down every item on the ledger because she would give credit to some people. And write in longhand what the food item was and the price of it and write it on down and total it up and have a, have the price at the bottom. People would come in at the end of the week and pay their bill with her. We used to--we had a park in Youngstown, Lincoln Park, wasn't too far from the house. We'd always spend a lot of time up there, they had a swimming pool, tennis courts, really a pristine, natural preserve that we would all spend time in. Had a neighborhood library there that I spent a lot of time in. I remember pulling open those drawers with the Dewey decimal system of filing for finding books and I would read a book from there, I'd read it as I was walking home. Probably five or six blocks down the street. I used to love the smell of that place. It smelled like old books and I just, I just liked that. My brother [Joseph Revish] and I were Boy Scouts for a little while. And we went to a couple of Jamborees when we were younger, probably 12, 13, maybe a little younger than that. Remember sleeping out under the stars and waking up to the mist around us and the dew on the ground. I still remember those days, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37014 Speaker 1: Well you, you were already starting to answer one of the questions I always ask, which is what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Youngstown, Ohio]? We always ask it like that. Speaker 2: You want me to continue with that? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: My brother [Joseph Revish] and I and our cousin Dwayne, we used to love to go fishing at Mill Creek Park. We would get up at like four [o'clock] in the morning and walk from our house, which was on the east side, down through downtown Youngstown, out Mahoney Avenue to Mill Creek Park where this low head dam where we would fish for croppy and bluegill. When you think about waking up early in the morning like that, young kids, I mean we were nine, ten years old, eleven and our parents [Estelle Saunders and Dewey McKinley Revish] would let us go. 'Cause they'd just say stay together when you go down there and we would just have the biggest time. We'd go down there and, and fish with our fishing poles and, and bring back fish that probably weren't as big as my hand. But my aunt Vivian, Viv, who is the last living relative I have on my father's side, she's ninety-two years old now. She's dying of cancer. She would cook those, those fish for us. She would filet them and cook them. So that was fun. We used to do--not family reunions, but family picnics out in Mill Creek Park. We'd get one of the lodges or shelter houses and folks would barbecue and, and bring in covered dishes and we'd be out there all day, yeah. Idora Park, an amusement park in Youngstown that was pretty, pretty well known for the fact that it was a, a full blown amusement park with a couple of great wooden roller coasters, the Jackrabbit and the Wildcat. And other rides there and I remember the French fries that they would put in these cups and you'd have the vinegar that you could, could put on them and the midway of that park. And it had a ballroom. Youngstown, because it was between Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Cleveland [Ohio], used to get a lot of acts, Motown acts that would come in because they'd have an extra date. And they would play at Reeds Arena, which was a roller skating rink in Youngstown. Everybody you can imagine played Reeds Arena, Aretha Franklin, the Temptations, the Four Tops, the Supremes, James Brown, Ray Charles. I mean Martha and Vandellas. Back in those days they used to put the posters on the, on the telephone poles a week or two ahead of time and you would see all these different acts that would come to town. So our city was very rich with music and, and black culture that way. Story_ID: 37015 Speaker 1: Youngstown [Ohio] when you were growing up was a fairly good sized city. Speaker 2: It was and very bustling, and I mean the mob took advantage of that because there was a lot of black men who worked in the steel mills and made great money. And you know my dad [Dewey McKinley Revish] used to run numbers when he was a younger man. It was just part of the culture we grew up around. It was called Murder Town USA for a good little while there. There was a lot of mob violence. You know we heard, we used to hear the bombs going off, car bombs, Cadillac Cavallaro and Joey Naples and these guys, big mob bosses who were killed in, in mob wars. But beyond that, it was a safe town. I mean they had their own violence on each other, but it wasn't like community at large felt in danger. Speaker 1: Okay as of in today you know we think about, you know, urban violence, being black kids killing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But those days you thought about the mob. Speaker 2: Yeah there was--yeah it was more mob violence. I mean there was always shootings involving blacks on blacks. But Youngstown was a safe city. There was sometimes at these cabarets and late night events, you know there'd be a little fighting and shooting going on there, so that was part of the life. But nobody felt like they couldn't go out. They didn't feel like they were prisoners in their homes. Speaker 1: I know Italian, wealthy family, the DeBartolos are from Youngstown, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That old-- Speaker 2: Right the, the mall people and let's see, Castro and a couple others that I can't call, but yeah, the DeBartolo family, Southern Park Mall still stands up there. It's a big, regional draw still in that city. I used to work there as a matter of fact. My first job was at fifteen [years; age], I got a job at a shoe store in the McGuffey Mall, which is on the east side of town. Had to be sixteen [years old] to work, but this guy wanted somebody in his shop. And I've always had a job from age fifteen until now. Story_ID: 37016 Speaker 1: Okay so let me go back to grade school if we can, now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? Speaker 2: Went to Lincoln Elementary [Youngstown, Ohio]. Lincoln Elementary was probably six blocks from our house. Everybody on the east side in my little hood went to Lincoln Elementary. Speaker 1: Now Youngstown from what--you lived in a mixed neighborhood, but would you describe Youngstown as basically a integrated setting, or was there a black side of town at all? Speaker 2: You know there had, there had--there were, there were pockets of segregation there, yeah. Fifth Avenue which was on the north side, where I guess it was like Broad Street here in Columbus [Ohio], or other cities where you have stately, old mansions. You would [sneeze], excuse me, you would drive down the street in the morning and see all these domestics showing up or at the bus stop, coming off buses. Or in the afternoon, getting on buses to go back home. They used to work in all these houses. These were the doctors and lawyers and white professionals there. But there was certainly black parts of town, Black parts of town. And even though our street was pretty integrated, well I, I'd say several blocks around me were, were pretty integrated. It all depends on where you went. You could get into a real black area, or you could get into a real white area rather quickly. Speaker 1: There's no, you know, specifically black side of town, like-- Speaker 2: Well I'd say the south side was, was predominantly black, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and you lived on the-- Speaker 2: East side. Speaker 1: East side, okay. All right so was, was Lincoln Elementary School integrated? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. This is a neighborhood school, right? Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood school, no bussing. I never got on a bus in my life, except for marching band in high school. Speaker 1: Okay so now did you like school? Speaker 2: I did. I was pretty introverted throughout my, my school life. At age eight I needed to wear glasses but I just hated the ones that my folks brought me so I'd never wear them. But I got into music in elementary school, started playing the trumpet there. And carried that on through junior high and high school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you played the trumpet and so you--what you start around fourth grade? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, about that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what else did you like? You talked about the library, right. Speaker 2: I liked to--we played softball quite a bit. We had a big--it was an asphalt baseball field. I mean it was marked out on the back side of the school, the playground there. And we'd play softball there and they had very tall walls around it, big, brick walls for some reason. Sometimes we'd hit the balls way over the wall. That and science projects. My folks would buy me little science kits, microscopes and, and things like that, and telescopes. I used to really enjoy looking at the stars and the moon at night and, you know dissecting insects and, and I think during biology we did--well that was in, in junior high and high school, dissecting frogs and all that kind of stuff. But I was always interested in the sciences, always interested in them. I remember--well when John Glenn [astronaut] went up, I think that was what, that's fifty years ago now. That was 1972 was it? Speaker 1: '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: '62 [1962], '62 [1962], that's right. '62 [1962], that was--I was in, in junior high maybe because I graduated in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: You were twelve [years old] in '62 [1962], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah well that was-- Speaker 1: We're the same age, that's why I know. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, okay, okay. So I remember the space shot, I remember him going up, I remember hearing that on the, on the PA [Public Address] System. And I was a, a movie projector operator at school. I would show movies. So I used to like gadgets, gadget stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37017 Speaker 1: Did you have a TV early on? Speaker 2: We did, we had a black and white set. And then that was in the days where you would get that cellophane and you know, that had the different colors in it and try to make it look color. We had that in there too for a minute. Speaker 1: You all had that, that with the green at the bottom and the blue at the top. Speaker 2: Right and the blue and all that. Right, wasn't that crazy, we, we trying to make it color. And then when we got our first color TV, that was really an amazing moment for us as a family to have one of those sitting in the house. Speaker 1: Okay so your family all--had a TV from the time that you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Yeah, my you know, my dad [Dewey McKinley Revish] was blessed to work in the steel mills, so he had a good job. And so I'd say we were firmly middle class that way. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, did you pay attention to television a lot when you were little, or did you not, you know--cause some people watch it a lot, some people don't. I mean as kids you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well there were certain shows, yeah there were certain shows that I would watch, 'Batman'. My dad was a big 'Bonanza' fan on Sunday nights. It was always amazing to me. He would, he'd like to wash his car on Saturday and, and hose down the driveway and the patio and, and take a bath and sit in his big easy chair in front of the TV set Saturday night with a cigar. My mother [Estella Saunders] hated cigars because it would smell up the house, but--and watch 'Bonanza'. And I would sit there and watch it with him sometimes. And I remember that. Story_ID: 37018 Speaker 1: What was the population of Youngstown [Ohio] when you were growing up, do you have any idea? Speaker 2: I'd say at least 50,000, may be 75, almost a 100. It was a fair sized down. I mean it was pretty dense in, in its population, the neighborhoods--rarely having any vacancies. I mean you know--you didn't have kind of vacant and abandoned homes we have today. Whole blocks, everybody, every home on the block was--and in the neighborhood was occupied. So, and with the steel mills, we had several steel mills in Youngstown that attracted a lot of people. So it was a fair sized city. I think it was in the--among the top eight in population. Speaker 1: Okay and how many public high schools were there when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Let's see, there was East, North, Rayen, South, and then you had the Catholic schools, you had Ursuline and Cardinal Mooney. So those were it. Speaker 1: So like four public schools and then two Catholic schools? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Just trying to get a sense of it, I guess. So, so did you have any special teachers in school, or any, anyone in the community that served as like a mentor, Boy Scout-- Speaker 2: I would say John Raz [ph.] who was a, a music director, was a mentor in a way cause he was very hard core, very gruff, very demanding, very disciplined and he wanted discipline out of the kids who played for him. I mean he would haul off and punch you if you [laughs] played too many sour notes. He was that kind of guy. We feared him so much. I had a couple other nurturing type teachers there. I can't even recall their names. But they encouraged me to do things and to stretch myself and I remember them. Speaker 1: Were there African American teachers in your school? Speaker 2: You know I, I never had one. But the principal of the school was African American. And Mr. Teague, T-E-A-G-U-E. Speaker 1: That's highly unusual, that's where the principal is African American and the rest of the-- Speaker 2: I know, it was wild. When you went to his office, I mean he, he would do the paddling in the school, that was when corporal punishment was like common. He would light you up, you know. So we didn't have really bad fights and stuff like that in school. Everybody got along pretty well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: Probably science courses, biology, astronomy. Wasn't great in math. Some history, literature, I loved the lit [literature] classes. Took a couple of years of Latin and I don't know why I did that because it was just the most difficult language. And we had a, a teacher who could not keep his class under control. It was the worst learning environment because kids were throwing spitballs at him and setting fires in the back of the room [laughs], it was crazy stuff in there. He was just a very abused guy. Speaker 1: This was in grade school or-- Speaker 2: This was in, well no I guess that was--that's probably in, in high school. Speaker 1: Okay well let's move on. Let's see now did you go to middle school? Speaker 2: How did they, how did that go? Lincoln [Elementary School], in Lincoln and then East High. It was like elementary school to high school and then there was like a junior high within the high school. Speaker 1: So you went first through eighth [grades] at Lincoln and then, is that it, and then-- Speaker 2: First through eight, yeah thereabouts, yeah that's right. And then ninth grade you went into the high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so okay so East High school, now you're around thirteen [years old] going into East High School, thirteen or fourteen I guess. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Fourteen I suppose, yeah, going into East High School. Did you have any--did you take the college prep course? Did you consider yourself-- Speaker 2: Yeah I think, I think you know I was up to that. I had pretty decent grades in high school. You know I had pretty decent grades. I don't think I made the National Honor Society, but I as on the honor roll a few times; played in the marching band and it was a pretty--I had a little crew of guys that I used to hang with all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37019 Speaker 1: Was radio a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Radio, WHOT, Boots Bell, like a legendary, he was like Wolfman Jack in, in Youngstown [Ohio]. WHOT AM and FM were the big, giant radio stations in Youngstown. Boots was the guy that got me a job in broadcasting as I go on in life. Speaker 1: His name is Boots Bell? Speaker 2: Boots Bell, yeah, Boots Bell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they had--they, they always had tie-ins with the acts that came to town. They would do their commercials and promotions on WHOT. Then they had the, the Pepsi Hit of the Week. For two Pepsi bottle caps you could go in there and get the 45 of the week for like fifty cents or whatever it was, it was real cheap money. And that was at the 'Record Rendezvous' down there on Federal Street in Youngstown. It was the big record store. And it was a, you know a big like Virgin Records, big, sprawling place. You could find anything in there or they'd special order things for you. There were also black record shops, but this was the downtown store and it was a, it was a big deal there. We listened to radio all the time, little transistor radios, yeah. Speaker 1: So those things were just like Top 40. Speaker 2: Top 40, R&B [Rhythm and Blues], well we had some jazz on the weekends, but it was basically--most people were into you know R&B and, and Top 40 and Pops, Pop music. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did your family, you know did--was the radio going a lot at, at home? Speaker 2: My mom [Estelle Saunders] and dad [Dewey McKinley Revish] didn't listen to a lot of radio. My mom would, as I remember, she used to listen to Larry King. I mean Larry King has been on the air, what 100 years? She would listen to him late at night in her bedroom on the radio. I remember hearing him on, on her radio at night. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard other people say that Larry King was, has been on a long time and with the, the radio, the late night radio talk show. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Then people remembering. Speaker 2: From that, yeah, way before TV. Speaker 1: Right, right. So okay, now was any--were there--you had TV stations in Youngstown, right? Speaker 2: Yes we had ABC, CBS and NBC stations, and public radio station, public TV station. Speaker 1: Okay when you were growing up? I mean Youngstown State [University] had, had a station. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, it did. Speaker 1: Okay, so these were in operation when you were growing up? Speaker 2: They were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and before the advent of cable of course, it was all rabbit ear stuff, but yeah. We had a pretty--we had, you know, whatever TV was like back there in the early '50s [1950's] and '60s [1960's] you know. They would sign off at midnight, you know, play the National Anthem and then you'd see the test pattern come up. Speaker 1: With the Indian chief's head on it. Speaker 2: That's it, all of that, yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite television show? Speaker 2: I liked the Jetsons. I liked cartoons, I liked them 'cause I was like--and the Flintstones, I liked that kind of stuff, you know just, just funny the way it was made. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you pay much attention to, to news? I mean just considering what you're doing today, did you, did you really pay any attention to it? Speaker 2: My, my mom and dad always liked to watch the news. I would watch it sometimes. Sometimes for sports. But yeah it was always on in the house during dinner time, so you know, I kind of grew up around that. But I didn't, I didn't have any sort of news interest back then. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37020 Speaker 1: Now did you--now you played in the band in high school [East High School, Youngstown, Ohio], right? Speaker 2: I did, marching band. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I played trumpet and French horn. And during the last three years, from my sophomore into my senior year, I played for the All Ohio Marching Band, the All Ohio State Fair Marching Band. We'd come down to Columbus [Ohio] and spend two weeks at the fairgrounds practicing and playing in the morning, in the afternoon, in the evening. I remember marching into the, into the, the race track area where the big stage was every afternoon. We had like 100 pieces in that band, and these were supposedly all the best high school musicians in the state. And you had to be recommended by your music teacher. And so I was able to get that. It was always an experience for me, I loved it. Getting on the fairgrounds early in the morning when just some of the restaurants and, and booths were open and they'd, you know they'd be flipping their pancakes or making eggs or doing whatever they were doing to get prepared for the day. And sleeping in the bunks in the dormitories. I mean a couple of those years when I had to leave and come back home, I cried. I mean and a couple of other people did. We just were so emotionally attached to the experience and to each other that it was--I loved those days. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did you run for office in high school, student government or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, I think I wrote a little bit for the, for the--East High School's mascot was the Golden Bear. So I believe we had a student newspaper. I think I wrote for that a little bit. Story_ID: 37021 Speaker 1: So now you were in, I guess you were in grade school when Kennedy was assassinated, JFK [President John F. Kennedy], you must have been about thirteen [years old] I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, what was that/ Speaker 1: '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: '63 [1963], yeah. I think everybody got sent home that day from school. And my mom [Estelle Saunders], when I walked in the house she was just bawling over that. Just a dark cast over the whole house because of, of his death. And then we were all like glued to the TV set from when Lee Harvey Oswald got shot to death by Jack Ruby, we saw all that on TV. And then the, the funeral itself, the cortege, all that stuff and little John-John. We remember those days, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Was your family--did your family discuss the Civil Rights Movement at home very much? Speaker 2: My mom was not a big Civil Rights fan in that the, the violence and the demonstrations that were attached to it, she didn't want us to get involved in that. Her, her mind about those things were work hard, keep your nose clean, do your best and good things will happen for you. She didn't buy into a lot of the, you know, the Black Panther stuff and all of that. She was pretty passive about those things, she really was. Just figured if you did well, if you worked hard, good things would happen for you and you wouldn't have to--she was probably more like, what did you have, [W.E.B.] DuBois and the other-- Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was more like--which one of those two is the guy that wanted you to just be the, the talented tenth? Is that Booker T or-- Speaker 1: Well DuBois' position was that the--yeah the talented people, but they should agitate for Civil Rights. Speaker 2: Okay, he was, yeah the other guy was Booker. Speaker 1: Booker T. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was more like a Booker T. Washington. Speaker 1: Yeah she was more like Booker T. I would guess, I would guess in that sense. Now what about your father [Dewey McKinley Revish], did he have a similar point of view? Speaker 2: Dad--when he started working the steel mills [in Youngstown, Ohio], he was one of the guys that broke--was a union buster. Back then they, they put blacks in the mill to break the union, you know and to--and that's how he got in there. So he was, was able to rise pretty well in the organization. He was a foreman and made good money and, and did well that way. His church, Third Baptist Church, they were--I'd say they were activists in some regards. I don't remember them doing many marches or demonstrations or things, but they always felt, you know, blacks should rise and, and be able to do better. And we have to agitate for that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't think he ever got involved in those things. Speaker 1: Did you know anyone that went to the March on Washington in '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: There was some guys out of the Urban League back then and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] who went down. But I was kind of not in the mix of those people, so I know I just remember-- Speaker 1: Well you were young, I thought you might, you know, there might be somebody you might have, you know, known from the community that went, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pete Starks who was probably the, the first black City Council Member in Youngstown, he was very much in the community agitating for civil rights and black empowerment, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was he, was he a member of the NAACP or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or one of those? Speaker 2: He was NAACP, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 37022 Speaker 1: Okay so when, so when you were in high school [East High School, Youngstown, Ohio], you were--you said earlier you were kind of introverted in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but is, but was it during this period of time that you started in radio? Speaker 2: No, that happened when--you know I went--after high school I, I attended Youngstown State University for-- Speaker 1: I don't want to get too far ahead. I just want to make sure I wasn't passing by that. So you weren't involved in radio. Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: So you didn't do high school radio or anything. Speaker 2: No. We didn't even have those opportunities. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so you played music and did you--when you were on the verge of graduation, what were the counselors tell you? Speaker 2: Let's see. Well they were saying you know, you got the grades to go to college, you should go. I spent two years at Choffin Vocational Center and in my junior and senior year. Choffin, C-H-O-F-F-I-N, in the Distributive Education Program. You know, teaching you about business. And out of that I got my first job, yeah. Well the job that I had working at that shoe store, ladies shoe store, was in concert with Distributive Education. And then I went from that, I started working at the General Foods Operation in Youngstown, the Birds Eye division. Speaker 1: So this was after high school graduation? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't go right into college after you graduated. Speaker 2: No, I think I, I stayed out a year, I think and then I went into college, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I think so. And again I may have just--that following fall I may have started at Youngstown State [University], I just can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so well when you look back on high school, were there any special--other than the band director, you mentioned him. Was there any other teachers or people that-- Speaker 2: The principal at East High School, Burton Honey, was very strong role model in that he was a--just a real gentleman. Very pleasant, very regal so to speak. You always gave him respect. But, he was, he was a fun guy. He was approachable, students loved him, and he helped make the school what it was. Story_ID: 37023 Speaker 1: Okay, so after high school graduation, you, you're at Youngstown State [University, Youngstown, Ohio]. What did you decide on as a major? Had you chose, did you choose a major right away? Speaker 2: Business Administration because I had done the vocational school thing, which was in sort of Business Administration there. I got involved in, in that. The first year I did okay. Speaker 1: This would have been 1967, '68 [1968], right? Speaker 2: '68 [1968] yeah, '68 [1968]. And then my--I have, I had an uncle, Ernie Jackson who used to live in Farrell [Pennsylvania], who moved away very early after his high school years to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. He--Farrell was a very small, oppressive, no future place. And he, he did well in school. He got a scholarship to go to Howard [University], and went to Howard University. And became an, an architect. And he lived in Los Angeles [California]. He had come back home that, that summer to visit his sister in Farrell and to buy her a house. He had done very well in his career. And he went to buy her a house and wrote a check for it. And this was, this was back in the late '60s [1960s] and you know the bank had no concept of a black person doing that. And so he was really offended they wouldn't take his check. But some kind of way they worked that out and he got her the house. But while he was there, he said well what are you doing? I said oh, I'm going to Youngstown. Why don't you come out to California? You know, you can go to school out there. You want to avoid this no future life here, come on out. So I, I moved to Los Angeles and that was the summer of '69 [1969]. Attended Chapman College out in Orange, California. Started in business, but then I went into more of a liberal arts sort of vocation, English Lit [literature] and I guess I started taking some journalism classes out there. And while I was there, one day I was walking down the dorm hall, and this was early when I first got on campus, and I turned the corner and saw all of this glass and these two guys in this control room. They had a radio station, a campus radio station. And the speaker was outside the studio playing the music. It was all '60s [1960's] kind of trippy music, you know that kind of stuff. But they looked so cool doing that and it just made an impact on me. I thought wow, look at these guys on the radio, they're talking on the microphone and doing this stuff. I thought it was the neatest thing. And it was something that I, that always stuck with me. I didn't do well at Chapman. It was maybe too much for me. I was twenty [years old], I turned twenty-one out there. My uncle was, was very well off, he had a Rolls Royce, one of those old Greta Garbo kind of Rolls Royces with the big fenders and all that stuff on it. I told him one afternoon, I'm going to wax this for you. And it was like waxing a battleship, it was so big. And I had so many great experiences out there and I think it shaped a lot of who I became. I saw a man who loved his family, loved his daughters, he had three daughters, loved his wife, had a great business, had people working for him. You know and that was during the, the go-go-days. The whiskey-a-go-go, and all those different kind of places out there. And you know when to the Forum and saw Sly Stone and the Jackson Five and, and Diana Ross, altogether on bill. And this was the most amazing--I thought it was--I didn't know where I was, seeing all this. But academically I just washed out, I didn't do well. So I came back to Youngstown. Speaker 1: Now what's your uncle's name? Speaker 2: Ernest Jackson. Speaker 1: Ernest Jackson, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he died about five years ago from lung cancer. Speaker 1: Okay but he was an architect? Speaker 2: Architect. Speaker 1: Fairly well. Speaker 2: Latt-Jackson was the name of the company, L-A-T-T, hyphen, Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now what were you--just having too much fun out there or what, what was it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--I got involved with the Black Student Union and we were really high on demonstrating for causes, but not that high on getting those books, at least the crew I ran with. I remember one day we took over the Administration Building. This was during the Vietnam War, I think it was the invasion of Cambodia, whatever that was, where college campuses across the country were in foments over that. And we, we sat in, spent the night outside the president's office in the lobby there. It was probably 100 people, it was just a big party. But after that, you know I kind of--it kind of signaled the end of my time at that college, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37024 Speaker 1: And so I moved back to, to Youngstown [Ohio; from California]. And-- Speaker 2: This was 1970 I guess. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Margaret Linton, L-I-N-T-O-N. Margaret Linton was a funeral home operator, and she was also editor of the 'Buckeye Review' newspaper. She was also very involved in the Urban League, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], black women's organizations. A real socialite. She wanted to see more black people get involved in broadcasting. So she helped create a experimental broadcasting program just for minority students. This was back in the days of Affirmative Action. And there were about fifteen or sixteen of us, different kids who, some of them were in college, some of them weren't. But they had an interest in this business. And local professionals in radio, television, and newspapers would donate their time five nights a week, three hours a night, to teach us the rudiments of the business. And I think that core study went on for maybe four or five months. And after which those who they felt had potential, they would help them get jobs in the business. And so that Boots Bell I told you about was my instructor in broadcasting. And he took to me and helped me in many, many ways. He was very high on, on elocution, being able to speak well and get your mouth around all the words and pronounce them properly and all that stuff. He helped me get a job at WBBW Radio. Speaker 2: Now when you--how did you find out about this opportunity? Speaker 1: Program? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I was on campus [Youngstown State University] and I was, I was taking courses, and I wrote a little bit for the, the 'Penguin' which was, I think that's what it's called, the Youngstown State University student newspaper. Wrote a little bit for that and I heard about this program. And just got curious and, and got involved with it. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So you hadn't met any of the people beforehand? Speaker 1: I think we had an organizing meeting. They had an organizing meeting and explained what it would be about, what you would be required to do. They had offered a stipend, I think it was fifty dollars a week or something for kids to go. But because my family made a little bit more money than the, the limit, you know, I didn't get paid, but I took the course anyway 'cause I just liked it. I liked the thought of it, and so you know, worked out. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37025 Speaker 1: So, Boots Bell gets you a, a job with the-- Speaker 2: With WBBW, a radio station in Youngstown [Ohio], just working part-time, weekends. I was a control board operator. There was a guy who had a big band show. He was a jewelry store owner, and he bought time on the radio station, primarily to hawk his watches and, and jewelry. He was a big Seiko watch distributor. We had this big band show on Sunday mornings. And I would spin the records for him. On Saturdays I would spin records and rip and read some wire copy during the half-time for Cleveland Browns and Ohio State Buckeye football games, you know, and the seventh inning stretch for the [Cleveland] Indians. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you--when did you have any inkling at all that you had the voice for radio? Speaker 2: I think early on because you know I could just speak well. Boots encouraged me to do that. And I kind of rose at the, at the radio station. I started as a [control] board op [operator], but then got into news reporting there. Doing morning drive radio, and they had a three person newsroom, and I learned from some great curmudgeons who just taught you, you know, take good notes and work on your writing and, and be sharp about that. One of my first beats was the Youngstown public schools' board meeting. I would go to City Council sessions and stuff like that. Didn't get a whole lot of experience out in the field as far as interviewing people, but I got some. And worked there for two years, and got a call one day from WBNS Radio. A friend of mine who was also at BBW said you know, they called and they're looking for a guy to do radio down in Columbus [Ohio]. Would you be interested? I said yeah, sure. At that time I was engaged, and I was thinking about doing more than being in Youngstown. I worked at the radio station, go ahead. Speaker 1: But, but what happened at, at the Youngstown station? You were there for two years and what was the--had the, had the--how did the job end? I mean-- Speaker 2: The job ended when I got the job at BNS Radio in Columbus. Speaker 1: Okay so you were still working at the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was amazing how I got that job in the newsroom. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: The guy at BBW who was the reporter in front of me, he got married and got killed in a car accident that very same weekend. It was the most awful thing. And I remember going to his funeral and looking at his widow, really it was his bride. And that following Monday they asked me at the, at BBW to--would you come in here and work full time? And so I did. Yeah, but it was odd how I got that job. Speaker 1: Yeah that's a horrible way to get it. Story_ID: 37026 Speaker 1: All right so this is 1974 that you started WBNS AM/FM Radio in Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Think it was February 4th, 1974. I remember that date because that was the same date Patty Hearst got kidnapped. Remember going on the air here in Columbus. Speaker 1: Do you sort of--those news events kind of mark dates for you? Speaker 2: They do in some, some ways they do. That one and then you know we had--that was a busy year I think also in '74 [1974], wasn't that the year that Richard Nixon resigned office? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And that was a big day. Standing in the newsroom, radio newsroom and watching him on TV and hearing him submit his resignation, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you start and the Patty Hearst case jumps out first. Now, now what were your duties at WBNS? Speaker 2: I was a General Assignment Reporter. I started working nights and weekends. You know when you get in the business, you start at the bottom and I, I worked the, the worst shift. I started my, my starting salary was like $770 a month, and it was more money than I'd ever made before but it wasn't great money. But I enjoyed what I was doing and I got married, started in February '74 [1974], and got married on June 22nd, 1974. Danielle [Revish's wife] moved to Columbus and we got a little apartment and started making our life. From General Assignment I rose to Assignment Editor, which was a guy who would you know, take care of making sure crews got to news events and keeping the press releases and the day book and all that stuff. I used to do a lot of stringer work for Associated Press. Back in those days if you did a local story that the wire service would pick up, they would pay you for that and so I used to make, you know, a few hundred bucks a month just stringing with stories that I would do. And I worked there for six years. And then I guess in the sixth year I just thought you know, I'm not going to go anywhere here. They're not going to make me News Director. So let's try TV. Speaker 1: But how, how were you treated? I guess in both situations. Were you the first black employee in both of these situations? Speaker 2: At BBW [WBBW, Youngstown, Ohio] I was the first black news reporter. There was a black disc jockey there who spun records on the FM side, a jazz station. I wish I could remember his name, I just can't right now. I was treated well, yeah and they--nobody marginalized me or you know made me feel less than. They were very encouraging to me. They really enjoyed me and I enjoyed them. At BNS Radio, pretty much the same thing. You know I had a couple of coworkers that were sketchy here and there but beyond that, the management was always good to me, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay but you said at BNS you had--since you weren't going anywhere, really. Speaker 2: BNS Radio, right. Because I, I, I had seen--we had probably two or three news directors during my time there. And I felt I was the most senior guy and I was as able as anybody they were going to bring in there to run the shop. But for whatever reason, maybe because I didn't have a college degree, I don't know, they decided that you know, they would hire outside. And so I figured you know I got--by then I had two small children. And my daughter was born in '75 [1975] and my son in '76 [1976], so I started there in '74 [1974]. I needed to make more money, so I went to TV. Story_ID: 37027 Speaker 1: Okay so did a job [in television broadcasting] come up, or did you just-- Speaker 2: It was interesting how I, I went to the news director at the time, doesn't matter his name, and asked for a job. I just went in there. I said you know I'd like to offer, I'd like to offer my services here. I'd like to get in this business. And he said well you don't know anything about TV. So you know, can't do that. So I went back to the radio station and worked another year. The guy that said no to me got fired and the new news director, I approached him, Larry Miles. And he said you know I've been listening to you in the mornings on radio. You tell a good story. I think you could learn the picture part of TV, yes, I'll give you a shot. So I started at BNS Radio, WBNS TV, Channel 10, June of 1980, again as a General Assignment Reporter. And a couple years into it I started as a weekend anchor. And I was a weekend anchor for about three years. And then I got tired of working weekends. I mean family was always important to me, still is today even though my kids are grown, I got grandkids now. I didn't want to be away from them every weekend like that and I figured if I'm good enough to work weekends, I should be good enough to anchor during the week time. But it took me eight years before I could get a weekday anchor job. Story_ID: 37028 Speaker 1: Yeah it seems as though black news reports always are the weekend anchors. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: On the major networks, local TV stations and if there's one aboard, he's on the weekends. Speaker 2: It was amazing. On Sunday nights Ed Bradley was on at 11. They did the CBS Evening News from 11 to 11:15, and then us from 11:15 to 11:30. So you had two brothers with beards on TV on Channel 10 at that time, it was kind of an interesting thing. Ed came to Columbus [Ohio] a few years later. He has family here in, in Columbus and I met all of them. Just lovely people, but he was always a, a inspirational figure for me. Can't call him a mentor, but he was somebody I looked up to greatly. Speaker 1: Okay.Now during the mid '70s [1970's] also that's when I think the first black anchor of a major network news program emerged, that being Max Robinson for ABC. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah they had three guys on there at that time. He was one of the three of that three headed anchor team. Speaker 1: The three would be Peter Jennings? Speaker 2: Peter Jennings and I think Reynolds was the other guy. Speaker 1: Was Reynolds the other one, or was it Hugh Downs? Was it Hugh Downs? Speaker 2: I think Hugh was, I thought Hugh was with NBC, but-- Speaker 1: Okay maybe so. Maybe it was Reynolds. I'm not sure. I always can't think of the third one. I can think of Jennings. Speaker 2: Harry, Harry Reasoner, Harry Reasoner. 'Cause they were on ABC. It was, it was Harry Reasoner, Peter Jennings and Max Robinson, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Did you--were you encouraged by him? Speaker 2: I was. I, I looked at Max and you know he didn't have the sort of charisma for me that Ed [Bradley] did. I never remember Max being out in the field a lot doing a lot of stories. I, I always remember him as being stuck in the studio, reading. So I don't remember him being out that much. But it was just the fact that he was on the air that was very, you know, inspirational. Story_ID: 37029 Speaker 1: Now did you--now, now you had some journalistic training, right? Speaker 2: I did. The Broadcast Training Program and I got my Third Phone, which is the third class radio telecommunications license. Because you had to have them back in those days to run equipment. You had to--to put your hands on equipment you had to have a, an FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license, so I had that. Speaker 1: Okay and you said that the, the people at WBNS [Columbus, Ohio] told you that you were a good storyteller and they-- Speaker 2: The news director there, yeah. And he gave me a shot and I, I rose rather quickly and I caught on really well. I mean the first series that we did was nominated for an Emmy [award], 'Your Kid's in Trouble'. We didn't win an Emmy, but it was just the fact that I was able to get that sort of storytelling effectiveness observed or noticed by other people that made me feel good. Speaker 1: Okay now was it, was it difficult to make the transition from radio to television? Speaker 2: I always thought that TV guys were, were more concerned about makeup and looking good than the stories. I--much the way newspaper people look on broadcast folks, particularly TV guys now. They fell they are the only true journalists left and TV guys are just you know, kind of celebrity. But no, I, I--it took me a minute to understand why they had to do makeup and, and why they had to be careful about their clothes and that kind of thing. But the impact of TV to me was very powerful. More powerful than newspapers, more powerful than radio. The radio experience that I had was great for me because it taught me how to write. And I would tell anybody who's going into this business, do not say no to a radio journalism job cause it forces you to, to write creatively, illustratively, you've got to describe things to people in their mind through your words. In TV you've got pictures to undergird what you say. We write to the video as it's called in, in TV. But I learned storytelling techniques out of radio. Learning how to grab things and distill them into digestible chunks of information rather quickly, and to be able to get on a phone sometimes and call in a story on the radio. All that came into play in television. The logistics of TV, you know we're always lights, photographer, microphones, all that stuff, was a lot more complicated than radio. But the impact of the whole experience of TV I think is still probably the strongest of, of media now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37030 Speaker 1: Now was it--I didn't ask this earlier, but was it--did your family speak in I guess standard English at home, or did they have, they-- Speaker 2: My mom [Estelle Saunders] was a very, was a very--was a stickler for good pronunciations and stuff like that. She never was into slang, she never liked you know sort of ghettoizing conversation, she never liked that. And so I was always around good speakers I guess in my family. Even though they were not, you know, professionals in any way. But they just gravitated towards that. Speaker 1: I know some families there's a, there's a, a language for around the house, there's a family--there's a language for some professional interaction, you know different, different, maybe three different languages that people speak, you know in the same household. But street language, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But your family was pretty much standard. Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much mainline, down the middle on, on the way they spoke. My mom was always correcting us, you know, if she heard us mispronounce something. And I guess it carried on, rubbed off on me 'cause I was always correcting my kids. My, my son and daughter are great public speakers. Speaker 1: So you didn't have to unlearn something. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 37031 Speaker 1: Okay so, so news reporting for WBNS [Columbus, Ohio]. So in the beginning you, you--well what would your day be like, typical day as a news reporter? Speaker 2: At the radio, at the TV station we'd come in and stop by the Assignment Desk and find out what stories are we going to pick up. The business started to change over the years. Back then the Assignment Desk sort of dictated what the stories were going to be. And reporters if you found out something, you were able to sell that story idea and get that on the air too, which I did quite often. But now the newsroom is pretty much a producer driven experience. And it's kind of amazing because these are guys that never get out. I mean they're in the room all day. They don't mix it up with people, and but they have an idea based on what the story content is of the day, how they want their newscast to look. You still have to come up with three story ideas every day. I doubt most of the reporters do because three new story ideas every day is pretty difficult to come up with. I mean decent story ideas. People throw up all kind of stuff, but you know you got to do a lot of digging, a lot of calling, working your sources, keeping your ear to the ground to, to hear about stuff that's happening. So it, it can be a little daunting that way. But at 2:00 I come in and we have a meeting, well that's now. But back then when I was just a General Assignment Reporter, we would pick up a story and go out and do it. I used to do something called Ohio Cam. It was where we would go out every single day to another county in the state and do a story from a different part of the state. And it was really pretty amazing. We'd go out real early, shoot the story and edit it for the nightly news that night. And we'd go everywhere. I mean Toledo [Ohio], southeast Ohio down in coal country, we'd go to Marietta [Ohio], even Cincinnati [Ohio], farm places that I never even knew existed, just rural areas we'd find these stories and do that sort of thing. Did that for probably a year. Got some great stories out of that. And finally got on with the morning show as an anchor, co-anchor. At that time we were starting the morning show at 6:00 a.m. We did an hour. And then over time we expanded it to 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 [a.m.]. I did mornings and the noon show. Speaker 1: So you started in 1980, right. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So you were about thirty years old then and, and so how long did it take for you to become a, a reporter, I mean-- Speaker 2: Anchor? Speaker 1: Anchor for the morning show. Speaker 2: Well after I'd had that experience as the weekend anchor, it took me eight years from when I left the weekend anchor desk to get back in the mix of being considered for another job. So I did general assignment for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so when you started you were general assignment. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then you became a weekend anchor first? Speaker 2: Weekend anchor and did general assignment for three-- Speaker 1: About, about what year is this when you, or how long-- Speaker 2: Let's see, probably '82 [1982] to '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now okay so '82 [1982] to '85 [1985] was weekend anchor, and then the-- Speaker 2: Then I went back into general assignment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For probably eight years, thereabouts. Speaker 1: So that's '85 [1985] to what-- Speaker 2: '85 [1985] to probably about '90 [1989] I think. Speaker 1: (Unclear; Simultaneous) Story_ID: 37032 Speaker 1: Because I do remember a pivotal time in my life was in 1991, the first Gulf War. We got a, an opportunity to go to Saudi Arabia with a water supply unit out of Marion [Ohio], the 79th Quartermaster Company. I don't know--a photographer, a dear man, Ron Johnson, RJ we called him. He and I were like two peas in a pod. We'd always shoot all the stories together, he was my photographer. I just, we just clicked. We went to see these guys off. This was an [U.S.] Army reserve unit. And they were going to Saudi to supply water in these big 10,000 gallon rubber bladders, to bring drinking water to the troops because you've got to have that out in the desert, you know and they didn't have it. And we thought you know we might be able to go over with these guys. So we worked the angles, we talked to the commander there and said would you sponsor us, you know, going over with you guys? And he said yeah, we got a couple of spaces, you know, we'll put you up, you can stay. And so we went over for like three days. Speaker 2: So you went with the military? Speaker 1: Yeah, we were with--it was like-- Speaker 2: This was with the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 1: No, it was the Army. Speaker 2: Army, okay. Speaker 1: It's like being embedded before they did embeds. We went over and shot like continuously for like seventy-two hours. We slept very little. We had enough material when we came back home to run that whole following year. Little bits and pieces of different things that we had. Won an Emmy out of that, the Desert Shield Diary. I got involved with the families of the soldiers here in town. And we would correspond back and forth. And it really put me on a, a much more noticed level at the station. People were more aware of me and my work. And it was the first, it was the first war in which reservists were called up. And that meant mothers who were reservists, fathers, sons and daughters who thought they'd never see active duty ended up going over to the Middle East, you know and it was a, an amazing thing for the whole country to see their loved ones actually in a war setting because we'd never seen anything like that. And so it just generated a lot of material for me over those years. Story_ID: 37033 Speaker 1: Okay now I skipped over something--I'll get back to this, but in 1985 there was a case of a man who was accused of, of rape? Speaker 2: Walter Smith. Speaker 1: Walter Smith, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah I got a, I got a letter from Walter, he was in Lebanon Correctional [Institution; Lebanon, Ohio] at the time. And he said you know, I'm locked down here for something I didn't do. They said that I raped three women. I didn't rape anybody. They said the rapist had a beard. I didn't have a beard when these women were raped. They said he was wearing a weight lifter's belt under his clothes. I didn't have a weight lifter's belt. I mean he had all this different stuff. And it was something about his story that made me think he's telling the truth. So we flew down to--back then we--money wasn't such a big issue. We took the helicopter down to Lebanon Correctional and went and sat down and talked to him. And I just felt he's telling the truth. And I tried to find ways to get him free. We tried to get lawyers to take his case because you know he had no money. He petitioned the court on his own. He wrote probably seventeen, eighteen different appeals, petitions to the court, all of them were turned back. And this was over a series of years and we kept all of this conversation going. I used to write to him on yellow canary paper. That's what we used in the newsroom back then, on big type. And he would write his letters back to me in longhand. One day I got so fed up with not being able to do anything for him, I called the prosecutor's office and I said you guys got any evidence in your impound room on this case that you have not been tested for DNA? This was early on. DNA wasn't quite what it is now, but it was in the early stages of, of it. And they looked and they said yeah, there's a shoebox that's got some stuff in it, you know some, some semen stains on the bed sheets and some pubic hair. His mom put up $2,000 for him to get it DNA tested. And the test came back that it wasn't him. And we finally got a lawyer out of Toledo [Ohio] to do the, the legal part of the appeal. Mike Miller was the Franklin County prosecutor at the time. I called him one day and I said Mike as a personal favor to me, would you allow this evidence to be tested? 'Cause I'd known Mike for years. And he said yeah I'll do it for you. And that's how we got him sprung. Speaker 1: Now is this the case, now you might remember if I'm wrong, you'll probably remember this case anyway. There's a case that was broadcast on 60 Minutes about a man from Columbus who was accused of raping several women. I don't know if the story-- Speaker 2: That was--but was he exonerated? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He was exonerated. Speaker 1: And they--the person who did it was actually a medical doctor. Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Jackson, Edward Jackson. Speaker 1: That was the Edward Jackson case, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I thought about that one when I heard this case. Speaker 2: Right, and they had these two guys, it was you know, mis-identification. Speaker 1: Mis-identification. Speaker 2: Right, just like they misidentified--they had Walter in a photo array and somebody ID'd him and it was a false memory, they got the wrong guy. And there was another Jackson, I forget the Jackson that was innocent, and the Dr. Jackson, he was the pantyhose rapist. He always wore pantyhose over his face when he'd do his deeds. The other Jackson got freed. He got a $700,000 settlement from the state and blew all the money probably less than two years, yeah. Speaker 1: That's a side story--the part we didn't see on 60 Minutes I guess. But--so Walter, Walter Smith was released. Speaker 2: He was. I remember the day he got out. One of his friends got a limo that pulled up to--he was over in London Correctional, he was transferred from Lebanon to London Correctional [London, Ohio]. We got a chance to talk to him before his release because there was, there was like a month or two, a few weeks before he could get out. I mean he was just bawling, crying, just so happy about his life and how this had finally come to be. And I remember meeting him when he got out, walked out of that prison and got into that car and drove to Columbus, had to register with the parole board. It was a great moment, it was a great time. One of the high points of my career for sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37034 Speaker 1: Is there any particular--just go back, is--I'm sure a lot of people want to get out of prison, but what was--what was it about his case that really made you sure that he was-- Speaker 2: It just sounded, it just sounded right and he had evidence to back him up that nobody would listen to. I mean he had--back then the--they called it--it was serum evidence. It was like they took some blood samples and the blood samples that they took didn't match his from the, the, the women that were raped. And that was before DNA, but some kind of way he knew that if he could get this evidence tested, 'cause it was never entered in court, that it would exonerate him. He had really bad representation, a bad lawyer. The guy didn't even care. And so we just, we just felt that we could put these pieces together, the, the big change, the door opener was when we got the DNA tested. Because up until then, no matter what he said, no matter how many appeals he wrote, they rejected every one of them. They couldn't reject that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37035 Speaker 1: Now the case of the, the Bosnian War, I mean the Gulf War, 1990, now this is, this is sort of unusual for a local station to send a crew to-- Speaker 2: It was. We were the first local station [WBNS-TV] in Columbus [Ohio] to go to the Gulf. Probably, maybe the first in the state, but I, I know there weren't any other guys going at that time we went because the, the Pentagon hadn't even established any sort of program to get journalists over there, except for network guys. And local people, you know we just--we went over there with $500, $500. We slept with them [soldiers] in their tents and ate in their mess hall and got driven around with them. But we had no money when we went over there, 'cause it came up so quick. We were going to get into a plane with them at Wright Patterson Air Force Base, but we didn't have our visas stamped and they wouldn't let us on the plane. So we drove back to Columbus, got on a plane that morning to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] and went to the Saudi Arabian embassy, walked in our passports to get a visa stamp in there, to go. And it just so happened that their plane when it got to New York, broke down. And they were stuck in New York for two days. That gave us enough time to get our documentation together so we could meet up with them. We met the plane at JFK [John F. Kennedy Airport] in New York, got on board and, and were able to get over. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37036 Speaker 1: Now in your early days at WNBS [Columbus, Ohio], now were you the first black anchor at the station? Speaker 2: No, there was, there was another black anchor and he was on the air before I even got there. Can't recall his name, sorry. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: There were a couple black reporters there too, Paul White, Chuck White was there. Chuck White was the first black TV reporter in the state, you know. Then he went on to do other things at the station, but I wasn't the first. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And now you were around when the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] started up, yeah the Columbus chapter. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell us about that, then. Speaker 2: The--there was a woman who had started that chapter and she had gotten sort of disheartened because she wasn't able to get a lot of people involved, you know. So I was a member of it and I thought it was really a great idea. It just needed some work, some dedicated people. So the year that she stepped down was the same year that the Columbus chapter was supposed to host a regional conference, three day convention here. And so I got involved, started planning it. I became the president of the local chapter. And that was when the Black Programming Consortium, National Black Programming Consortium was still in Columbus, headquartered here. They moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and then they moved to New York, but this was a great black archive of, of independent films and we had a lot of association with them. We had them do a film premiere of a couple of black films during our convention here in town at the Hyatt Regency. And we had DeWayne Wickham come in as one of the speakers. It was a, it was a really great event. And so I stayed in that for probably, as president, for probably four years. Then we developed a broadcast, or a journalism workshop for high school students, which I helped develop. Ohio State [University] at that time had a journalism school, and they had a complete TV station in there that kids would be able to, to use to learn the business, cameras, switching boards, teleprompters, set, all that stuff. And so they would let us come in. We had like a six week course, six Saturdays in a row. They would let us come in and use their equipment and, you know it was raw, these were high school kids who had no understanding about broadcasting or journalism at all. And I asked for--from the counselors I said I don't want your A students. I want the kids who are kind of troubled, at-risk kids because the A students are going to do well anyway. But we need some kids who don't have really any hope, don't really think they can do anything to turn them onto journalism. And so many of the students that we got were kids who were academic underachievers. But when they got in that program, just a light bulb went off and they just went to it. I'd say we probably helped four or five at least, people get into the business out of that. TV reporters that are still working today. Story_ID: 37037 Speaker 1: Yeah I'm glad you mentioned the National Black Programming Consortium. I'd forgotten all about them but that, that's right, they were here in Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mabel Haddock ran that. And she's in New York now. They're still, they're still around but I don't think they have the--they lost a lot of funding, you know, nonprofit but they're, they're still hanging in there. Speaker 1: Yeah it's really an exciting concept and the organization was really doing a lot in the '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s]. Okay so and we were talking about the Gulf War. So in '92 [1992], you became co-anchor [at WBNS-TV, Columbus]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay so--cause you had--you stated previously that you were like a weekend anchor and you got kind of tired of being away from your family so went back to being a-- Speaker 2: General assignment reporter. Speaker 1: General assignment reporter. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now you've become co-anchor. So, so your slot is like 5:00, 6:00 and 11:00 [o'clock; p.m.]? Speaker 2: Now it is, but when I started it was the morning show, I did the mornings and then was back in the general assignment. All I had was one show, the morning show and then I was still reporting after I got off the air at 8:00 a.m. Then I got the mornings and noon, and then I would be gone after 1:00 in the afternoon. Did that for five years. Then I got the noon and the 5:30 [p.m.], so I got sort of an evening exposure. And then after Dave Kaler retired, I got the 5:00, 6:00 and 11:00 [p.m.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he was the main evening anchor. Speaker 1: Now most people would think it's the bigger job to be the anchor, a more prestigious job, I guess it's more exposure. But which one did you like, do you like the best? Speaker 2: I used to like the noon and 5:30 just for the hours. I mean I would show up at nine [o'clock] in the morning and be out of there after six [o'clock]. You know I had my evenings, it was great that way. I don't mind the evening newscasts. You know it's just me and my wife here now. My kids are grown, they're still here in the city, but she grew up pretty much as an only child and she's a very independent person. So it doesn't bother her to be alone in the evenings when I'm gone. I come home for dinner just about every night. I like the evening newscasts. I, I think I do have a more influence on the product, what's going to be told, how we're going to--what we're going to give time to, what we're not going to give time to. And it's a whole different skill set. You know when you're a reporter you get like a minute and a half in your story on the air, or a live shot maybe. But as the anchor you're in there for that whole half hour. You're able to set the tone, able to add some color and background to stories because you're, you got the mike, you're sitting there. So I, I, I--the best job I have is the, the best job is the one I have right now, yeah. So far out of all, all of the assignments. Evening news anchor was something that I wanted. It is sort of a prestigious, it's like the brass ring for reporters, for anchors to be on the evening newscasts. Those are the most watched newscasts. The 11:00 newscast is the biggest moneymaker for any station, and we do quite well in all of our day parts. So I enjoy it. It's very time consuming. Like I said, it's basically from 2:00 [p.m.] to midnight, but basically I start getting ready for work around noon every day. I watch the noon newscasts, start ironing my shirt and after I shower up and all that, you know. Just heading into work, leaving here around 1:30 [p.m.]. So my weekdays are pretty tied up with that, but I have my weekends free. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you ever get a chance to go out and report from the field? Speaker 2: Yes. Every now and then I do. I'll go out, sometimes I'll pick up a story--they don't have, a reporter is out. They don't have any reporters and we're sitting in there and we'll go out and, and grab an interview, or take somebody's raw footage and turn it into a package if we need to do that. I did an unsolved crimes special this past month. We're starting to edit it now. And so every quarter I get to do one of these long form pieces. So it's--I don't get out as much as I want. I would like to get out every, every week but it doesn't happen that often. Story_ID: 37038 Speaker 1: Now I don't know--this is before you became an anchor again or not, but I have note here that there's a story about the Bosnian War. Speaker 2: Yes, we went over to--what was the name of that assignment? It wasn't Southern Watch [ph.], cause that was something else. But we went over after, after the Bosnian War we went over to see how that region was healing itself and mending all that violence from the war. We went through Sarajevo and Srebrenica and a few places like that with a [U.S.] Army group. And they were basically on patrol, just helping to keep the peace. This was after the Dayton Accords and the country was coming, Bosnia-Herzegovina was coming back together. They had like four or five presidents of all these countries working together to make one country. So it was an amazing scene, driving through these neighborhoods and seeing so many shattered homes from bullet rounds and artillery rounds and mortar rounds, and how we were told to always walk on hard surfaces and not on, on the ground because there was a lot of landmines that had been sowed in Bosnia. And we went to a cemetery one afternoon. And a young man showed us where his daddy was buried. I remember that. And afterwards, some other kids came up to us while we were at the edge of the cemetery and I said how many of you have lost somebody in the war? And all of their hands went up. How many of you lost your daddy in the war? Three quarters of them went up. Because that was during that ethnic cleansing time and they were killing a lot of these Muslims in, in that country. So it was just a, basically a tour of what was going on at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37039 Speaker 1: On these assignments, did you ever, have you ever had a time when you actually felt like you were in danger? Speaker 2: When we were in Haiti for a minute there. We were, we were at the border of Jimani which is on the border of the Dominican Republic going into Haiti during the U.S. invasion of Haiti to get Rose Sadres [ph.] out. And Jean Claude [Jean-Bertrand?]. Speaker 1: Aristide. Speaker 2: Aristide, thank you, get him back in office. We were stuck at the border for like three days, we couldn't get in. But I was seeing some other reporters go in and I asked somebody, I said well how is it these guys can get in and we can't? He said well they paid a bribe. If you bribe the security guards, you might be able to get in. So we paid, me and my photographer paid a $300 bribe each to the security guards who were--this was a racket. And they called up one of their buddies with a pickup truck and laid us down on the back of this pickup truck. It was like five of us who got in this truck and they pulled a tarp over the top of us and drove us into Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. And we could have been driven 300 yards and shot to death, you know when you think about it because we didn't--we were just trusting strangers to hold up their end of the bargain. That was about the only time. Once we got into the city of Port-au-Prince, we saw all these tanks and military vehicles and armor personnel carriers and helicopters and stuff. U.S. troops were there taking over the country and, and Haitians were climbing onto the vehicles and giving the "V" sign and all that stuff. That was about the only time I felt in danger. The first Gulf War and then we went back six months later to see how the troops were doing when we were there. There was so much artillery, so much armor, so much security, so many soldiers that you never felt anything would happen. Not like this Iraq stuff where roadside bombs, we never encountered any of that kind of stuff during that Gulf War. It wasn't like that. Speaker 1: First, Desert Storm was a lot different. Speaker 2: Right it was. Speaker 1: And the Haitian trip was in '94 [1994], I guess [unclear], 1994. Speaker 2: We went there twice. We went there when Aristide was put back in, and we went back I think six months later to take a look at what the progress was made. Very little progress was made. He never got a government together. All this money, millions of dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars that the international community wanted to give to Haiti couldn't because they had no mechanism to receive this money. But in all of that, the Haitian people are the most industrious, pleasant, joyous people. And we're talking about some hard core poverty and depravation there. But they just never give up. You wish their government was, had the spirit that they have. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37040 Speaker 1: Now I--is there a very large Haitian community in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No. There, I think there's, there's some now. We--after the earthquake there was quite a few fundraisers and a lot of Haitians came out to them and we discovered them at that time. But even still it's not--we have more Somalis than we have anybody. Speaker 1: You know that's, that's something I keep hearing, that Columbus has a lot of Somalis here. Speaker 2: We do. I think we're the second largest behind Milwaukee. Speaker 1: Yeah, have you ever done a story about the Somalis? Speaker 2: Yes. They, they are pretty clannish to me. They stick, stay with themselves. They haven't assimilated very well in the public school system. They have their own culture, networks, stores, businesses, charter schools in town. So you know and they think, they feel that they're a pure race as opposed to African Americans who they feel are kind of a mixed breed, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah I've heard there's tension sort of between-- Speaker 2: There is, there is. Now their, their elders are trying to reach out because it behooves them to get involved in the community and be able to take advantage of some of the things for the children and for themselves and housing and economic opportunities and educational opportunities. But they--it's still a work in progress, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37041 Speaker 1: Now in 1996 you, you won the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] Salute to Excellence Award Contest for the best international reporting, right. And that was for the Haitian-- Speaker 2: Right, it was for the 'Return to Paradise', I think it was. Speaker 1: Yeah 'Return to-', yeah, 'Return to Haiti, Rebuilding Paradise', the story is called. And this is when you go back to Haiti to see the progress. Speaker 2: Right, we go back and take a look at--and we met some of the people that were there the first time out, Cite Soleil and some other areas and, and they still--it was still not together. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37042 Speaker 1: What was some of the other stories that you remember I guess through the '90s [1990's], through the rest of the '90s [1990's]? Speaker 2: Went to Japan to do a story about education. Went to Tokyo [Japan], spent a week there. We were trying to find out why do these Japanese kids do so well in school. Basically why they do better than most everybody is because they study more. They go to school five and a half days a week. They go to school on Saturdays. They do Juku, which is a after school reading and study program five nights a week. Their parents are very much on them to do well. You've got to apply to go to the next grade in the prestigious schools. And they put your name out on a board outside the school building and you never want to bring dishonor to your family over there and so these kids--there's a lot of pressure on them to do well. They have a pretty high suicide rate because of, because of that. But I was amazed at how focused they are on education. We'd see five year olds get on their subways, five year olds, with the little backpacks and uniforms and nobody would bother them. You would think how would you put a five year old on a--but you know, they would get to where they needed to be safely. That--when we went to South Africa to do the story of the Ohio State Basketball team being the first American college to play in South Africa after the end of apartheid. Got a chance to meet Nelson Mandela. I was so awestruck at this man, I rarely have ever been at a loss for words in meeting people, but I just stood there looking at him. I was just so stunned that I was actually meeting this man. He's very tall, he's like 6'3" [height], thereabouts. And that was in '94 [1994], '95 [1995], somewhere in there after he'd become president of the country. And he was working real hard to heal all the wounds and he had the diversity of people in that country who were involved in, in the political arena and in society and how wealthy South Africa is. I mean it's the wealthiest country on that continent. All the nuclear power they got going on and all that kind of stuff. It's like being in, being in Johannesburg [South Africa] was like being in Detroit [Michigan]. I mean you know you just--you see all the modern accoutrements. I had no frame of reference for anything. I mean if you wanted to see animals, wild animals in those cities, you had to go to the zoo. I mean it wasn't like you know, you'd run up on them or any of that. It was a big story. We did Operation Southern Watch in the Gulf again with the [U.S.] Navy this time. And we were watching the coast of Iraq from a destroyer, which was intercepting contraband. Saddam Hussein was trying to get oil and batteries and medical supplies surreptitiously into his country cause there was this big embargo on him. And so these vessels were in the, on the high seas intercepting the contraband. So being out on those destroyers and watching all that was quite something for me. We went to Barbados and did the same thing we did with Japan, looking at how Black educators were doing so well with these kids. Because they had schools on a British model, all followed the way they do things in Great Britain. Speaker 1: Are, are there any--was there a population of people from Barbados here? Speaker 2: No. You know we used to go for stories just out of the interest in them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If we could bring back an interesting story, that was the whole rationale for getting it. Speaker 1: I know there's so many of them in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, New England, you know, full of--and they do well when they come up here. Story_ID: 37043 Speaker 1: The election of Mayor [Michael] Coleman [Columbus, Ohio]. Tell me about that and, and--now this is one of the biggest stories I guess in Columbus' history I guess for the black community especially. Speaker 2: Columbus had a sensibility about black folks in political office. We had state legislators who were black. Ben Espy ran for mayor in front of Mike but he lost in a primary. But I remember Mike was a City Councilman before mayor. And I remember walking into an elevator at City Hall and he walked on with me and there was a lot of murmurs, whispers about him running for office and he said you know, I'm thinking about running for mayor. What do you think about that? I said if you went for it, you'd probably get it. You know I just said you should do it. Mike was always a very community oriented guy and still is. He was very much into building up neighborhoods. And I always liked that about him. He used to have some initiatives where he would tear down old, abandoned gas stations in neighborhoods that were just little toxic bombs waiting to go off and he'd just wanted that land to be claimed to build housing on or business or whatever. And he did a really good job with that. One of the first things he did when he became mayor was to improve the city snow clearing operation. Snows would come into Columbus and we'd--the city would be paralyzed. The streets wouldn't be plowed properly, the interstate would be bad. And that was one of the first things he did. And pothole patching is a big deal to him. I mean just basic services and, and having ninety gallon trash barrels in every neighborhood where the city needs to do collections, and city-wide clean-ups and working on getting clinics and rec [recreation] centers open. I mean he's just been really a tremendous guy that way. Speaker 1: His election was in, what '99 [1999] or 2000? Speaker 2: The first one? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: Okay. I was trying to get that right. And what--just kind of tell us what were the dynamics of that? Who, who was his opposition and who was mayor before him? Speaker 2: Before him we had Tom Moody and then Dana Rinehart, and then Greg Lashutka, and he and Lashutka battled it out for mayor and he beat Lashutka and got in. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37044 Speaker 1: What are the, I guess the demographics of Columbus [Ohio] in terms of the black population? Is there a majority black population here? Speaker 2: No. We got maybe 18 percent, 20 [percent] black, maybe--I mean it's grown over the time. But when he [Mayor Michael Coleman] first got in office, he was a crossover candidate. I mean he was able to get a lot of white people to vote for him. He had, you know the black vote pretty much locked down, but he got a lot of other people to vote for him, yeah. And then, and then when Woody Hayes endorsed him during his first run for office, Woody who is a die-hard Republican, endorsed him. That made all the difference. Speaker 1: That was--did they have a relationship prior to Mayor Coleman running? Speaker 2: I don't know. And when you talk to him, you might want to check this. It was Ben Espy, excuse me, Ben Espy was running for the state senate, that's what it was. And Woody supported him because Ben played football for Woody Hayes and that's how that went. But Mike also got some big endorsements from, from a lot of movers and shakers in town. Speaker 1: Okay, and he's remained mayor a long time. Speaker 2: He is in his fourth term. He's the longest serving, continuous serving mayor in the city. Speaker 1: Now was the community surprised? I mean I remember when Harold Washington was elected in Chicago [Illinois], the news anchors were stunned. They were like, like-- Speaker 2: There was, there was, there was a little bit of that. There was a surprise. I mean just, just the whole novelty of a, of a black man winning the mayor's office here. But I think he was able to prove or show or demonstrate that you know, he's got some ideas here that if you give me a shot, you know, I can improve this city. And so people gravitated toward him and away from Greg Lashutka, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37045 Speaker 1: So all right, so Columbus [Ohio]--you have seen, I think I mentioned this when I came in, that Columbus seems to be, is the only city in Ohio that's growing right now and it's one of the brightest spots in the Midwest. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: And what, you know from your position as a, as a news reporter, an anchor, what would you--how, how do you account for that? Speaker 2: A diverse economy, for one thing. We have some manufacturing but not that much. We have five universities in town, a lot of hospitals, the expansion of Ohio State University's hospital operation is going to put 6,000 jobs in the city. You've got a lot of headquarters here for different white collar corporations. You've got state, county, federal government of employees here. A large school system that, that hires a lot of people. You know there are some run-down areas in, in town but nothing that could be called like a complete--I would say probably now you'd have to say there are some ghettos here because some of these schools--some of these areas have been hit by arson and blight and vacant and abandoned properties. The city is trying to get rid of a lot of them now. You do have some pockets of real abject poverty in the city. But it's always been a stable economy, and a younger demographic because of the universities here. You know I think the average is in the early thirties here in town, which is a pretty young, young demographic. Plus it's very open to entrepreneurship. There's a lot of people that come here and start businesses, do well, Wendy's, Jenny's Ice Cream, Donato's Pizza, I mean all of these different companies have, have opened up shop, started here in town and done very well. So--and seems to me the City Hall and the Chamber of Commerce are after that kind of stuff, helping people. Story_ID: 37046 Speaker 1: What were some of the big stories here in Columbus [Ohio] during the 2000's? Speaker 2: Well the big brouhaha over Chief [James] Jackson, the police chief. [Greg] Lashutka was trying to get him out of office and locked him out of his office over some bogus allegation that he was soliciting prostitutes and stuff like that. I mean it was really, really bad. He filed a defamation lawsuit against the city and ultimately I think they settled or he lost. But he waited until the end of it before he retired. The guy served thirty-five-some years on the police force and eighteen of them as chief. The longest serving chief of a major police department in the country. That'll never happen again now because they changed the charter. Police Chief and Fire Chief can only spend two five year terms, and that's it. Then they've got to change. And we're in that right now, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief are both retired in the past year and they're looking for their replacements. That was a big story. The demise of City Center downtown. It was 150 store mall that was just a jewel, it was a regional mall that did very, very well for probably ten years. They had to acquire a lot of property, three square blocks of city property they had to acquire to get this place and it took them a lot of years to get that. But it started to wane after suburban malls started growing, Polaris, Tuttle and East, and these are big malls that started sapping energy away from downtown. And so today it's been leveled, it's just a park right now. The hope is that they can redevelop that. And we've had some big fires and stuff like that. That's what comes to mind right now. Story_ID: 37047 Speaker 1: You were elected to the, to the Ohio Journalism Hall of Fame in 2005? Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and it was nothing that I, you know, had to apply for. They just decided after my longevity to put me in. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, it was Broadcaster's Hall of Fame, not journalism, okay, Broadcaster's Hall of Fame. So, so you say it's just for your longevity [laughs]. Speaker 2: Well longevity, but I guess achievements too, but it was just, you know I've been in the business for what, thirty-eight years now. So it's--that's an achievement in itself. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright I guess people have grown up seeing you on television. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and their kids are watching too. So I always appreciate that. Speaker 1: So when you, when you move about the community, I mean are you, are you constantly--I mean how do you--do you have any peace, you know? Speaker 2: I embrace everybody. I do because for them to even walk up and want to say hi, and maybe ask for an autograph or a conversation or a picture, I mean those are our customers. You know and if you burn them, you never win them back, you know and they go through the rest of their life hating on you. You know and so I try always to be polite and courteous and spend the time, you know. I will say that there's sometimes when I go to Kroger's all I want is a quart of milk, you know, I just want to come out of there. But you know I've learned to live with that and it's not a bad thing to live with, you know. You just have to--you make your life, your living in the public eye, you know. And so that's part of what comes with that. Speaker 1: You know I, I YouTubed your name a couple of nights ago and I see you in a lot of public events, introducing people and giving awards away and that sort of thing, receiving awards. Does this take a lot of time and-- Speaker 2: It does, it's a sacrifice. Yesterday I had to do something early in the morning. I can't remember what it was. I had to do a tax, corporate tax workshop. It was the most dull, boring thing I've ever been involved in in my life, but I had, I had Senator Rob Portman asked me to do it and you know, he's Republican and I like him. He's a decent man and I wanted to do it for him. So even though I had a real heavy week and I got up at 8:00 a.m., 7:30, got down to this meeting, did that, went to work and then worked through to two o'clock in the morning because of the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] basketball game afterwards. It was really a brutal day. Those things happen. I try to keep my weekends free because it's the only time I have for me and my wife [Danielle Revish]. I don't mind doing it during the week or weeknights because I'm working, so I'll give that time up. But we all feel a commitment to the community and try to give back as much as we can. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37048 Speaker 1: Now do you have a, I don't know if we can say a broadcaster's or journalist's, journalist's philosophy? Speaker 2: Well it's that old bromide of "afflict the comfortable and comfort the afflicted." You know that's, that's, that's part of the, the thing that I--I think it's a calling for me. It's something that I've always enjoyed doing. When I can make a difference in people's lives. You know I remember so many of the little stories. They weren't little to me, but they were just--they weren't big, you know, blockbuster kind of stories. But of a mother and kids who are sitting in their apartment shivering because the landlord doesn't have the heat on and they've got the door open to the stove. And there's trash all around on the outside and, and he's ripping them off on their rent. We put that story on the air and then the code enforcement comes in and makes that man get the heat on in that house. Makes him clean up the property. I mean that, that, that to me is what it's all about, you know, making a difference, exposing unfairness. I like doing stories about the little guy because--and the underdog. Because in many ways I felt that way in my career. I felt I've had to fight, I've had to work hard, I've had to endure slights. I mean I've got, you know, been blessed to do some things, but there are many things that I didn't get a chance to do. Places I didn't get a chance to go, jobs that I was passed over for, you know, often. But I hung in there and I said I'm not going to let this beat me, I'm going to beat it. And I'm going to do the best I can every single day and I'm going to be so irresistible to these folks that they can't say no to me one day. Story_ID: 37049 Speaker 1: Yeah, I neglected to ask you about the Columbus [Ohio] school desegregation case in 1979. Speaker 2: The Penick vs. the Columbus Board of Education. The Columbus school system was segregated. Black teachers could only teach at black schools. Black kids could only go to black schools. Schools were built according to where the majority of whatever students were, lived. This was majority white, white schools were built. Majority black, black schools were built over here. There was a lot of unbalance on opportunity. Black students, some of these kids were working with textbooks that were way older than the kids in the white schools. So this was the backdrop for all of that. Judge Robert Duncan, a black federal court judge, got the short straw and he was the one who heard the case. It was like six months worth of courtroom testimony, maps and, and witnesses and housing pattern stuff and we were in that every single day, the reporters. I was in radio at the time, WBNS Radio. So much so that the superintendent of schools gave us all a pillow award at the end of the, of the court trial because we had sat on those hard pews for so long and needed pillows anyway. It was the--they appealed that and it went to the Supreme Court. And I remember going to the U.S. Supreme Court to hear that argued. It was an amazing time. The Supreme Court upheld the lower court ruling that the Columbus schools must desegregate. So the morning of desegregation, September of 1979. There was a lot of uncertainty about how things were going to happen in our city because we had seen the riots in Boston [Massachusetts], we had seen riots in Louisville [Kentucky], we had seen riots in other cities across the country. Rocks thrown at school busses. But when those busses rolled on the morning of desegregation, nothing happened. No violence of any kind. Every kid got to his school. National attention was focused on Columbus that day. And the school board decided early on after the court said you've got to desegregate. The superintendent of schools, Davis said whatever we have to do, we're going to do well. So they devised the best bussing program that they could. And so for probably the next six, eight years, kids were bussed across town to get the ratio balance right in these schools. Then they came out from under the federal court order I'd say in the mid '80s [1980s], maybe late '80s [1980's], came out of that. And now the school system is probably re-segregated in some ways. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Kids can go to any school they want to now through a lottery program. Alternative schools were born out of this where kids--you don't want your kids to go to this school, there's an alternative school that you can apply for and get them in. So it was praiseworthy the way they did that. I think it helped build some of the suburbs. I think Reynoldsburg [Ohio] exploded, Hilliard [Ohio] doubling because of white flight and black flight. Parents didn't want their kids bussed in the schools like they were in Columbus. They lost a lot of students. But the district has stabilized now and it's a legacy of Columbus. Speaker 1: Are, are charter schools big in Columbus? Speaker 2: Charter schools, there are many of them. The leash has been pulled in on these schools as far as--because a lot of them were just business deals for some of these folks who weren't educators at all. The state is, is monitoring them closer, yanking their licenses rather quickly if they don't come up to snuff. So there, there, there still are charter schools, but they're on a much tighter rein than before. Story_ID: 37050 Speaker 1: Something I didn't mention before just occurred to me. We were talking about the '70s [1970s]. Columbus [Ohio] was one of the first cities to get fully wired for cable TV. Speaker 2: Yeah, Time Warner cable and the old cube. We had a little interactive box. They were way ahead of their time when they did that. You could press a button if you liked something, press a button if you didn't or change channels and all that. Speaker 1: I remember 'Tony Brown's Journal'. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Being broadcast from Columbus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And urging people to get on their phone and vote. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: For one position or another. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah it's interesting. Story_ID: 37051 Speaker 1: Tell me what are some of your hope and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I want the violence to stop, primarily. Most of the stories we do that are shootings, homicides, have a black face on them. And I'm just so tired of that. It's not what we are, it's not what we're about. But if all you did was watch the top five minutes of every newscast, those kind of stories would percolate to the top. I want job opportunities for our young people. There are too many young black men and women out here doing nothing. They can't get jobs. They've got records and that hurts them so badly. The mayor has started an initiative to hire ex-felons. The state of Ohio, Governor [John R.] Kasich is starting an initiative to get opportunities for ex-felons. I mean let's face it, these folks who have done their time and have stayed clean since they got out of the joint, should have an opportunity to live a life. I mean if you don't, if you don't have a job, how can you do anything? You've got to have work. Education, more educational opportunities. I'd like to see our city schools work. You can't say it's the teachers always. A lot of these kids are growing up in homes where nobody reads, where nobody goes to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings, where just the whole notion of doing better and going to college is not a thought for them. We've got to some kind of way change that. I think our churches need to work on that. Some are doing it, but many more need to get involved that way for African Americans in the city, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37052 Speaker 1: You were, I think before we ended the last segment, we were talking, you were talking about your, your progress, you know in your profession and some of the obstacles you had faced. Though you didn't get into detail, but where do things--what did you have to really face and, and what are--where do things stand now I think for young people who are coming along, you know following in your footsteps? Speaker 2: In the business? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's pretty bad. We're getting ready to do the, the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] convention in, in New Orleans [Louisiana] here in June here 2012. And part of the problem we're seeing is that a lot of black reporters are being let go. Black managers are being let go. First hired--last hired and first fired, a lot of that is happening. There's a constriction going on in the business, in television. Radio has always been sort of a hard place to be because there's not a whole lot of news that--opportunities that happen there and it's all formulaic now and it's all pre-recorded, and there isn't even an opportunity for a disc jockey to show a personality. There are time and temp artists, you know what I mean? And in newspapers, newspapers are still having problems getting their circulation back and being profitable because of eBay and Craigslist stealing their classified ad revenues. You know thankfully we're in an election cycle where a lot of money is being thrown out there and that, that does help. But it is very--it's getting worse for us and there isn't, I don't think, a real concerted effort generally speaking, across the industry to recruit and hire minorities. Our station probably has the most minorities of any station in Columbus, and we have always had that. We've got probably five black reporters/anchors, one Asian American anchor, and one Hispanic reporter. So we've always--and, and I pride Channel 10 [WBNS-TV, Columbus, Ohio] about that because they send, they send somebody to the NABJ every year. We have a booth there and we're recruiting people. Whether we have the job opportunity at the time or not, we're still going to be there to take in resumes cause we always want to know who's available. And so that's been very, very valuable that way. But it's going to have to start from the top down. There are very few blacks in management, very few blacks in sales, very few blacks in decision making roles in these stations. You know they got a lot of, of anchors and reporters, but as far as being in the executive suite, there aren't that many. Story_ID: 37053 Speaker 1: When you look back over your career to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That I was fair. That I was compassionate. That I cared about people, cared about their plight and tried to change things for the better, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37054 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. You alluded to your children and, and your wife [Danielle Revish]. Speaker 2: Well my wife and I have been married thirty-eight years. Our kids are adults. We have three grandchildren. I pastor a church, the Unity Temple Church of God in Christ. I've been a minister, probably an ordained elder in the Church of God in Christ for thirty-plus years. Just this past year we decided to strike out on our own, started with the Bible Study in our home and then got a building and now we have a full fledged ministry that way. People wonder how can you do these two jobs? I've got a lot of support. A lot of people that can help and the way I work, it doesn't conflict with anything right now. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And did your parents [Estelle Saunders and Dewey McKinley Revish] get a chance to see you start off in the business? Speaker 2: My--no. My--I was, I was in radio when my mother was alive, and I was in TV while my mom, well my mom and dad were alive. But they never came to Columbus [Ohio] to see me on the air. Speaker 1: And you had just started, really. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was the year you started. Speaker 2: Right, right 1980, then my mom passed in '81 [1981], my dad ten weeks later. But they knew I was involved in broadcasting, you know, they knew that and they were very proud. But they never got a chance to see. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37055 Speaker 1: Well is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think we've hit it, really have. Speaker 1: All right well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Never really thought about that. People think I'm a, a genuinely nice guy, they feel that I'm open to them, that I'm humble. I think I am. How would I like to be remembered? That I cared about people, cared about their situations and tried to fix things when they were wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you sir, Story_ID: 37056 Speaker 1: All right, this is my high school graduation picture. East High School in Youngstown, Ohio, Class of 1967. Speaker 2: With a still camera. I don't have a scanner in my pocket. Next one. Speaker 1: Okay this was when we were in the Boy Scouts in Youngstown. I'm on the left standing there. Speaker 2: On this side? Speaker 1: Yeah, with my hands behind my back, that's me. And then the guy next to me is Putt [ph.] my cousin, and then my brother Joe [Joseph Revish], and then Herbie Williams on the other side. Speaker 2: That's 1962. Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Back in the photo. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Say that on the mic [microphone]. Speaker 1: The Boy Scouts, 1962, August 1962 we were taking a picture in front of one our friends' homes. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: This was an Emmy Award. I believe this was for, let's see that was Steve Harvey to the left there, my photographer. And this was for a story we did in the Persian Gulf on a destroyer. It was called The Tip of the Spear, yeah. Speaker 2: 1990? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. This was Ed Bradley. He came to town to do some meet and greet, and I got a chance to interview him. Very gracious man. Enjoyed talking to him. This was probably in the mid-'90s [1990s], somewhere in there. Speaker 2: This was, this was off Hyannis Port [Massachusetts]. We were reporting on the plane crash of John F. Kennedy, Jr. and his wife and others who were on that plane. And it just so happened that when--they didn't find that plane while we were there for the first four days. When we got to the airport to leave town, that's when they found it. Speaker 1: This is my wife Danielle, and this is an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] Award. This was one in Toledo [Ohio], I think in the late '80s [1980's]. I was 'Reporter of the Year'. Speaker 2: This was at a Suk [ph.] in Bahrain. This was our guide. He was showing us around the various stalls and businesses in that big, outdoor bazaar. That was probably 1992. Speaker 1: Bill Cosby came to town and this was a picture we took backstage, America's Father. Speaker 2: This was on the USS John Young, a destroyer in the Persian Gulf. We were intercepting contraband that was trying to be taken into Iraq over the high seas there. We spent like four days on that. Think it was '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: This was one of the, one of our early news sets. I think I was doing the noon newscast at that time. I'd say that was in the mid to late '80's [1980s]. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that little fake skyline. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: Yeah this was my original WBNS Radio [Columbus, Ohio] news crew. WBNS Radio, five minutes sooner. We'd go on the air with 55 with our news cast. And that was my first crew, 1974. Speaker 2: Okay and some folks think I dress sharp. My--I blame that on my wife. She's a professional model and stylist and she buys my clothes. And so this was a shot out of the 'Columbus Monthly' that week. Speaker 1: Okay that's it. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you gents, appreciate you spending the time...