 Story_ID: 35839 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Mathew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Clifford Lee Stanley. And that's C-L-I-F-F-O-R-D, L-E-E, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 31st, 1947, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], D.C. General Hospital which no longer exist. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Right now, I'm retired; but I'm pretty active. So I'll, I would say it's Dr. Clifford L. Stanley, Major General, United States Marine Corp (retired), and if you're with me at church it's Deacon Clifford Stanley, and if I'm writing a recommendation for you, it's the Honorable Dr. Clifford Stanley as former Under Secretary of Defense. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 6th of August, 2013 (laughter). Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in, let's see, 1440 New York Avenue. It's supposed to be Suite 600; but I'm on the 11th Floor, Room 306. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 35840 Speaker 1: And, all right so before we go on into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter). I'm sure you normally get a laugh like that. Believe it or not, my favorite is actually shrimp and grits. I love shrimp and grits. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm drooling right now. Pavlovian conditioning. (Laughter) That's my favorite and, yeah. That's my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I thought about that and, I'd have to say it goes between red and blue. And it's actually kinda almost equal. Even, when I even looked at that over a month ago, "What's your favorite color, Cliff?" And I actually said, "It's still red and blue." You know, so I mean it's two colors that I like the most. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like the spring. I love the spring. It's just so special to us. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I'd have to say right now it's going to be my future home which is in Charleston, South Carolina. We love the South in general and we particularly love Charleston and any chance I get to go there. Now, I'm saying that as a person who lives in Villanova, Pennsylvania and grew up in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], but my parents, mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] was from Virginia. My father was from South Carolina. I loved going to South Carolina on vacation, anytime to get away whatever, and my father, we grew up around Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] area which is in Conway [South Carolina], and so that's where we love to go. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really. I've thought about that too and you'd almost have to ask somebody else to see what I say a lot. I don't think I have it, but maybe during this interview something'll come out and you'll say you said that about thirty times, and so maybe something'll come out, but I can't think of a favorite phrase right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 35841 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side separately from your father's side-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and then we'll put them together. So can give us first your mother's full name and spelling for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Ellen Elnora Stanley, and that's E-L-L-E-N, E-L-N-O-R-A, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, her maiden name was Childress, Ellen Elnora Childress. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born October the 6th, 1922 in Moneta, Virginia. M-O-N-E-T-A, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them first of all? Speaker 2: Only what I've found on ancestry.com. I never, never knew her mother and father. I know their names only because I looked it up, and she had, basically there were nine of them. Eight brothers and sisters and a very close family, lived in farming, rural, you know, Virginia, but very close, very religious, and very supportive, very fond memories of a family that migrated. Some stayed in the Moneta, Roanoke, Virginia area. Some moved to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] area. Some moved to New Jersey, but we all stayed in touch and we have, in fact my mother's side of the family, we have reunions every year between Virginia, Washington, D.C. and New Jersey, but a very close-knit family and a family that taught us, you know, gave us the foundation of not only religion but also humility and no matter who you were the most important thing was is to not think too much of yourself, you know things like that. So I give her and my father a lot of credit for the way they raised us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hope that's answering your question. Speaker 1: Yes, and, well are there--but you didn't know your grandparents. Were they, had they already passed before you? Speaker 2: They, my mother says that I think it was her mother passed, I believe when I was really still an infant. So I've had no knowledge of her at all. Ida Childress and her father, Early Childress, I didn't know. I mean, he had died before I was born, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I never knew him. Speaker 1: So your grandfather's name was Early Childress? Speaker 2: Early Childress. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother? Speaker 2: Grandmother was Ida. I think it was Ida Ellen. I'll have to check that. Speaker 1: Okay. So but the older siblings were running the farm. Speaker 2: Oh, the older siblings, you know, to my knowledge were running the farm, and there was a big gap with age wise. I mean, my mother had a couple, my mother was the youngest of all of them and so she had sisters and brothers that were decade plus older than her who were fully adults. In fact, I remember going to Virginia to visit with her Aunt Maggie, one of her sisters, and Aunt Maggie was pretty old when Mom was pretty young and I remember that. So she had a number of sisters and brothers that looked after her so when Mom moved to D.C. for example an older brother, Uncle Elijah, actually kind of took her in, not kind of, took her in, gave her the first foundation, you know, and everything, and then another sister name, Roxie, about my mother's age but they were, you know, almost the same age, but a little, she, Roxie, was older and they were very close, but the family was very supportive and she had like I said sisters and brothers that were much older, and much older. Speaker 1: --Okay. So possibly born around 1905, or. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. Oh yeah. No question, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35842 Speaker 1: So are there any stories about how the family [Stanley's maternal family] acquired land in Virginia or-- Speaker 2: No, not at all. I never heard any of those. Never heard of really anything. I mean, when we would go to Virginia (laughter), we stayed with that Aunt Maggie most of the time. Sometimes with my mother's other sister named Aunt Bessie who lived right up the road about a mile or so. We'd usually walk up there. Old rickety dirt road. Aunt Maggie had pigs, you know, hogs and chickens, some cows. Aunt Bessie had more cows and a few chickens and, so everything, life centered around the farm and raising the crops at the right time. They had a couple of cars between them and church, almost everything. I mean, I can remember Friday, Saturday was preparation for church as you're getting ready to go and things like that, but not a lot of stories. Not a lot, which as I look back on it, even, I mean as an adult, I remember I was definitely curious, but we lost my mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] last year. In fact, almost a year to the day; but it was July 29th [2012] to Alzheimer's [disease] and, we were, I was asking her questions even before then, but just not that much would come out and so we just didn't get that much. Speaker 1: So do you think as an African American that's living in a segregated Virginia they were disinclined to talk about what was going on? Speaker 2: Well yeah, you could have, but you know believe it or not in, where they lived, we just didn't see it. It was really, even though I know it was segregated and even though I know what the culture was like at that time, it was transparent to us because of the closeness of the family in Virginia. I mean it was so transparent because where they lived, it was literally in the country and we were literally by ourselves and you didn't even see white people hardly even passing by except when we went to the store or something and I just never had what I would call a negative experience at all in Virginia. Never in that little area there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35843 Speaker 1: But your mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley], was she able to finish school there [Moneta, Roanoke, Virginia area] and everything? Speaker 2: No, Mom stopped in the, I want to say it was in the ninth or tenth grade. She later went back and got her equivalency certificates and everything; but she didn't finish. No. Speaker 1: Okay and so when she came to Washington [District of Columbia], what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: Well initially she, you know, was doing, I think it was housekeeping and housemaid and things like that and then she eventually became a licensed practical nurse, went to school for that and so she was an LPN and she retired from Walter Reed [Medical Center, Washington, D.C. area] as a licensed practical nurse, LPN. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she did get the schooling for that and did very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she have any, so she never really talked about what it was like growing up there or tell stories about it? Speaker 2: No, she didn't. I mean what she talked about mostly was actually making the best for me and my brother. My brother is Michael. I mean, I credit her mostly for the seeds of education, succeeding even though she couldn't help me with my homework and stuff. She said do your homework and she kept us focused and I mean, I couldn't even imagine for example, I mean there was, there was a home discipline that I couldn't even imagine even raising my eyebrow negatively to my mother (laughter). She was strict, but she was also soft and loving and so she just kind of, (unclear), you know, she was a phenomenal cook which is the reason I can't cook (laughter) because she just always had a spread out for us. You know, she always, and we ate as a family. I mean, it was things (unclear), family was so important to her and so those are the things that she centered her life around. In addition to working, I mean dinner was at, you know, let's say 5:30 or 6:00 [o' clock] and you ate at 5:30 or 6:00 and you didn't go very far up the street. You know, I mean you could hear your name, I mean go right to the porch, Clifford because she'd be calling you (laughter), and I mean, I'll never forget. That was Mom and so even though sometimes her shifts would change, you know, from 3:00 to 11:00, you know, or from 11:00 to 7:00, or whatever or something like that and we became latchkey kids or something like that, there was always still dinner at a certain time. Are you home? You know, things like that. You know, that was Mom's focus-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so we didn't get the stories, I mean, and to be frank, I'm not even sure I missed them because of the way the family was and when my family was together, her brothers and sisters and all of our cousins, you know, laughing, joking, having a good time, loving each other. That was it, and just laugh, and every once in a while, you know, something would come up, but it would be their little joke. I remember when Mom used to talk, for example, she tried to get over on us, like with pig Latin, you know (laughter) and she thought, you know, heck, I probably was five years old or something, you know, how kids can just pick up anything. You know, and next thing you know I gave away my secret cause I understood pig Latin. I didn't know it, I just learned it, you know and they said something, and I'll say we ate Latin pig (speaking pig Latin) (laughter) and next thing, I say oops, and they changed that tone right, real quick. You know, those kind of things, you know, 'cause kids learn. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 35844 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'll try and get them together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: --Yeah. --Okay. It's Joseph Franklin Stanley. That's J-O-S-E-P-H, F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Conway, South Carolina in October, 1920, and I'm, it was October 20th, 1920. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about your father's side? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Almost the same although I knew his father. I met his father and remember his father. His father was Joseph Franklin Stanley, Sr. and even though Dad never went by Junior, never, ever, he was still Joseph Franklin Stanley, Sr. and-- Speaker 1: Is there a reason for that? Speaker 2: I'm not sure and I, you know, I never had a chance to ask Dad. He just never went by Junior. He just never, you know. That wasn't, you know, so yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really, I wish I had asked that question now, but I never asked, but Dad, my father's father was an African Methodist Episcopalian minister, AME and we grew up AME, and again on my father's side, and like my father had one brother who was an AME minister. My Dad eventually was a trustee in an AME church and if you're picking up the picture here, church was like an integral part of our lives as we grew up. Dad retired from the CIA, Central Intelligence Agency, as a photographer working with them, but he had[Ges1]--and he also served in World War II. He was in the [U.S.] Army. I know he served in France. He never talked about it. I found his papers and every once in a while I'd ask him a question. I mean, literally he just never talked about his time in the service. He and my mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] met in Washington [District of Columbia] about the time he was going in and she waited for him and when he came back from the war[Ges2], you know, when they got married. Story_ID: 35845 Speaker 1: I don't wanna-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --speed past this question and that is like what[Ges3] are, are there any ancestral stories [of Stanley's paternal family] from, you know, about emancipation or reconstruction or any of that in South Carolina? Cause that was-- Speaker 2: Only the again, it was one the, no. The first, I mean, the short answer is no, and I don't know why, you know, as I think on it and have thought about it why Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] and Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] didn't talk about those things that much. We observed some things though because we used to drive to South Carolina from Washington and we'd go down Route 301 and there were positives and negatives. The negatives and also sometimes we'd take the train or the bus to Virginia wherever, we'd be still be going South[Ges4] and I remember one time we were young and Dad drove, we got some gas at a gas station and I remember very specifically the man not giving my father his change. You know, he gave him a larger amount and it was change due and Dad very tactfully said, you know, change because he gave him let's say he gave him a twenty [dollar bill] and he only gave him something back and the man used the "N" word and Dad said okay and left and what I remember most about that incident was my Dad's poise and the fact that he didn't curse, didn't set a bad example and just flowed with it and I'll never forget it. I mean, I'm like looking at Mom and Dad (laughter), I'm standing up. I'm small enough to stand up in the back seat and he's cool and I'm saying "Wow," and I know we didn't have a whole lot of money. That's in the '50s [1950s]; but-- Speaker 1: This says something about the culture that he was raised in, and he-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --what respect and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. You know as I look on it, I mean it's almost like a, my family on both sides were able to, from a Darwinian survival of the fittest, they sublimated a lot of things. They accepted a lot of things, and I know that had a lot to do with how I've sort of, you know, how I've dealt with different things because of just the way they were, and when we would go to South Carolina, when we would go to Conway, I remember we cropped tobacco. We made a dollar, you know, I don't know if, it wasn't very much; but, you know, a watermelon for lunch believe it or not, (laughter) and, but even there, there was a civility to the racism. You knew it (laughter). You knew that there was "Colored[Ges5] only" and this and that. I mean, Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] as it is today didn't exist then. It was Atlantic Beach, the colored beach and then Myrtle Beach[Ges6]. And, but you knew where the lines were and everybody was, you know, okay. You know. I didn't have a complaining family. Story_ID: 35846 Speaker 1: My father's [Joseph Franklin Stanley] brother, Connie Stanley, I know I'm getting a little bit off of the subject, here[Ges7], but Connie was very close. He was the only one on my father's side[Ges8]--actually, both sides of the family at that point who had gone to college and Connie majored in chemistry at the same school I went to. We joined the same fraternity and Connie is, obviously is a generation ahead of me and, but Connie Stanley, my father's brother, was killed when my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] was injured. I don't know if you know anything about that, but my wife was a sniper victim in 1975, and I know I'm getting ahead of myself with initially talking about my father, but this is sort of-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --leads into this, and it goes into how my father was and my mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley], but in, on April 13th, 1975, I was stationed in at the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland] and on a Sunday evening we were leaving my brother's [Michael Stanley] house after having dinner. Connie was with us, and my father and mother and our daughter who was three months old at that time. A guy named Michael Edward Perch opened up and shot us, shot at us, shot us as we were driving down Georgia Avenue approaching University Boulevard. He paralyzed my wife. She was the most severely injured of those that lived. So my wife uses a wheelchair now. She is a paraplegic and my uncle, Connie was killed. He was in the car about a block ahead of us 'cause[Ges9] we were separated by about a block because of a light, just missing a light. Shot him in the chest and the stomach. And he killed two people, a guy named John Sligh (ph[Ges10].) and my uncle and then the police killed Michael Edward Perch. At the time, you know, Roz was lucid. As I got out of the car, I didn't realize, you know, I was just driving my car and the passenger window broke, didn't know what happened because it, didn't expect anything to be breaking and we saw them pulling my uncle out and so they ran down, my father and I jumped out. My mother and father and my daughter were sitting in the back seat and Angie was just in their lap 'cause she was just three months old. She was just born and we went down and we saw that my uncle's eyes were opened. You know, looked like he was dead and then we looked back and saw the parademics pulling my wife out, and they took her to Holy Cross Hospital and they performed a laminectomy and I'll never forget the doctor's name was Dr. Palanko (ph.) and he indicated that, you know, obviously not only that she was paralyzed; but he hoped that she be able to walk again. I think now as I look back on it he was telling us that to give us some hope which we appreciated, but she went to Rush Rehabilitative Institute after that, but I'm getting in, what I'm alluding to here right now is that I had a family structure that even when that was happening I didn't think about suing the state. I didn't think about suing the police for not cordoning off the area, and we lucked up and found, you know, criminal injuries compensation and they took care of some things and we happened to, had insurance to help cover things. We've been blessed, but our family structure was just so tight and even though Connie, chemistry major, working at the Bureau of Standards. Fast forward, he has a daughter who now is a physician. A son who is a financial analyst and doing extremely well, who was actually on track to be an Olympic ice skater, but the shooting took him off track. He's Reggie, and I'm thinking back to the family that didn't talk about the things that happened and I don't believe there was a concerted effort to insulate us, but it just seem liked there was such strong, there was work ethic. There were ethics. There was humility, but at the same time pride. There was a sense of service. Dad was scout leader and also my Uncle Connie was the scoutmaster at our Boys Scouts and it was all the different things that you would say that you look back on that, (unclear) I'd say you were really fortunate to have, you know, family that supports you like that and that's sort of how it was, but no one ever, ever, talked about Jim Crow although you would see them. You know, even when we talked about Martin Luther King or different things like that, it was always a perspective, you know, it was, it would just help you to understand what this means or like if I said something inappropriate, long before my wife was injured and, I mean you know, persons in wheelchair. I mean, they were helping us to be sensitive to people who were disadvantaged or people who had physical disabilities or people had different things. I mean, like so when I joined the [U.S.] Marine Corp my wife, heck, I wasn't, I was just married. I mean I blazed the trail for the physically handicapped as a first lieutenant when I was Officer Candidate School, just to give a project for my people, not knowing that my wife was going to be injured later on, but just doing something because it was sensitive and this was the family structure that we had that taught us, but taught us without going into maybe some of the examples of real, of life. Story_ID: 35847 Speaker 1: They [Stanley's family's response to racial discrimination] seem to make the best of what happened without talking about it, but we weren't naive by any stretch of the imagination because I remember, you've heard of Glen Echo [Amusement Park; Maryland]? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Glen Echo, right out here. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: They had an amusement park, and I remember when Glen Echo Amusement Park was desegregated and I remember we were so happy that it was desegregated and opened up to us. And[Ges11] I remember taking a streetcar, the transportation to get out there with my friends and that lasted a nanosecond. I don't know how many months it was opened, but that bad boy closed down. I mean, they just, you know, as I look back on it I say okay, I know what happened. All of us started showing up and next thing you know they closed down the park. Speaker 2: So it had been segregated before? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was segregated before. Speaker 2: And you couldn't go Speaker 1: Couldn't go, and then when they integrated it, you know, but even then when it happened, you know, we, you know, I mean, you verbalize, okay I think this is why it's closing down. Now I still don't know why it closed down. They may have gone bankrupt. I'm not sure, but, that was, those were the variables. So, for example, where we lived on 10 Buchanan Street NE, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], when we moved there, there was one other black family on our block. It might have been one or two on surrounding blocks, Allison and Crittenden Street. When we went to, my brother [Michael Stanley] and I went to the school, I was the only black student in our fourth grade class. Well, there's two of us, me and then there was one, Doris, looked white; but, you know, she was black. I remember her, Doris Hayes and by the time I got to the sixth grade, the school was all black and the block was almost all black. [Made swift moving sound] Everybody went. You know, and even then, our parents [Joseph Franklin Stanley and Ellen Elnora Stanley] ever dwelled on negativity, helped us to understand what was happening without getting into the mush, so to speak, and kept focusing on study, and kept focusing on did you do your homework, and kept focusing on make sure you're here for dinner, and kept focusing on make sure you choose your friends wisely. And then if I ran in home, in the house, I remember, I'll never forget that time I got in a fight with this guy named Bradley outside, you know, and I ran in the house, you know, 'cause I didn't want to fight and Dad said, don't come in here. You better get out there and take care of yourself. Now, of course, he probably wouldn't say that today 'cause these people have guns and everything, but it was, you know, fist and stuff and I was running. And he said nah, nah, nah, nah. You go, you get right out of here, you know. I learned a lot then but it was[Ges12] all about character and about, you know, the different things that, you know, make a man and all that. And[Ges13] so back to my family history, I only knew my grandfather as a little boy and hearing him preach and again the same thing, you know, they loved you unconditionally. I don't remember his wife at all. And I think her name was Ellen; but I'm not even--sketchy on that, but I don't even know. Speaker 2: But that wasn't your grandmother? Speaker 1: His, my grandmother, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but I don't even remember her, and my father had, I wanna say it was seven of them [siblings], I believe. Yeah, seven of them. Story_ID: 35848 Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me about Michael Edward Pearch. Now, he's a. You said he's a white guy. Who was and was he? Did he have a military background, or? Speaker 2: Yes, Michael Edward Pearch has--I'm only going by what the newspaper said--but the newspaper said that he was an [U.S.] Army veteran. And the paper said he had a tumor on his brain or something. But he had a 45 caliber pistol and he had a satchel full of 45 magazines. And 45, as you may know, is a very lethal round. And so he had the. As he was. As he did his shooting on April 13th, 1975 what happened was--as I mentioned earlier, my uncle was separated by about a block 'cause we were leaving the same place but we missed a light and he got the light. And so he shot my uncle and shot the guy named John Sligh. The police, we--when we pulled up a block away we could see the police cars. But what the police had seen was or heard was there was shooting, but Michael Edward Pearch blended in with the crowd and was just walking up the street. Not shooting anybody. He was walking passed and then. Speaker 1: So he was out on the street with this-- Speaker 2: --with this-- Speaker 1: --with this 45 handgun-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Right-- Speaker 1: --just. And he was shooting when he saw. Speaker 2: --when he saw black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so as he walked up the street. You know, I mean, and he just walked passed people casually. He'd see another black target of opportunity and he'd shoot. So he shot a guy named Navy. I think his name was Harold Navy. A young boy who was working at a restaurant or store and he was walking across the street with a bag. Shot him and then my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] was shot. And he, we were just driving. We were actually just driving down the street. Moving fairly slow because I was looking for a gas station cause I had to drive back to Annapolis [Maryland], and had to take my parents [Joseph Franklin Stanley and Ellen Elnora Stanley] home. And we were just driving straight down Georgia Avenue. He shot in our car twice because we were moving. The first shot hit the passenger's window. And my wife actually saw something. Didn't know what it was, and she ducked which probably saved her life but the bullet hit her in the back, and, you know, paralyzed her. And then, because we were moving, the next shot actually went to the trunk of the car. And so I didn't know what had happened and I got out and everybody said get down, get down. I mean literally. All the white folks around us just said get down, get down because he wasn't shooting them. He was just shooting black folk. Anyway, he ended up shooting one more person or a couple more people, but there was a total of five injured, two killed, and we heard the gunshots around the corner, pow, pow, pow, pow, pow. And as I learned from the paper, the police told him to put his weapon down. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He didn't. And they shot him and killed him. And we took Roz to Holy Cross Hospital and she had the presence of mind even as she was going. She said isn't this where George Wallace came? Because he had been shot, you know, sometime before and had also gone to Holy Cross. And they took Michael Edward Pearch's body to the same place. We got, you know, and we got through that. I mean it was. But when you say, you got through it, I mean we, I mean you live with this. This is not, you know. Our daughter [Angela Stanley] now is, she's a [U.S.] Navy nurse. She's a nurse practitioner and she is a commander (unclear) in the Navy and also getting her doctorate degree in nurse practitioner at Medical University of South Carolina. So she's--she works for the Navy Surgeon General right now but she gets her doctorate in December. But I think that life's circumstances moved her almost in that direction. So she actually blends between both of us. Me, military, and taking care of Mom. You know, again family. That kind of thing. Speaker 1: Now you were twenty-seven years old? Speaker 2: I was twenty-eight, when that-- Speaker 1: --28. 28. Okay-- Speaker 2: --when that happened. Speaker 1: So you were a young officer [in the U.S. Marine Corps]-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --but. Speaker 2: --My wife was twenty-six. Story_ID: 35849 Speaker 1: Were you a captain [in the U.S. Marine Corps] by that time? Speaker 2: I was a captain. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how did it? Did it change you fundamentally in any way, this incident? Speaker 2: Well yes and no. But I will say definitely yes on some pretty important things. I was doing okay in my career at that point. My career took off after that because I actually didn't care. I don't want to say didn't care. But I wasn't really overly concerned about fitness report evaluations, how someone wrote, you know, evaluated me, my assessments as much as I may have been before because there were more things important in life than how this person viewed me. And that aelon (unclear) so to speak, that attitude took off and I wasn't bitter. I was thankful. But at the same time I've learned, you know, like in a bas-relief (unclear) just how temporary life can be. And how your life can change so fundamentally. So quickly. Because no one. We would have never have anticipated something like that happening. An uncle that you're really close with. Just beginning your life. We wanted to have more children and we didn't. And, you know, so, and so I know that prepared us, me and my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley], and my family to endure even more. But I think we were prepared even before then with different things because of what we went through, you know, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now this was at Georgia Avenue? Around where? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Georgia Avenue and Wheaton. The Wheaton Plaza. Wheaton Boulevard, I think it is. Something like that-- Speaker 1: It's out there by-- Speaker 2: --it's in Wheaton, Maryland. University Boulevard. I said Wheaton Boulevard-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --It's University. It's Georgia and University Boulevard which is in Wheaton, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Georgia and University Boulevard. Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. This is in 1975. Story_ID: 35850 Speaker 1: Let me, let me-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --go back to-- Speaker 2: --Right. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --your father [Joseph Franklin Stanley], if I can. Your father grew up in rural South Carolina-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Conway. Speaker 2: --Uh, huh. Speaker 1: And so he was able to finish school in Conway. Then go on to college? Speaker 2: He didn't. He wanted to go to dental school. He finished high school. And I even, I saw. I use to play with the little teeth that were (laughter). That he kept in a box, you know. I think he studied something in dentistry. I'm not exactly sure what it was. But he, I don't know the sequence of things. Of when he was drafted. I know he was drafted. Speaker 1: Now where was he in college? Speaker 2: He didn't. He didn't go to college-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --he went to-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --a dental- Speaker 1: --Okay. --school or some type of-- Speaker 2: --Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --of specialty school. Speaker 2: So he wanted to be a dentist and he went to--do you know the name of it? Speaker 1: Nah, I don't. Yeah, I don't. I just know what, his stuff was there. You know, I saw the stuff and everything. And, you know, we talked about that once but he became a guard initially and then worked his way into the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and--. Speaker 2: So he, he was drafted? This was during World, World War II. Speaker 1: --War II. He was drafted. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was born in 1920. Speaker 1: --Should be 1920-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --1920. Speaker 2: Okay, so he is drafted. Enters World War II. Is, does he serve overseas? Speaker 1: He did. He went to. I know he went to France but he never really talked about it. He was in, you know, segregated troops. And he did his time and he got out. And we, I mean, most of what I even learned there I got from his discharge papers, you know. 'Cause he didn't talk about it. Story_ID: 35851 Speaker 1: Well he [Stanley's father, Joseph Franklin Stanley] met your mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. Is this before he went over to the war, or? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He met Mom. I know before he went. And they didn't get married. They got married when he got back, you know. So and he came back thankfully. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story about how and where they met? Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter). Yeah, I think-well, I've kinda pieced this together. I know that my mother and aunt, her sister, my Aunt Roxie were together. And, you know, I remember them laughing about who's that cute guy over there and this guy and, you know, they'd talk to him. And oh I like him a lot, you know. They met and they dated and they went out. And I know they had some of their favorite places they went to. I don't remember the name of their favorite places they went to, but they did. And they wrote. You know, while he was gone [World War II]. And, you know, of course, when you go to war then, they're gone for a long time, I mean, it's I think they might have been gone a couple of years just about. And he came back. And, of course, she was still waiting for him and they got married. And I came along shortly thereafter. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35852 Speaker 1: So when your dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] came back [from World War II] he was discharged from the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was discharged. Yes. Speaker 1: And now how did he get involved with the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency]? Speaker 2: Well, eventually, I'm not sure exactly how that job process went. I just know that he was a guard for a while and he was doing other kinds of jobs but he was always-- Speaker 1: Was he a guard at a government? Speaker 2: --Yeah. It is government- Speaker 1: --Yeah-- Speaker 2: --it was government kind job, job. And may have even been the CIA but he got the job with the CIA and in fact did very well. Like I said he was working as a photographer and doing different things. And, of course, that job in that business it might have been all the reason why he didn't talk too much. Because he didn't talk too much. I remember when the Cuban Missile Crisis happened he came home with an envelope and said if something happens open this envelope. If nothing happened, don't open this envelope. I said okay. And we didn't open the envelope. (Laughter) So and nothing happened, you know, in turn of us getting nuked or bombed or anything like that. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a photographer for the CIA? Now this is-- Speaker 2: --Yeah-- Speaker 1: --really-- Speaker 2: --Yeah-- Speaker 1: --an interesting-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --occupation. This is one of the most interesting ones that I've ever heard of-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --that anybody's father ever had. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah. Speaker 1: So did. Was he a photographer in the [U.S.] Army during the war? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --I don't think he was. No, he wasn't a photographer. I don't know exactly what his specialty was. I'd have to go back and look at what his papers. But he wasn't infantry either. So, but I won't even speculate as to what he did, you know, when he was in. We never even talked about it. Don't know. Speaker 1: But he served in France. Speaker 2: He served in France. I know he served in France-- Speaker 1: --Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: That said. It's interesting. So I mean as a black man in the Army in World- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --in World War II-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --he's serving. I mean, now. Did he, he didn't enter as an officer or anything? Speaker 2: No, no, no. He was enlisted. I could probably. I'm thinking it but didn't verbalize it. Nah, he was enlisted. Speaker 1: Okay. And did he go to college after he came back? Speaker 2: No, no. He never went to college. Other than the, you know, the school that he went to or the schools that he went to just to kinda get himself up to speed to where he was, trade schools or professional schools whatever. But he didn't go to college. My uncle [Connie] was the only one that actually graduated. Speaker 1: Now was he trained to use a special, specialized cameras or anything, or? Speaker 2: I think, yeah-- Speaker 1: --Both small cameras or-- Speaker 2: --he was-- Speaker 1: --or Speaker 2: --and you know, he was good at it. But you know, it's interesting even with his specialty as a photographer. He wasn't taking--he didn't take a whole lot of pictures at home and things like that. He just was good at what he did, you know. Speaker 1: The CIA. You know, when you think of them, you think of international-- Speaker 2: --Uh, huh. Speaker 1: --you know. Espionage and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And not in so much domestic with-- Speaker 2: --Right. Speaker 1: --So did he. Do you know if he? Did he travel a lot? Speaker 2: He had--we had the opportunity and I was actually a little disappointed that he didn't. I remember that we didn't because he chose not to and so because. He had a good friend. I'll never forget him. It was Mr. Tate. Who at that same time both were offered opportunities to go abroad, to go overseas. Mr. Tate took him up on it and they went. Nah. Nah, excuse me that was Mr. Miles. (Laughter) I get these names mixed up. It was Mr. Miles actually went. Dad decided to stay home and we weren't in really. My brother [Michael Stanley] and I really weren't included that conversation. It was one I just heard him and Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley], you know, talking about. Hi, what do you think? Nah, nah, I'm going to stay here, you know. And so we didn't take that opportunity. I think there were promotion opportunities. There are opportunities for broadening and clearly there would have been opportunities too, for us, to become. Mike and my brother, myself. My brother and I to become, you know, a little bit more exposed to different things, different educational systems and things like that. So we ended up becoming, you know, stuck right there in Washington [District of Columbia]. You know, stuck right here in Washington. You know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He had the opportunity. I know he did. Because I remember being not too happy about that, you know. Story_ID: 35853 Speaker 1: All right. Well. When you think about your parents' [Joseph Franklin Stanley and Ellen Elnora Stanley] personalities-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --or dispositions-- Speaker 2: --uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --or sense of humor. How they walked? How they talked? How they approached situations? What they looked like? Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Ah, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my mother. First of all, I look like her and I didn't realize how much I look like her until I, she passed away and I started looking at pictures. Said geeze. (Laughter). Not kidding you. I mean I had, you know. Roz [Stanley's wife, Rosalyn H. Stanley] and other people said, oh you're your mother's child. They would say it. But I could never see it when we were living. You know, when she was living. I could never see it. And after she passed I started looking. I said wow. (Laughter) You know, but not only that. Also disposition. I'm actually pretty low key, soft. Not argumentative. Even though I succeeded in the [U.S.] Marine Corps because I had this blend of (sound of air blowing fast)--I can go after you. I mean not, you know. So it's not an issue. And so I took--so Dad gave me some significant pieces there. But I also had the blend of Mom's patience. And, you know, Mom was--she didn't have a lot of education. She was--she struggled with directions for example. I mean she was. I mean we had, we had bread crumbs for how she got from our house to her sister's house and we always went the same way. And I'm saying why are we going this way? You know, I'll be thinking that. And I lived. When we lived in down in Quantico [Virginia], she would never come by herself because the lines, the signs on the 14th Street Bridge would be confusing to her. I mean she, you know. I mean it could be confusing to you. You look and you know you got 110, 95, 395, you know. This street here, I mean, you know, so and so. She would never come by herself. Dad would either always be with her and then when, you know, Dad passed away, one of her friends or somebody else would come with her. Mom would never come. But those--the lessons I got (Laughter) from both of them actually helped me a lot to, you know, sort of become the person that I am. Whether or not that's valid or not. And fast forward, me and some buddies right now are actually starting an executive coaching business. I mean literally I'm taking what I learned formally and informally and we're putting that to work in a business to actually help executives lead and to become better at whatever they do. And so we're doing that now and I'm practicing some of the things that I was taught informally. That kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hope I answered your question. Speaker 1: Yeah, you did. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Story_ID: 35854 Speaker 1: Well, a little bit more about what. Now what was your father's [Joseph Franklin Stanley] personality like? Speaker 2: Dad was a. Dad didn't have a whole lot of patience. Dad was a. Wow. As I, you know, I think about it now. He just didn't have a whole lot of patience and that bothered me. If I didn't understand something and was sitting there doing a math problem or something, he wasn't very patience. Mom couldn't help me with the math problem. But she was extremely patience, you know. So I learned on one hand to get the math problem, but at the same time, I defaulted to the other side. Dad was quick to laugh. Very social. Morally straight and solid. But then we missed some things. Meaning, go back to some of the things. Okay. One of the dichotomies of Dad was that Dad loved to fish. But guess what? He never took me fishing. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: He loved to fish. And then when I was an adult. Just about finishing college. He took, you know, I went fishing with him. One time with his buddies, you know, that kind of thing. But he loved to fish, you know. And so that's the kind of. And then so he was a man who was complex. Dad was not a person to say, I love you. But you knew he loved you. Mom gushed all over you. Mom (laughter) always said she loved me (laughing), you know. And she was always there. But then Dad. When Dad was sick and was dying of cancer, he said these boys will take care of you. Make sure you take care of your mamma. And, of course, we told him, we loved him, you know. So he always had his plumline straight. But he was Dad. And so you respected that and you loved that. Both Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] and Dad would spank us now. Don't get me wrong. However, Mom was always the softer one and she'd say wait til your Dad come home. (Laughter) So, if I stepped across the line and did something, you know. You know, Dad was primarily the disciplinarian. Mom could discipline and would discipline. But you could almost see it was hurting her more (laughter) than it was hurting me (laughter) you know, when she was doing it. Those are things you don't necessarily see at the time, but you look back on and you say, wow. But we loved Dad and we respected Dad and I miss him. And he was so proud when I joined the Marine Corps. The fact that I even joined, much less an officer. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: The fact that I joined. He was proud. And Mom was too. But like parents, they're a little worried. And although I didn't go to Vietnam. When I had orders to Vietnam both my parents were proud and didn't convey what you would call the hyper-parent worry, that something might happen. Of course, something might happen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but they were good parents, you know. Story_ID: 35855 Speaker 1: Now you've got a brother? Speaker 2: A brother, Michael. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's just the two of you? Speaker 2: Just the two of us. Speaker 1: Okay, and your brother is younger than you? Speaker 2: He's a--yeah. He's almost two years younger. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, a year and eleven months younger. And we're almost operated in different peer groups because of those two years. But still close. We've gotten closer over the years. That's an opening wedge to boys. A lot of sibling rivalry when we were growing up. Because unbeknownst to me and I learned this later. Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] always compared me, you know, or him to me always. I didn't know that as I was growing up. She would say things like, as I found out later, 'cause I asked Mom about it. And she'd say how come you not cutting the grass like Clifford cuts it, you know? 'Cause when I cut the grass, I really cut the grass. I mean, I just didn't cut it. I trimmed it up. I swept. It wasn't trying to do anything but just, I just. When I washed the windows. I washed the windows. So when I hustled in the neighborhood. I hustled. When I say hustle, I'm talking about paperboy, selling 'Jet' magazines. I sold a 'Washington Post', the 'Washington Times', or 'The Washington'. It was a news thing. I mean it was. There were like three different paper routes I would take. And I would always independently, if you lived close to me you didn't have to worry about if you were old. I got you. I got. I shoveled your snow. I cut your grass and I washed your windows and I did other little odd jobs and my brother wasn't inclined to do that, you know, as we were growing up. And so there was a lot of sibling rivalry. A lot. I went to college. He did not. I encouraged him to go to college. He did not. He's been married three times. I've been married one time, you know. Things like that. I've been married forty-two years. Mike's now passed the 12, 13 year mark or something like that with his current marriage. You know, that kind of thing. But still he never, you know. I mean. He retired as a, from a superior court. Went to his retirement dinner and (unclear) party. And, I mean, we went--. Things got extreme--a lot better even though we're close. Always loved him. When I was ordained as a deacon in our church and when that happened he saw another part of me which was I teach bible study. And so he could see some things that he may not have been able to see before and maybe it wasn't there before. I'm not sure. But the bottomline is that we got even closer after that. Took some time. Speaker 1: Now, what does he do for living? Speaker 2: Right now he's retired. And he is retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean retired. Yes. So we're like polar opposite even there. So right now after leaving the government, the D.C. [District of Columbia] government. Mike retired. I mean I can call him right now and he's just getting up or chilling out. Mike's had a heart attack. He just had a stint removed from his heart, you know. Or just, or some kind of operation to kind of expand the stint or something like that. Still smokes. We're just in different places. And we talk when I call him mostly and if he's calling me, I'm worried that something happened. Like, oh Lord who died, or whatever. So he allowed me to handle most of Mom's affairs. In fact all of them. I did the power of attorney. All of the business ends of it. I sold the house. I cleaned the house out. Almost solo. In fact I was working in Minnesota just to give you an example. I'm working in Minnesota. I'm living in Pennsylvania. Mike lives fifteen minutes away from Mom and now Mom's in assisted living. We're selling the house. I had to sell the house. I had to go into the house. I had to clean everything out. Solo. A couple of cousins came by to take some clothes off our hands and things like that. Resolved that and then I sold the house and then handled the finances and set up the accounts, you know, and managed it all. And I'm only saying that because he just wasn't comfortable doing those things. And I just said okay. Well okay. We got it and we'll do it and no animus. No issues. Just do it. And then trust. And as we divvy up different things. Trust. He trust me. And just took care of things. So I don't have any heavy expectations of what he, you know. He would expect of anything like that. But we're definitely same family. There was a time when I was growing up I was wondering if we were the same family. 'Cause I was saying, man we are different. Man. (Laughter). But we are. (Laughter) Bloodlines are the same, you know. And he looks more like Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley]. I kinda look more like Mom and, you know. That's the way it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 35856 Speaker 1: Now, so it's just the four of you growing up in the household? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well--Nah. Nah. I mean by the time I was probably a teenager, probably, yeah early teenager. We had a number of different cousins who would come live with us. And they would pass through. Even earlier than that. My mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley]--one of my mother's sister lived--. We always had somebody passing through and staying with us for extended periods of time. Mother's, my Mom's sister, Aunt Pearl lived with us. Year. A couple of years maybe. Speaker 1: So that's almost like the family tradition on your mother's side-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with that tie knit-- Speaker 2: --Come right through. But the same things on my Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley]. Because my Dad had some nieces who came up and we're all very close. And one of them closer. So close in fact Velmina [ph.]. She's literally. I call her my sister. Because she's, we're that close. We're that close. We're very close. In fact I'm closer to her than I am to my brother [Michael Stanley], you know. Velmea, you know. So we always had somebody coming through to stay with us for extended periods of time. And then occasionally we had people coming through who stayed, you know. A week. A couple weeks, whatever. But it was that kind of thing. And then on my mother's side she had one sister. I mentioned Roxie once. Who lived on G Street Northeast [Washington, District of Columbia]. And Roxie's door was. Aunt Roxie's door was always open. There was always activity. I mean, I don't even know how anybody can live like that. I mean it was like. It was the, an open door to the street. Everyone was always in there and they were drinking and they were eating crabs and doing whatever. But they were always so. I mean I never went over there and it wasn't like a crowd of people on the porch and in the house. Chilling, talking, laughing, talking, whatever. Always over at Aunt Roxie's house. Always. And then the same street. Up the street. Her brother was polar opposite. Cab driver. But deacon in the church and nobody was ever in there, you know. I mean, it was like, you know, [makes "poof" sound], you know. So we would go over his house occasionally. But we always go by Aunt Roxie and just hang out, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35857 Speaker 1: Now this leads to a question we always ask. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Crab-- Speaker 1: --Now you grew up in Northeast [Washington, District of Columbia]. Speaker 2: --I grew up on. I started out Benning Road Northeast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 54th Street. Then we went to Savannah Terrace at Southeast. And I didn't forget 1922 Savannah Terrace which was an apartment which is no longer there. I drove by there one time with my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] just to see what was there and it's gone now. They've put up something else. And then we moved to 10 Buchanan Street Northeast. Those are places I remember. And they. I remember. I can remember visions of being small and remember walking under the dining room table in one of the places we lived and. Speaker 1: Is that your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I can remember that. I can remember walking under the table. I can remember playing and having my own playpen under a dining room table and standing straight up. I can remember it, you know. My aunt reminds me of the fact that I use to love her red pocketbook. I don't remember that. But she said you loved my red pocketbook. I just (makes a sound). There was always--the sounds were always laughter. Laughter and fun and all that. And chicken was always cooking in the background. You can, you can, you know. You can invariably. Some chicken and roast beef or something like that. I mean they can smell that. Steamed crabs. Whoop. I mean I don't even--well, you know, I guess we'd be going in the poorhouse if we ate them now. Cause they're so expensive. But they'd buy a bushel of crabs and it just be a handful of us and we'll clean that bushel of crabs. I mean it would be--. So I learned how to eat crab. I don't even know what age I was when I learned how to eat crabs. It just. Just knew. Not a lot of alcohol. Didn't even hardly smell it. Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] and Dad [Jpseph Franklin Stanley] loved music. They would have parties down in the basement. They had their parties and not a whole lot. But they have parties and put the red light and put a little bit of the good music and I remember the Birdland and the, you know, (hums a tune) and stuff like that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know. And some of the old singers and we would, you know. I learned how to dance and had good rhythm. And I remember even surprising some of my classmates who were shocked that I could dance the way I could. Cause I mean I could get down. I could still pick up a dance pretty quick, you know. I can, I can go to a dance now. Look at a line dance. Never having seen it before and before I leave, and before that song is over, I got most of it down. I might not be able to repeat the line dance. But I can repeat it, you know. That kind of thing. So but the sights and sounds of happiness, laughter, cooking. Foods were fairly routine whether we were in Virginia, South Carolina, Washington, D.C. or New Jersey. And the New Jersey part of my mother's family became my closest family. They actually became--they've became the closest because she had a brother named Uncle Louie. And Uncle Louie had five sons and we are tight. The five sons. One is a year older than me. One's a year younger. Two are, you know, not quite a bit younger. But, you know, they're now in their fifties, you know. And I'm sixty-six [years old] and then one passed away. But we were very close. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35858 Speaker 1: All right. So we were talking about sights and sounds and smells. Speaker 2: --Right. Right-- Speaker 1: --Right. So-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, it was. But it was. I just always remember just like I said it was. Just happiness. It was food almost always around. I can't believe that even. I remember never having a problem with weight because I would eat like there's no tomorrow and couldn't gain a pound. And I remember not telling the truth. I lied about my weight when, when I went to college. 'Cause I was embarrassed. 'Cause I was so light. I wasn't, I was barely a 120 [pounds; weight] when I went to South Carolina to go to school. And by the time I finished my freshman year, I was 160. But that was, I just matured, you know. And I went back and they said whoa. (Laughter) Compared to where I was when I left, you know. I mean I was a twig, you know, and that kinda. I was on track team. You know, stuff like that. But I just, you know, was small. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: It was good times though. Speaker 1: Aah, now. Aah, so. Now you're an industrialist youth it sounds like. Doing all-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --kind of things. Ah. What was? Did you have a favorite little, ah? Well, I know you liked to. It seems as though you were a productive youth. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You made your own money apparently. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Working and--. Speaker 2: I did. Yeah. Speaker 1: So did you have any time for any other, anything else? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I mean I was. I was a Cub Scout, Boy Scout and Explorer. I enjoyed that. I was a. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you said your, was your dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] the scoutmaster? Speaker 2: He was. He was the assistant scoutmaster. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the assistant scoutmaster 'cause they had several of those. And my uncle was actually the scoutmaster. We were. I was in Civil Air Patrol. I was in the Civil Air Patrol National Capillary Drill Team. Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to go up in a plane? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah, went up in a plane. And didn't go in the [U.S.] Air Force. But I actually was going to go in the Air Force. And I remember I wore glasses. I still wear glasses and they said I couldn't be a pilot. And I said I didn't want to be in the, you know, I didn't want to be in the backseat. You know, I just had my own rationale. But the bottomline was, and the waiting list was long too. This is Vietnam War and all that and everything. But back to some of the things I did. You know, I always sang. I was in the choir at my church. I was also a neighborhood civic leader and so that also was part of my life then-- Speaker 1: --Okay-- Speaker 2: --so early.-- Speaker 1: --But in terms of block club-- Speaker 2: --Block club. Yeah-- Speaker 1: --that sort of thing. Speaker 2: --Yeah, I was, I was like the president of our civic association. The Youth Civic Association, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause a lot of communities don't have a Youth Civic-- Speaker 2: --Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Association-- Speaker 2: --Right. Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and don't-- Speaker 2: --yeah-- Speaker 1: --even have an adult one-- Speaker 2: --Right, right. Yeah. Speaker 1: --so. Speaker 2: We had an adult one and youth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I did that and--. Speaker 1: Was there a name for the association? Speaker 2: Nah. Just remember. Just the civic association was the name of the civic association. Speaker 1: And that's, that's for which neighborhood? Speaker 2: That was right there in Fort Totten, Buchanan, Crittenden, North Capitol was in that little area at Northeast Washington [District of Columbia]. We had three blocks or four blocks if you included North Capitol. But it was Crittenden Street, Buchanan Street and Alison Street, and we had. Okay it must've been four because then you had Fort Totten Drive. So Fort Totten. Fort Totten and North Capitol had the top bounds and then you had five. Okay five streets and then you had Alison, Buchanan and Crittenden Street. And that was our association. I don't know if it was the Fort Totten Civic Association or what. But the bottomline was, it was something that we did early on. Story_ID: 35859 Speaker 1: What was the main street through your neighborhood [in Washington, District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: Main street was North Capitol-- Speaker 1: --North Capitol. Speaker 2: --bounded. Yeah, that was the main one. Only a handful of people lived on North Capitol because the main street--we, of course, Buchanan and--Buchanan and Crittenden Street were like our lifeblood, you know. That was where all the. Most of us lived. Handful of us lived on the small street, Alison Street. And then a handful lived on Fort Totten Drive. That was most of it. Speaker 1: This is mostly a black community, right? Speaker 2: Mostly black. By the time we're, like I said, by the time I got to sixth grade, it was almost all black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I remember as early as the third [grade], it might have been in third grade. I remember participating in salve contest. Selling salve and-- Speaker 1: --(unclear), salve-- Speaker 2: --yeah. Just a little can of salve-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right-- Speaker 2: --just salve-- Speaker 1: --What kind of salve is this? Is this-- Speaker 2: --just the salve you-- Speaker 1: --What is this for?-- Speaker 2: --put on your hands, you know-- Speaker 1: --This for?-- Speaker 2: --and whatever. And it was. It was just something that you did. I mean it was a contest-- Speaker 1: --Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --and I sold the most salve in my elementary school. I could. I'll never forget it. And so I got a baseball bat and a ball. And it was like the first thing I had kinda won. You know, that was one thing. I remember being in the fourth grade and at Garfield Elementary School on, I think it's Alabama Avenue, Southeast Washington. And my teacher made me a lieutenant in the school patrols. I was a fourth grader. Already an officer in the school patrol and I didn't really appreciate the full significance of that, but it was. When I understood the significance is when I went to Keene Elementary the very next year. As we transferred to the new school, you know, on Buchanan Street. And remember now, it was pretty much all white. And I'll never forget Mrs. Armstrong, cause she was the. She was my homeroom teacher. And they didn't call her homeroom teacher, but she was my teacher. And so I applied to be a patrol, school patrol boy. Became a school patrol boy. Now I'm just a private now. And I didn't turn in a homework assignment one day. It was a spelling test. I don't why I didn't turn it in. Either forget or something. They say can't turn in your homework. Can't be a school patrol. No debate. No discussion. That's it. And so the person that integrated the school patrol at Keene was now off. I was crushed, but I didn't go home and complain to Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley]. Didn't do all that. Just okay. Got it. I was hurt. But that was it. So from lieutenant to private to nothing, you know. That sort of kinda happened. So that was fourth grade. So it must've been third grade that I was actually lieutenant in the school board. Cause I'm. Cause we was. Cause I did the 4th, 5th and 6th at Keene. So it was the third grade-- Speaker 1: --Okay-- Speaker 2: --that I was actually lieutenant. I mean I was doing okay and good student. And I struggled initially at Keene because they were in a different place in math. I remember. That's why I remember the math stories of my Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley]. Because whereas we may have been, let's say, on the five tables or whatever it was in multiplication or sixes. At Keene they had already moved to division and, you know, I'm still struggling with the multiplication. And so it became, you know, it was even more challenging and daunting. I'll just never forget it. So, but I was a good student, you know. Story_ID: 35860 Speaker 1: But I probably would have been a better student [in elementary school in Washington, District of Columbia] if I'd, you know, had an opportunity to kind of not deal with some of the other social things that were going on. There were fights. You know, they were the kind of. Speaker 2: Fights related to the integration of the school? Speaker 1: Integration-- Speaker 2: --Okay-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --Were there any other black students there? Speaker 1: Not at the time.-- Speaker 2: --As well as you- Speaker 1: --Not in the fourth grade. Speaker 2: So everybody was fighting you? (Laughter) Speaker 1: Nah, not everybody-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --but there were like-- Speaker 2: --Okay (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: --little picking things-- Speaker 2: --Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, just occasionally. Not, nothing to kinda make you paranoid schizophrenic. But enough to be realistic to the fact-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --that there were people who, you know, took exception and then they would push on you, or pick on you, or something like that. I fought back. It's no problem, you know. And-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --so. They also--they had what they call a school lunch visitation program. And this is when things started changing real quick. What--the normal--what would happen in the fourth grade--and I'm not sure exactly when it went away. But the students would go home with other students for lunch. And so, you know, I would bring my white classmates to my home for lunch or whatever it was. And they would reciprocate and you'd go to their home. That was changing pretty fast though. And next thing, you know, this lunch program went away. I wasn't thinking about it then. It just stopped and then the complexion of the school started changing, you know. Things like that. Speaker 2: Do you think that white parents objected to their-- Speaker 1: I mean that that's what my thinking would be-- Speaker 2: --children going to-- Speaker 1: --but the program stopped before all the students changed. It's just the program just stopped. And so it's logical to me that that's probably what drove it, you know. You know from the decision point. But I've got the benefit now of hindsight even long after I left it. But bottomline, those are the things that I saw- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: It happened. Speaker 2: So you enter in the fourth grade but-- Speaker 1: --Uh-huh-- Speaker 2: --you said by sixth grade-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, it was-- Speaker 2: --It was all black-- Speaker 1: --It was pretty much all black. I mean there were a few whites still there. Don't get me wrong. Definitely was still there. But I can. If I can resurrect a picture that I took of my sixth grade graduation picture, there were a few white students in my class graduating. But not many-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: --as opposed to the 4th grade. It was one me. They had a baby contest. I remember. They had baby pictures and the purpose of the baby pictures was, and this is fourth grade to see if we can guess who's who's from the baby pictures. There is no way. I mean. (Laughter) That's what happened. Doris, like I said looked white so she, they didn't pick her out. Me I was eliminated immediately-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: They said okay that's Clifford, you know. So, yeah. Okay, that's me. Yeah, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 35861 Speaker 1: Okay. So this is-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --Ah. Oh, I didn't. Like where did. You started school in Northeast [Washington, District of Columbia], right? Speaker 2: --I- Speaker 1: --at another, I mean. Speaker 2: --I started school actually in Southeast. Speaker 1: Southeast. Okay. So this was be at Garfield? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Garfield. Speaker 1: Okay, so you've started grade-- Speaker 2: --Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --Yeah. Yeah. Garfield at kindergarten up to the third grade. And by the time I got to the fourth grade, I was going to Keene [Elementary School]. Speaker 1: Now between the first grade and sixth grade, I guess-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --until you get in. Did you have a middle school or a junior high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had junior high. Junior high was two years. It was seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --Ah. Speaker 1: --in the first six then-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh- Speaker 1: --who were some of your influential teachers of favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Sure. I'll never forget Mrs. Winston. I don't remember all the reasons why I won't forget Mrs. Winston because it was my kindergarten teacher. And I just won't forget her because I loved school and Mrs. Winston made it such a nice experience for me. She was a--I mean she just was phenomenal. And, but I can't tell you why because it was just so long ago. But I just remember Ms. Winston, Ms. Winston. Just loved her. She was just a good teacher. It was fun. And then Mr. West was. He had to either be my third grade teacher, and I'm not exactly sure the timing when we went in the fourth grade. I know I did almost all of my fourth grade year at Keene, but I must have at least started the fourth grade year at the school. I just don't remember exact dates of moving. But Mr. West was someone that I also was pretty high on. And as I learned from an obituary and a phone call from somebody, he passed away a few years ago. Not too long ago, and--. But they were the favorites. Mr. West not only believed in me, but--it wasn't the question of believing in. 'Cause, you know, you take things for granted when people love and they're around you anyway. So you weren't thinking about it that much. It was just that he was always supportive. And okay Stanley, I'm just going to do this. And he just, just actually, just kept pushing you on. And then I know, you didn't ask me this question. But in college it was a guy named Mr. Harrison who was a trigonometry teacher that, that made trigonometry fun. I could not believe it. I'm serious. Here's a guy that says, you know, you're the hardest working guy. I only got a C in trigonometry. Don't get me wrong. But I had fun with trigonometry. And the bottomline was that this, this one guy made it fun and I enjoyed it with him. Story_ID: 35862 Speaker 1: Did you struggle with math in elementary school [Garfield Elementary School and Keene Elementary School, Washington, District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: I did. Yeah, I did. Not until I went to Keene. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when. That's when it started for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Ah-- Speaker 1: --Cause they were-- Speaker 2: --So I had-- Speaker 1: --slightly ahead of you and. Speaker 2: They were ahead. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I had to constantly work at it. I always did it. I mean did out the algebra. Did the Algebra II. Did the Calculus. Did some things like that. But I always, I mean I always had to really work at it. Whereas other things I didn't have to work as hard. I had to work at that, you know. I had to work at it. I ain't gonna lie to you, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to work at it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have a favorite subject in grade school? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I just enjoyed reading period- Speaker 1: --Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --loved reading. Passionate about reading. And there was a bookmobile for example. And I wasn't tied to peers who--in other words, I wasn't even--I went by myself to the bookmobile because I loved reading and I would just. The bookmobile was the opposite way of where I lived. But I would go out of my way to go to the bookmobile when I was in elementary school and then walked my way back home with books that I enjoyed reading. And so because we didn't travel a lot. I didn't realize that at the time, but I use to use my imagination and I'm traveling. So I went in places that other people didn't go because I was just reading and enjoying it, and visualizing it. And I remember even as an adult, I remember James Clavell's book, 'Shogun'. (Laughter). I had, I had already, I had, Roz [Stanley's wife, Rosalyn Stanley] was hurt, and this was our first tour separated where I was going to be gone a year. I was gone for six months and I was coming back for two weeks' leave. And I cracked the book 'Shogun' as I was on the plane headed home and I couldn't put it down. And so I got home, and I've been gone now for, you know, six months. I'm home now and Roz just wants to talk and Angie [Stanley's daughter, Angela Stanley] wants to talk, and every time they look, I was looking at this book. Oh, sorry. And I'd put the book down and, we talk. Oh yeah, no problem, we can talk. And then they'd go do something else, I'd open the book again. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: What's wrong with you? I mean, and so we had an argument about. I mean, listen you're gonna be gone for another six months. Can you just pay attention to us? And I use to dream about this book because my imagination was, you know, such that I would see things. I could visualize. I could actually smell the sea. I could smell different things in reading the books and so forth. And so my passion was reading. It still is. The whole way down here, I'm listening to Lisa Scottoline, 'Don't Go'. Her latest one. Her latest book. Just book on tape. And so I just enjoy it. Enjoy using my imagination. Enjoy reading and continue that. I enjoy writing and enjoy that kind of, you know, excursion. Those are things I am passionate about. I do other things, but I'm pretty passionate about those things. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Kinda-- Speaker 1: So this is--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: --long, long-winded. Yeah. Story_ID: 35863 Speaker 1: What about movies and TV and that sort of thing? Did you like-- Speaker 2: Nah. You know, TV's almost like a backdrop. Never was passionate about it. I look at some things. I like 'CSI' [Crime Scene Investigation; series]. Don't get me wrong. You know, things like that. But I'm, I could do without it. I'm just. Don't necessarily need it. I enjoy looking at hell, things like Rachel Maddow and CNN and--. But I don't have a whole lot of favorite shows. I'm not a sports nut. My wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] is more into football, baseball, basketball, things like that then I am. Although I can follow and I tell you what the rules are, you know, that kind of stuff. Just not and, but I enjoy reading. I help my daughter [Angela Stanley] out as we--she's one of my coaching clients for example as I'm going through my certification process. So we're doing what they call a disc assessment. And, so they did a comparison disc assessment. Personality assessment between me and my daughter. And they gave the results to us. I'm more private. She's more outgoing. I'm more of a loner in terms of how I can work in doing things. She's more outgoing. But I've been very successful in the things I've done and she wants to be more like her Dad and so we're working through the things. Nah, you've got excellent talents and skills. You need to work on the things you have and then understand what your blind spots are. And so we're working with each other. But the bottomline is that I enjoy serving and--serving in a way that doesn't necessarily call a whole lot attention to myself. I don't need the strokes or pats on the back. I even had some mixed emotions even about doing this and I said okay. Well, I'll do, you know. It's no problem, you know. But I'm not looking for anything other than because I know how temporary this is, life. Went to a funeral yesterday as a deacon. Young man was seventeen years old, you know. Hadn't even had a chance to start his life. But just sharing and being able to serve is one of my other passion so I don't spend a whole lot of time sitting in front of tube. Nothing like that. Speaker 1: So, it really seems like you had a strong service orientation with all the activities of Cub Scouts-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Boys Scouts, school patrol-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --church-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --service-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in that context I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Civil Air Patrol-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --helping all the elderly in the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, you know, that sort of thing. Trying to do a good job-- Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: --when you have a chance. Story_ID: 35864 Speaker 1: When you were in middle--now where did you go to middle school? Speaker 2: I went to McFarland Junior High [School, Washington, District of Columbia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And McFarland, believe it or not is like. The parking lots of McFarland and Roosevelt are shared. They're that close and even though we had a nice hump from our neighborhood to Roosevelt [school] and McFarland. It's like McFarland was right there. Speaker 1: Okay. So in junior high school. So this right there in the neighborhood and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's-- Speaker 1: --a- Speaker 2: --it's a good clip from Buchanan Street where we lived-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --on northeast to Georgia Avenue Northwest. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: When I say good clip, it's probably not two miles, but it seemed like for a long way to walk. Speaker 1: That's pretty long way from. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and, but we walked and then when it was inclement weather we took, caught a bus, and transferred once. Speaker 1: So was this the closest junior high school to you? Speaker 2: Yeah. At that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's one closer now, but when we went there wasn't. In fact, by the time my brother [Michael Stanley] went to junior high school he actually went to a different one. He went to Birdy Backus Junior High [School] which is actually closer. But that two years, you know, made a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, you said you started. Did you start running track and that sort of thing in middle school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I was. One of my best friends in fact, you know, Sidney. I was on cross country team for the winter basically that was just a two mile race then. And then I was on the spring track team. I ran the mile and I tried the pole vault. I wasn't too good at pole vaulting. But that was what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35865 Speaker 1: So this is 1959, '60 [1960], I guess. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. In junior high [McFarland Junior High School, Washington, District of Columbia] and all that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: Yeah, cause I finished high school in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're entering high school. When you, when you come into high school that's when the March on Washington takes place-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --here in D.C. in a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Did you go? Or did your family-- Speaker 2: --Nah, I didn't. I didn't. I'm gonna try to go this time [fiftieth year anniversary in 2013] because I missed the first one. I mean, and the irony is that that March on Washington as you look at it was not that far away from where we lived. Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] and Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] didn't go. I didn't go and some of that, you know, you may see how some of that plays out later on in college. But I didn't. I actually went to Martin Luther King's funeral as a student, you know, delegate. 1968, I was a Junior Class President at my college [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. And in '68 [1968]-'69 [1969], I was a Student Body President. Student Government Association President. So I was a student leader. Even then though they had. We had factions. You had H. Rap Brown, Stokely Carmichael. All those folks came down to our school. We had the Orangeburg Massacre which you may, may not have heard about. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of it. Speaker 2: I was there then. And, but I was one of the students telling them stay off the front of the campus. As President [M. Maceo] Nance was telling us, don't do it because this is very dangerous. This is like a tinderbox. And you had folks from outside coming in and they were agitating and doing things. And we had three students killed. And an untold number injured. Between twenty and thirty or so injured. And no one was ever persecuted or anything like that. We marched on the capitol. We marched on Governor McNair in South Carolina. I mean, I led a student delegation in 1968. We marched from Orangeburg, South Carolina, forty miles to the state capitol. And I remember the governor saying "nigras." He didn't know how to say "negro," or if he did, he didn't--he chose not to. So I was a student leader, but I was different. Not in a different place, but I was a little more--I just approached it differently. Wasn't militant, but I was militant. And at the same time when I joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps although another classmate--or he was actually ahead of me--but he joined after me. I was the only one who joined the Marine Corp. So I mean, only one. Couple other folks actually came in afterward too. Yeah, I remember that now. But I was. I joined the Marine Corp, you know. We had ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and I was gonna be drafted and I said well here's what I want to do. And I just joined the Marine Corps. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm. We're going to get to that-- Speaker 2: --Okay. Apologize-- Speaker 1: --let's get through high school-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: --then when we get to that. But, but no, that's all right-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --I didn't want to stop you, when you--. Story_ID: 35866 Speaker 1: So Roosevelt High School [Washington, District of Columbia]. Now this is. This is mostly blacks. Now is this all, all-- Speaker 2: Mostly. Speaker 1: --black high school. Speaker 2: It's mostly. We had some white students, but most were gone by that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So you're there from 19--, what, 1960? Speaker 2: Yeah, '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: Yeah about that. '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. It might even been '61 [1961]. Cause I went there in ninth grade. Speaker 1: Ah, '61 [1961] to '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I went there in ninth grade. Speaker 1: It's '61 [1961] to '65 [1965], so--. Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you're there when [President] John [F.] Kennedy is assassinated too? Speaker 2: Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --Right-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, I sure was. Well John Kennedy was assassinated in, what that's-- Speaker 1: '63 [1963]. Yeah. Speaker 2: --Ah. Speaker 1: Same year as the March [on Washington]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think. I remember we're taking a student trip and I thought I was in the seventh grade, but I'm not sure. Okay. Speaker 1: It would have been November of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Yep. Yep. You're right. And yeah, cause we were just taking a student science trip. And I remember hearing about it and I remember where I was when on that train when I heard about it, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Boy, did those years go by fast. Wow. Speaker 1: Now were your--how was your family I guess deployed in terms of politics? Cause I know a lot. In those days, there were almost as many black people for [President Richard] Nixon-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --in that '60 [1960] election as it was for Kennedy-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh-- Speaker 1: --But-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. I thought. Well, first of all, they were--they were Kennedy supporters and although I don't think we had pictures of John F. Kennedy there in the house. I had my John F. Kennedy button and I wasn't even able to vote. But, you know, Mom [Ellen Elnora Stanley] was happy about that, and Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] was too. And I heard them talk about it. Just generally. And they would watch it. And I watched it, you know, the debates and things on our TV, black and white. I remember that. But not a whole lot of political discussion. But the bottomline was to vote. Vote. Vote. I mean that was the key. Vote. Story_ID: 35867 Speaker 1: Now were you aware, I guess at this stage in high school of any African American officers in the military? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because of segregation they lived around us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they couldn't hardly live any place else. And so we had a couple of majors and some other folks. And, of course, I later learned about Colin Powell. You know, kinda where he was at the same kind of things. But across the street was a guy name Major Greer. And there was one other officer that was right there. And then all of the blacks who were able-bodied males, men in our neighborhood were veterans. Almost all of them. They were enlisted all of them. But they were all veterans. And so you had that as a culture. So here, you have a couple of officers around coming in. And then you have veterans that you're surrounded by. So that was the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, they really didn't start talking about the Vietnam War until like, I guess, what '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It really started. Speaker 2: That's when I really started becoming more aware of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very much aware of it. Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: --and had some classmates that went after we graduated from high school [Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.]. Several were killed. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: Knew that. One good friend, you know. Had the upmost respect for Hylas Dewery. And I remember Hylas and who. I think Hylas joined the [U.S]. Marine Corps and he was killed. And I remember Ricky McCormick. Very nice, quiet, solid citizen though. Ricky McCormick was killed. And then I remember. Forgot Garcia's first name. But he lived. But served in Vietnam, and almost all my--my brother [Michael Stanley] went to Vietnam-- Speaker 1: --Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --you know. So these are folks just as we're finishing high school and/or there getting out even a couple years later. They, you know, was guaranteed that you're going in, or drafted whatever. Yeah. But that was very much a part of our awareness. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to go. Actually, my best friend and I, Sidney. And we're still very close. Sidney and I in the eleventh grade went down to join the [U.S.] Navy Reserves. And I was like seventeen years old, something like that. And Sidney's parents signed for him. My father [Joseph Franklin Stanley] and mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] said, you kidding me? You're going to college, boy. (Laughter) That was another time they put their foot down. And I said well, you know, okay. So. 'Cause we went down, I mean on own, you know. It was a time when you could. You know, it. We had a lot of autonomy as kids. You'd get on your bike and you could ride all over D.C. and nobody said anything. I see you later on Mom. You just get on your bike and go. And when we went down to sign up, I didn't tell Mom I was going downtown. We just downtown and I took the test and both of us qualified to be nuclear submariner guys enlisted. And so shoot. We're ready. Took my paperwork home. Hi Mom, want to join the Navy Reserves. Un-un, you know. So Sidney joined. I didn't. Sidney ended up going to Fayetteville State [University] after high school. I went to South Carolina State [University]. Sidney's folks were from North Carolina and to make a long story short. Sidney started missing reserves meetings, and (laughter) they pull him on active duty. So he didn't finish college. He served in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And enlisted, you know. So that was it. Story_ID: 35868 Speaker 1: Now did you have ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in high school [Roosevelt High School, Washington, District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: Did. It was mandatory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was mandatory. We had. In Washington, D.C. all high school students were required to take junior ROTC. So I took [U.S.] Army Junior ROTC-- Speaker 1: Aah. Speaker 2: --and that was another good time because what. I looked forwarded to it and so we called it the Cadet. The Cadet Core and we--I was a cadet captain mainly when I graduated and I was on our Drill Team, you know, while we were in high school and everything as a junior. And Junior. And we, it's another. It was an example of. And I saw it happening and knew why it was happening. Remember, I was a small guy. Okay. Remember, I didn't, I mean, I barely weighed a 120 pounds and I remember. But I had this huge command voice. I mean pretty--and presence. So we actually--my company from our school actually won the drill competition. I mean it was very precise. I mean was. I had indie company. I company. And we won it. But I remember Colonel Talley, who was the professor of military science, decided that the school--that the company that would represent the school at the citywide competition would be a combination of another company and my company. In other words, he didn't--didn't send me. So the guy was--I forgot his name. I don't know if it was Harry Stratton or whatever. But it was a football player. A very popular football player. So he took my company and made it a kind of a larger plattoon. And I was a plattoon commander and one of my plattoon commanders was another plattoon commander and then another guy became the company commander. I said okay. If that's what you want to do, you know. I didn't go through all that. We went to the citywide championship and we won second place in citywide championship. I had the presence of mind to know that even as we were going through the drill prep and the competition, I knew where the mistakes were made. I knew what I would have done and I knew I could have won it. But I sat there and sucked it up. And said okay. And did that. So that was another one of the, you know, you kind of just pick up on the inequities of things that happened with people but it wasn't--I didn't leave the situation bitter. Most, you know, I just--okay, chalk it up. And, you know, there's just different reasons people do what they do. And, we were all captains. Cause the other guy was a MP. Guy was a captain. I was a captain and the guy who was a company commander was a captain. Usually your plattoon commanders were first lieutenant or, you know, whatever. But that was. It was mandatory. It was required and that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35869 Speaker 1: So, did you run for class office in-[high school; Roosevelt High School, Washington, District of Columbia]? Speaker 2: No, I didn't run for class office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did not. Yeah. Speaker 1: And what were you thinking about in terms of career when you were in high school? Was it, you know, did you have a career goal in mind? Speaker 2: Lawyer. Speaker 1: Aah. Speaker 2: Actually thought lawyer. And I put it in the yearbook, lawyer. I didn't end up doing that. But that's what I put down initially that I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: What inspired you to become a lawyer? I mean, what were you seeing? Speaker 2: Well, remember. Hi, man. Not only did I love to read, but it was a function of service and the orientation on that and then I think lending on strengths because I could. I was very persuasive in talking and I was still coming into my own. But I still was very persuasive in my delivery and I enjoyed reading. I enjoyed studying. I enjoyed just pulling together the logic which it started coming even more in college [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], you know. Speaker 1: Did people tell you that? Speaker 2: I got a little bit-- Speaker 1: You ought to be a lawyer because of your--. Speaker 2: --yeah, you know, you got a little bit of that, you know. But it wasn't so much that somebody was pushing me that way. As it was I was thinking that's what I wanted to do. And it just sort of panned out that way, you know. In terms of what I put down in the yearbook. Cause it's literally, it's in my yearbook, you know. I want to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, what kind of counseling did you have at Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Not good. It was. It was almost non-existent because the way things went because I wasn't a star pupil. I was okay. But because I wasn't one of the top students and the star students in school, you didn't get the time. And so when you go by you could almost perceive that you were sort of like okay look at this, you know. You couldn't even get the real conversation, the counseling. I don't think I got counseling. So what I did was pretty much almost on my own. Speaker 1: Hmm. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35870 Speaker 1: So, how did you manage to choose South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I, you know, I had two people in my life that I was close to. One was the person I told who's a sister. Like a sister to me who was at South, who was at South Carolina State at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. This is your cousin. Speaker 2: That's my cousin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I had my uncle [Connie]. The one that was killed [in a sniper attack; April, 1975], who also graduated from South Carolina State and he was, you know--we were very close and I went to his fraternity. I mean, we joined the same fraternity later on. But those were my personal role models and examples and so I wanted to do the same thing. I didn't particularly want to go to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]. 'Cause Howard was like around the corner. I wanted to go, get away. I mean, Howard. Great school. But I could walk to Howard and I wasn't ready to be walking to college. I really wanted to get out and I loved the South. I loved the experience and all that and so that's pretty much why I chose it. I know I applied to one other school. (Laughter) I don't remember what it was. I think, but. The reason I don't remember what it is because it was like it was just there as a placeholder. I wanted to go to South Carolina State and I just--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --applied to something else just to kind of, you know, keep things. Story_ID: 35871 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you graduate [from Roosevelt High School, Washington, District of Columbia] with any particular honors or anything when you? Speaker 2: Not from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Not from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I graduated. But it wasn't necessarily thank you lordy. But it definitely wasn't like-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, all that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now I take it you were, you were very busy in high school doing all those things that you were talking about-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: --delivering papers and doing yard work and doing all the other things. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All those hustles-- Speaker 2: --Right Speaker 1: --and activities. So 1965, you graduate from high school and what you do over the summer before you got there? Speaker 2: The--. Well, I know we went to South Carolina for part of the summer. My Dad [Joseph Franklin Stanley] and I. Took me down and we stayed down there for a little bit. Took it easy. Did a little bit of reading, you know, that was about it. Got ready to go to college [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. I mean that was really about it, but--. Oh, excuse me. I worked. I did a job. Cause I worked almost every summer. I think that was the summer that I was working downtown not too far from here, 8th and E Street, Atlas Sports Store. And I was a sales clerk for that summer. And yeah for that particular summer and maybe one before that. So I was working, I know that. But I always pretty much had a job during the summers and Atlas Sport Store is one that I really enjoyed and doing that. Yep, so that was the answer. So I worked until it was time to go but also had fun and, you know, just enjoyed, you know, that was it. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Forgot about that till you asked. Yeah. Story_ID: 35872 Speaker 1: All right. So Orangeburg, South Carolina. This is fall of '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I guess you get there and so what's. What was South Carolina State [University] like? Speaker 2: Wow. Well, it was. South Carolina State was. That was family unto itself. You had a loving, nurturing environment. You had a disciplined environment. The teachers didn't--I remember Mrs. Zimmerman. Again, a math teacher who didn't cut us any slack. Who made sure that you got your work and by the way, one of her nephews now is my closest friend. (Unclear) Zimmerman who was a math major. My roommate was a math major. I guess there's no accident in that either. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Now is this the teacher that taught you trigonometry? Speaker 2: Nah, that was Mr. Harris. Speaker 1: Oh, Mr. Harris. Okay. Speaker 2: Mr. Harris was the one that I was most excited about and enjoyed being around him. And you know, and so in my freshman year, just the adjustment of studying. I met Roz [Rosalyn H. Stanley] then my wife, who became my girlfriend. Met her on a blind date going to a barn fire. We walked together where another good friend, named Bertram Beard introduced us. Cause he was dating Roz's roommate. And so we walked to the barn fire together. And freshman wore beanies then, and you had to wear your beanie. And I remember John Gillen. I remember not wearing my beanie one day and John Gillen who became a player for the Vikings, the Minnesota Vikings. And he was a big football player. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. John Gillen, the wide receiver for-- Speaker 2: Yep, you got it. Speaker 1: --the Vikings. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: So, freshman where's your beanie? What's it to you? (Laughter) You know. You know, he, they just messing. We just tease each other and things like that. But I'll never forgot that, and, you know. But we had fun and we studied. I had four roommates, or three roommates. There was four of us in a room. In Lowman Hall which has now been turned into Administration Building. But it was one of the older freshman dorm on the campus. And so you learn how to study in a room with four of us together and your small tables on the side and your bunkbeds and all that. Living in a building that where there was a good Charleston contingent. Charleston, South Carolina contingent. And when I started dating Roz from Charleston. The Charleston group, the Geechee. (Laughter) They indoctrinated me then. Make sure I was okay for their home girl as they called her. But we all were very close and continue to be very close to this day and. But, you know, mainly studying. But I wasn't worried about making it. In fact, did quite well and then pledged [a fraternity], you know. 'Cause you had to have an academic average. Story_ID: 35873 Speaker 1: Pledging then was a full year, you know. You just didn't, you know. So you academic average, one semester. Academic average, the second semester and then you pledge, you know. And so. Speaker 2: So what fraternity did--? Speaker 1: Kappa. Kappa Psi. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, so. But good experience and. Now the South was deeply segregated at that time. The University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] was not even open to us, to blacks at that time. They opened their doors the next year after we began. So I think it was like '66 [1966] or something. They opened up. And, but good time. Yeah. And I started the--. I don't know where you want to be in the progression in college. But leadership things that started happening. It wasn't like I was looking for things. I was--. Cause I usually start out. It wasn't any plan. I just engage and then become, you know, fairly reliable. I was the chairman of the Program Committee. Literally. When I was a sophomore. And, you know, all I had to do was just make sure programs are going this and that and help to coordinate details. Next thing, you know, the class is voting me to be the class president in, you know, in the junior year. And then next thing, you know, the class is voting for me to be, not class, but the school is voting for me to be the student body president. SGA, Student Government Association president in my senior year. Speaker 2: So, this is a (unclear) you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --this is a. So, the Programming Committee brings in speakers and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Yeah, speakers. And, you know, coordinate the activities-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and coordinated with other schools and things like, you know. Like students going to have a National Quiet Day, you know. And I'm standing up talking about it. But, you know, you weren't trying to do anything. You just basically doing, doing. And it just turned out that became something I was half way decent at, and had good rapport with folks, you know. It just worked out pretty good and I wasn't--you know, I wasn't necessarily. I mean I wasn't walking on water even in academics, but I was very good academically. And so as a result, you know, when I finished school I had a Legion of Merit Award. Excuse me, not to call, American Legion Award. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I got that for inspirational leadership. And, you know, just setting an example as student and things like that. Story_ID: 35874 Speaker 1: I was also a member of the South Carolina State Student Legislative Branch. It's a mock legislative branch that sort of mirrored the state legislature of [U.S.] Congress, you know, there in South Carolina. Speaker 2: Now this--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --almost as incredible, and I'm thinking about the history of blacks in the South Carolina legislature after the [American] Civil War. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And at the time that you were there, there were no black people-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --in the legislature whatsoever-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --but you, yet you all had a group- Speaker 1: Yep-- Speaker 2: --that was mirroring the (laughter)-- Speaker 1: --that's right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: --and we did. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was only--it might have been a couple more black students from some of those schools. But I don't think there were many. Cause I was one and we'll go to Columbia [South Carolina] and I'll be with the other schools, you know. University of South Carolina, Winthrop [University] (unclear), you know, and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh, they had. They integrated the-- Speaker 1: --the legislative. The student mock-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, the student-- Speaker 1: --Mock student body- Speaker 2: --the mock. Okay. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, the modeling legislature is integrated, but the real one-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --is segregated-- Speaker 1: --Right. Right. Speaker 2: --and that's interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah and it was. It was. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So we did that. We had--. In 1967, my second year there, '66 [1966], '67 [1967] we actually--we boycotted and essentially got rid of our president. The students basically. His name was B.C. Turner. Speaker 2: Now this is. Is this the President of South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]? Speaker 1: South Carolina State. Speaker 2: Okay, so what was? What was the issue with-- Speaker 1: --The issue was-- Speaker 2: --B.C. Turner. Speaker 1: --B.C. Turner was. The students didn't know him and to be frank with you a lot of the, his--I wasn't necessarily--I didn't understand all of his policies, but it was one of those kind of things where he was just out of touch. And the students just emotional contagion started just getting on board. And saying okay. And we even had songs, you know. They say that B.C. Turner, you know, and blah, blah. But as I think on it right now it was more student unrest. Probably spurned or spawned by facility dissatisfaction or something like and the students just emotional contagion got into it. Because when I look back on it, I can't even put my arms around anything specific that we were-- Speaker 2: That he did--. Speaker 1: --other than the fact that he was just this guy that was detached. That wasn't involved and blah, blah, blah. Story_ID: 35875 Speaker 1: Now this is an age in which, I know the black colleges and maybe South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] in particular from what you describe-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you know, wearing a freshman beanie. This is like the old time. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: White colleges-- Speaker 2: --Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --in the old. That's really old timey. Beanies-- Speaker 2: --Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear) Speaker 2: There are (unclear) vespers. Speaker 1: --Aah. Speaker 2: We had. We had vespers on Sundays. And you had to be in a certain seat. And you had chapel every Friday at ten o'clock. Speaker 1: Okay, and I suppose that there's curfew-- Speaker 2: Yeah, curfews. Speaker 1: --for-- Speaker 2: Curfews were there. Speaker 1: --for the female students-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that had to be out of the dorm. Speaker 2: They could not be out after I think it was. It was really early. Nine [o'clock] or something like that doing the week, and you had a certain time on weekends, you know. I mean there were definitely curfews. Speaker 1: Did students have to wear certain dress? At certain time? I mean, I don't know. I'm just thinking. Speaker 2: --Yeah. There were-- Speaker 1: Dress code. Speaker 2: Dress codes. But loosely enforced with the men. But more strictly enforced with women. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: But the dress codes were there. And definitely no co-ed dorms. Speaker 1: Oh no. Speaker 2: Yeah. (Laughter) Speaker 1: Now, this is. But this is what's you referring to-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --are changes are being made across the country mainly on the white campuses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They have co-ed dormitories. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: People with no dress code. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You know this is '65 [1965]. People--the whites is wearing long hair. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, and drugs were coming on campus. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Almost total freedom to say whatever you want-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --to say. And do whatever, you want to do. And in contrast with this, almost 19th century. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: We had--I mean, to give you an example. I smelled marijuana for the first time, I think in my junior year when I came home and went to a party in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. In South Carolina, at South Carolina State, I heard a rumor that--did you hear that so and so was smoking marijuana? I ain't never smelled it down there. I never even saw it. And never was around anybody that was smoking anything. The only thing they did was drink some wine or, you know, whatever. But nobody--I never even saw anybody, you know, or smelled marijuana, you know, at that time. Down in South Carolina. Speaker 1: Which is interesting. Cause a lot of people's first experience with marijuana comes in college. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: (Laughter) No. No. Didn't see it. I mean, they even had something--I mean like they played bid whist a lot. And we had. They use to have what they called a Flunker's Ball in our freshman year. And, you know, so. And if you knew some folks who went to the Flunker's Ball. They ain't coming back next semester, you know. And they didn't. Then some later on, they came back. But the--the standards, I mean from room inspections. Your rooms were clean. I mean, you know. I mean you were college students but they have dorm proctor and things like that. And it was, you were required, not only to pay the money to live in the room. But also to keep the rooms cleaned and they inspected your rooms. And before we left for the semester, your rooms were checked out, you know. So it was all these different things that were happening that you, we take for granted right now but that was the college experience. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So these are these are, I imagine some of these were the issues and the tension with B.C. Turner [president, South Carolina State University]. Speaker 2: Yeah. B.C. Turner. Right. Yeah. Story_ID: 35876 Speaker 1: And then--so the Student Government Association [at South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Now you were--you're the Student Government Association president as of senior, right? Speaker 2: As a senior. As a senior. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: At that time, see that was--. I was still a--I was a sophomore. Speaker 1: Ah. Speaker 2: When B.C. Turner [president] went out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then we had Dr. M. Maceo Nance came in after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Dr. Nance was very popular with the students. Was a director with, of our business operations, you know, and physical management of the school. So he was an internal product. Had a honorary doctorate. But was referred to all the time as Dr. Nance. And was one of our most popular enduring presidents. Speaker 1: Okay. And as you were alluding to before Orangeburg becomes like a--. Now this a story that's hardly ever told. I mean it's not one of the most publicized civil rights-- Speaker 2: --Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --crisis story. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But Orangeburg experienced some of the most intense and violent--. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That Orangeburg massacre is-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --something that will, you know. So, what, when did? This happens in '67 [1967], is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: '68 [1968]. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was like. In fact the massacre shooting was on February 8, 1968. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's another one of those dates you just don't forget. Speaker 1: Now. Speaker 2: You know, (unclear). Speaker 1: This had something to do over a bowl. Something do over a bowl-- Speaker 2: --Bowling alley. Speaker 1: --A bowling alley, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Bowling alley that to integrate. And, of course, that's the event that's publicized but the entire city was still segregated. So you had, you know, the bowling alley was what we integrated. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And pushed for, you know, integration. Because, you know, you had people from New York and New Jersey. I was from Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. You had people from all over who were coming from places where you can go to the bowling alley. You can do things in the city and you come to South Carolina in Orangeburg and you can't even go to the bowling alley. When you went to the movies although I didn't mind sitting in the balcony, I had to sit in the balcony, you know. That was South. I sat upstairs. White folks sat downstairs. And so that was South Carolina State at the time. Mix all of that in with the, like you've already mentioned here, just kind of the student not happy about having to take vespers and having to do all these other things like that. And I think, you know. As I look back on it as a matured adult, B.C. Turner [former university president] just got caught up in the conundrum of the times and, you know. The changing population and things like that. But he wasn't a bad guy, but you know. Hell, I was nineteen years old. (Laughter) You know that kind of thing. Speaker 1: You write songs about him and everything. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right. That's right. Yeah. That was it, you know. But, you know, the Orangeburg Massacre like I said, the number that were killed. The number of the wounded. Just three wounded and the Smith Hammond Middleton Center or our big auditorium like became the place that named for him. And I dedicated the monument the next year in 1969, '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. In our center place on campus, Smith Hammond Middleton Memorial. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35877 Speaker 1: Yeah some of the figures down there. I've--names I--did you know or hear, know about Gloria Blackwell Rackley? Speaker 2: I know the name, but no. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was. I think, she had left, I think as you were, or was leaving as you were arriving. Speaker 2: But no. Okay. Speaker 1: I think. Speaker 2: I just know that name, but. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a big leader in Orangeburg. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But she had to. Basically was forced out of town. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know. They had threatened her daughter and she actually left town. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Cleve Sellers. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, definitely Cleve [Cleveland] Sellers. Cause he actually came to the campus while we were there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And his son is down there now, I think in some leadership position. I don't know if he's a member of [U.S.] Congress or what, but Sellers, yes. Definitely. Speaker 1: And Cecil Williams, the photographer. Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, Cecil's a photographer, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Sure. In fact I've just met his sister during the Delta [Sigma Theta; sorority] convention that was here in D.C. recently. Cecil Williams. Speaker 1: He documented that whole--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. Do you know him? Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know him, but I've seen the book and I--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We interviewed Gloria Rackley-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Blackwell Rackley-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and she was- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --telling us the story and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely-- Speaker 1: --So-- Speaker 2: --know Cecil though. Speaker 1: --Yeah. So it's a story that I, you know. I kind of crept up on me on. I hadn't heard a lot about it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but it's-- Speaker 2: --and Matthew, Attorney General, I mean, Attorney General. Attorney Matthew Perry was our lawyer. Speaker 1: Matthew Perry, right. Speaker 2: Who represented the school and who fought for years afterwards to bring the people who were, you know, the National Guard and the police who did the shooting. But it didn't come to fruition. They found them, nobody guilty of anything. Speaker 1: Yeah. So like. So this would have been 1969, right? Speaker 2: That was, yeah, by the time-- Speaker 1: --'69 [1969]-- Speaker 2: --by the time the litigation stuff started. Speaker 1: Yeah. The shooters at '68. Speaker 2: '68 [1968], right. Speaker 1: And went by without much national attention. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Unlike what happened at Kent State [University]. Speaker 2: Kent State, that's right. Speaker 1: Just two years later. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean it was almost nothing for South Carolina State and then Kent State and those dichotomies did not, I mean, I picked up on that. A lot of folks picked up on that right away. It don't count and this becomes national news when some white students are shot and killed and so forth. And the same kind of, you know, instigators, not instigators. But people whose shooting. National Guards. Those in uniform. That kind of thing. Story_ID: 35878 Speaker 1: So, you say you were--? Well, did you find as a student leader [at South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina; Orangeburg Massacre, 1968] were you kind of torn as to what to do in that situation, or what to? Speaker 2: Nah. You know, I mean it's interesting. Cause I'm glad you asked the question because I never found myself torn on what to do. I've always been pretty certain about what I should do. Although even my certainty would cause sometimes my stomach to be a little uncomfortable because I wasn't torn. It was just hard to do sometimes. It's hard to stand up in front of a bunch of folks who don't see it the way you see it. I saw it the way, I saw it and I felt strongly about the way I felt. But it still didn't make me anymore comfortable saying what I would be saying. In other words, cool it, you know. As opposed to those who were saying, burn, you know, and get out and do it. I didn't feel comfortable saying it, but I knew what was right and felt very strongly about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, your role is to try to cool things off? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, you know. It wasn't so much cooling off as much as it was to lead in a very positive direction. To, there's a way to do civil reaction in addressing civic issues without burning it up. I mean when the stuff happened in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], I wouldn't be burning down our buildings. (Laughter) You know, I mean, after Martin Luther King was killed. I, there's other ways of doing this. Now I also recognize that the ying and yang it also. That helps. In other words, the rebel or the people who are going to be more aggressive and militant. As opposed to my militancy which might be a little bit less aggressive. But those two work together. And so I was recognize, I recognize that and I had a way of conveying it without even saying it. I didn't look down. Was not judgmental. But I said here's the way I think we should do this. But I wasn't judgmental on those folks because I was friends with these guys and I was able to kind of walk that walk without being a hypocrite and that served me well over the years. Cause I still respected them but I just wasn't going to do that. Speaker 1: What's a political dynamic that. It's interesting that you recognize it in those days, but there's no reason. As they say, there's no reason to talk to Dr. King unless there's a Malcolm X. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I saw then. I was more inclined to be where Dr. King was. As opposed to being, doing what Malcolm X would do. At least initially in his early years. He eventually started moving in a different direction, as you know. But that sort of where I was. But I wasn't necessarily choosing either one of one of them as people because again that early foundation we're talking about, I'm sort of like, okay, here's what I see it, and I know we're going to get to the [U.S.] Marine Corps but that's what served me. I just said okay. Here we go. And I'm not here to make friends. I love you though. (Laughter) Just keep moving on, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35879 Speaker 1: So okay at--so, South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Did any of the South Carolina politicians play any role in the? Did you encounter them when you went to the state house and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The only one I actually remember though is the governor. I mean we actually met with the governor. I mean me and a couple of other students and one of our student leaders. Not student leaders but our faculty members, staff members. We met with him. I remember that meeting. It was almost surreal. The others we, we're just around. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Can you tell us a little bit about it? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: This intrigues me. You know, what-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --would the governor of segregated South Carolina tell the black students at campus what after something like the Orangeburg Massacre? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, he. I can't obviously quote it at this time because it's been so long but what stands out to me now is. I won't even call it commitment. But he was still going to look into what happened. It's under investigation. I remember that. And I remember being turned off as I alluded to you before when the, what the niggas want. And it was. It was, I found it be condescending, condescending. And I left with the impression that he didn't really understand what we were saying and what our concerns were. You know, while we were at state even before this happened, the, you know. Even the, you know, blood supply, I mean. Cause I was also a part of the Red Cross as a think sophomore, freshman, one of them in Orangeburg, South Carolina. And I know I'm getting away from the statehouse. But white blood and black blood did not mix and it was separate. And so you had, even though Charles Drew was the, you know, blood plasma and all that and everything, you know. That was still an issue and so we were still dealing with that kind of issue from a perception standpoint in our conversation with the governor. I was a short meeting. Wasn't a long meeting and. A very short meeting. (Laughter) But, and I didn't have anything to say. You know, it was more like the main student leader and, you know. And, of course, the faculty member. I'm trying to remember if Matthew Perry was with us. I just don't remember. I know he was integral to the whole piece there. And so he may have been. It almost seems like he must have been. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, what? Now he's no longer with us. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's deceased now. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Well, can you even remember that and just kind of talk about him for a second? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What kind person was he and? Cause I know you had intended to become a lawyer. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --And Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --here's a-- Speaker 2: --Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess the most prominent lawyer you going to meet-- Speaker 2: --Right-- Speaker 1: --for a while-- Speaker 2: --Yeah. He was incredibly smart, articulate, poised. Had something, you know. Tall and highly respected and even if others didn't respect him, I'm like looking at him with my mouth dropping open. You know, Matthew Perry. A name that was almost a household word even, if. Because even though you may not have known him beforehand, when the name was said it became a household word. That's the respect of Matthew Perry. And he continued to do great things and you know, in law. And, of course, in South Carolina. So I had the upmost respect for him. Was only in his presence a few times. But it's almost like it was yesterday with him and so that's the awe that I had of Matthew Perry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So to speak. Story_ID: 35880 Speaker 1: All right. So, now did you still have in your mind that you were going to become a lawyer? Speaker 2: No. I think at that time I was pretty much committed to doing my service in the military. Whether or not it was going to be a career wasn't there yet. But certainly serving is where I was. I was a psychology major and I knew I had to get a master's degree at least. And also by the time, if I had done more research the law program, the pre-law program at [South Carolina] State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] went away like the year went, or the year right before I went. In other words, it was there before, but they stopped the pre-law program 'cause that was what I would have majored in. Would be pre-law and so that was gone. And so that became--. So psychology was something I wanted to get into and so that's what I did. But, so that, I had already start transitioning from that at that time. Speaker 1: Why psychology? Why were you lending towards psychology? Speaker 2: Well, I really wanted to understand and learn more about people in general. As you recall, I enjoyed reading. I enjoyed. I wanted to understand just us as a people. I thought it also that if I decided to go into law or something like that would help with that. As it turns out it became something that I have lend on quite heavily and very effectively in my career. It's just understanding people. Learning to listening, but knowing what to look for. You know, going from there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, after you graduated in 1960, was there anything special about graduation, before we? Speaker 2: Un-un. I mean, it was a big day as I look back on it and all the events and everything. I was happy to get out. Oh so happy just to be launching off in life. Starting in life and not saying that, I wasn't started before, but okay, I've been in school all my life and so I'm ready to go. Speaker 1: Well, I suppose your father [Joseph Franklin Stanley] was there, right. This is-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: --his part of the country. Speaker 2: --father was there. Mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] was there. Yeah, mother was there. Family was there. Proud. Story_ID: 35881 Speaker 1: Now was your brother [Michael Stanley] in Vietnam by this time? Speaker 2: Brother was. I think he had, I think he was still there, or just getting ready to come back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because he, cause he, cause I was wearing a lot of his clothes. That was the other thing, you know. Cause he had all these clothes and everything so I needed some extra clothes and so we could wear the same (laughter) size. Yeah, but he was. I don't know if he was back yet. I don't remember. He didn't come to my graduation. I don't think. So he must have still been there or some place else. I just don't remember. I didn't feel slighted so he must have been officially deployed or doing something, you know at the time. But, you know, other than that, I mean just, you know, launching and waiting for that big day when I was going to be, you know. Going into the military. Going into the [U.S.] Marine Corps. Getting ready for Officer Candidate School, I mean, and running and I was already in good shape, but getting even better in physical shape. I left out that was on the swimming team while I was at [South Carolina] State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] for a little while too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and although I didn't, I wasn't a good swimmer, I was an effective swimmer, then I had a hernia and had to get off of it, you know. So that was one of the things. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now did you go immediately to the Marine Corps after-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in August. Speaker 1: --graduation Speaker 2: Graduation was in May. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went in on active duty in August. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I had, you know, couple of months to work and then to chill. Get ready. Roz [Rosalyn H. Stanley] came up. Spent a few days with us, you know, before I left. Cause that was, I think her. I think was her first trip up. Speaker 1: Now were you all married by this time? Speaker 2: We weren't married. No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: We were still going together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Mom and Dad were pretty judicious about how that worked too. Yeah. You know, separate (laughter), not even close. (laughter) You know, but you know, we were committed and then. Oops, had summer wrong. She didn't. We stayed in touch then but that was the next summer when I was getting ready to go to Vietnam. That's when she came. That's when that was. So I apologize. But anyway, and then I went in. Went to Officer Candidate School. I hadn't read the small print. But the small print was if you are not successful in completing Officer Candidate School your obligation to the Marine Corps still exists. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: I missed that. The small print. (laughter) And so I had, I had a couple of officer candidate classmates who were, I found them later when I was a second lieutenant as PFCs [private first classes] and lance corporals in Okinawa [Japan] when I went there the first time. Yeah. Story_ID: 35882 Speaker 1: So now coming out of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] now. Do you go to a regular [U.S.] Marine Corps basic training first? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's. We had. First of all you had mandatory ROTC training at [South Carolina] State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as I. I may have shared with you, I've always been a little altruistic in my service goals. So my frat [fraternity] brothers and my friends and all that were going to the [U.S.] Army and they continued to be, become officers in the Army. But they weren't serious in my humble opinion. They were, I mean they were fine. Don't get me wrong. They were my boys. But they just weren't serious about this stuff and the example I saw said, and I was even asked by the new professor of military science, don't you want to go into the advanced core. I said nah, I think I'm gonna chill out on that, you know. I'm just going to go another route and do something else. And that's why I was looking at the [U.S.] Air Force and then the Marine Corps. But I was looking at something to be just a little bit more of a challenge for me personally. But I still wanted to serve. But I wasn't as committed to going into the [U.S.] Army after doing Army Junior ROTC in high school. Army mandatory ROTC in college and I'm like not liking the discipline. Just the perception. Speaker 1: You thought it was too loose, or what? Speaker 2: I thought it was a little loose, you know. But now that's from the eyes of 19, 20, 21, 22 year old. When I look back on it, it wasn't and there were different communities, but I didn't see all of that. Not at that point. As a look back on it, I can see some of the same things even in the Marine Corps, but I had a perception, an image of a Marine which was totally different. Totally different. You know, in turns of the movies different things. I never met, even knew hardly many Marines other than the folks that I knew in high school and all that, but they were tough. That's all. Speaker 1: So you joined the Marine Corps based on a perception that was a lot tougher than the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Or a lot more disciplined than-- Speaker 2: Lot more disciplined. I joined thinking that was the case and something that I wanted to see whether or not I could cut it. And jumping on a challenge. Taking the risk, might not make it. Let's see what happens. So I did. And, you know, and I hadn't seen too many guys like me. I didn't know too much about the date and stats of where people were and things like that. I knew a little bit about the history and so I did it. That was okay. And you know, there were. Once I got in at Officer Candidate School, they must have been a couple of hundred folks there and they were like three blacks in this company I was in. We knew each other, but we were in different platoon. One of us was in the same platoon, but then there was another guy in another platoon and, you know, we saw each other and me and this one guy that was in my platoon, we got pretty close. But to give you enough perceptive my platoon started out with like 70 close to 80 candidates, officer candidates. And by the time we finished we were down to about 50 something. I mean there were quite a few who for physical reasons, aptitude reasons, leadership reasons, I mean they just, I mean you were (makes a sound). It was pretty strict. Speaker 1: So out of. So there's like 50 candidates, I mean, 50 left after--out of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --how many? Speaker 2: About 80. Speaker 1: 80--. Speaker 2: Must have been 70 to 80, you know. There were--there was a fairly large size platoon. But they, you know, people were leaving for different reasons. I mean the first thing was the first physical evaluation which you lost a handful just for dental, for other things like that. I mean they weren't all just people dropping out. Then you had people who didn't have the stamina to hang in there. And you had a lot of leadership tests. Leadership tests were like every day. Every day. And so you were evaluated and all that. And so it was--it was pretty challenging. Story_ID: 35883 Speaker 1: What was the Marine Corps looking for in turns of a--? Speaker 2: What, I'm sorry what were you saying? Speaker 1: What was the Marine Corps looking for? What kind of a--? I mean. Yeah. Speaker 2: What kind of person you mean? Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of the leadership standards. Speaker 2: Ah, okay. Yeah. They were looking for. Well, first of all I, as I learned, they was a big effort to find more African American officers. And so I know that was one category I fell in. But the other was discipline, mentally strong, focused leaders, morally upright, set the example. I mean all the things that go into being a Marine. Being out front. Courage. You know, it was just. That was, that was the impression of what you had. And in fact when I met with the recruiter they didn't pull any punches. 100 percent chance you're going to go to Vietnam. Still want join? Here's the requirements that you are expected to meet when you get there. Expected to run three miles on this. Expected to be able to do this. Expected to do a number of sit-ups. Expected to do x number of pull-ups. You ready for this? Oh, and by the way, when you're doing this. When you finish all of this, you're going to be evaluated for your mental agility after you've been through a significant heavy endurance run. So in other words, okay, and then I'm going to ask to lead something and you do that too. They call that the speed march reaction course. So you put a pack on your back. You run up some hills and do some other things like that for about twenty to thirty minutes and then you finish it up. Take your pack off and say okay solve these problems. And then they evaluate and that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So it was kind of heavy. So you were honored that you've completed and then once you're commissioned you still had more training to do. This goes with that notion I'm talking about I'm so happy to get out of school. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Speaker 2: I was in school with then for ten weeks and then I went to another school for like twenty-six weeks. This is the polishing your bars. We knew about it, but it was a little tough too. Story_ID: 35884 Speaker 1: But it wasn't just the school, it was the culture. You're sitting in there and you're one of a handful of black officers and there's so much attention on you. And I actually, the one night. We had one black staff member, like a faculty member, who was a supply officer. And so I still had this naive impression that all [U.S.] Marines were Marines. They are. But they aren't. And so he was a supply officer. Had been to Vietnam and set a striking example. He's a good friend to today. And so I chose supply as my first MOS choice, my military occupational specialty. Why? One reason because of him, and his example. The other reason was I wanted something to do that would set me up for success once I left the [U.S.] Marine Corps. I wasn't thinking. I was thinking, okay, so let me do this so that when I get out, I can do this and I was in supply school. Went to Okinawa [Japan] and I said I made a mistake. Speaker 2: Why? Speaker 1: Well, the mistake I was that I was thinking like a civilian and was thinking that preparing myself for life after the Corps instead of thinking about why I'm serving in the Corps and what I'm doing in the Corps and the--. Just like in the [U.S.] Air Force, the main line of the Air Force is pilots. In the Marine Corps main line is infantry. And I understood that better once I deployed. So I said okay if I'm going to augment which mean you have to apply to stay. It's just called augmentation, you can't stay just because. And so I did well enough in my performance in all of the different schools and, you know, in the operational unit. I applied and I threw a Hail Mary. And, I mean it was a Hail Mary. I said I am applying for augmentation, but I'm telling you now that I want to be a platoon commander. I want to be an infantry battalion commander. They are things I want to do in the future and if you choose not to select me, I'm going. And it's in my application. I literally said it. And they came back and said you're augmented. You're now infantry and I became an infantry officer. Speaker 2: So how long did it, and I know you went in, you were in Okinawa in 1970. You were assigned there? Right. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So how long did it them to? Speaker 1: I applied for augmentation in. It was 1972. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It was about 1972, and I was augmented about that time and so I had done two supply tours. Tour and supply at Okinawa. A tour and supply, partial tour at Quantico, Virginia, and I probably would have been getting out if I wasn't augmented, and I applied. I was also preparing to get out too, but it was no guarantee. They weren't augmenting very many and so I was interviewing for jobs and things like that and then the augmentation came through and I immediately went to Officer Candidate School for a few months to kind of hone my infantry skills a little bit. And then I went boom, straight down to Camp Lejeune [North Carolina] and became a platoon commander. Still a first lieutenant and then company commander, infantry. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 35885 Speaker 1: So, so are you married by this time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yes. Married [to Rosalyn H. Stanley] in June of--June 26, 1971. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when I returned from Okinawa [Japan] which was supposed to be Vietnam, I got married right after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were your feelings about the Vietnam War? I guess you didn't have any trepidation about it. I guess? Speaker 2: Nah, I mean it was. I mean I read about it. I mean I knew that. First of all I supported our [U.S.] Constitution and I took an oath that I would uphold and defend our Constitution against all enemies foreign and domestic and I viewed our service of our troops and our comrades as being part of supporting our Constitution. That's way I was at that time. Still there, you know, in turns of following orders, but also serving. And obviously there was a lot of unrest in lots of areas about the Vietnam War. Should we have been there? All this. And I was very much aware of that, but I was also a [U.S.] Marine and so we follow orders and I volunteered to serve and I wasn't debating whether or not I should go or not go. Speaker 1: Now, I've interviewed a lot of officers about this and I'm just-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --so what did you, were you, did you put the two of them together at the beginning? Like, you know, Vietnam War, and Marines. If I'm in the Marines, then I've gotta to participate in the Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did you have an opinion about the war before you joined at all, or did you even think- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --about them being this? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, but I guess that the thing was is that I was going whether I wanted to or not, and I wanted to go as an officer. So in other words, I was gonna be drafted. I was 1A. Which means you're next. Meaning, I'm calling you, and so that actually. Even though that didn't necessarily shake me, I knew that I had, I was going to be going. Maybe not necessarily to Vietnam, but I knew I was going to get drafted or whatever so there were some different circumstances shaping serving at the time. So that became part of it. The other part was that it that altruistically as an American, I'm still very must aware of the segregation, the problems dealing with racism and these issues. And I'm stepping up as an American. Your bonafides are still questioned even when you do whatever you do cause they have been on many occasions. But the bottomline was that as an American citizen I'm fighting off the full bite of this American citizenship. And I believe very strongly that serving our nation, whether I agree with everything that they're doing, whether I'm on board with different policies and things. I still swear to uphold this Constitution. And it may sound, you know, not. Obviously folks have different ways of dealing with this, but we're not Egypt. You know when I say that, we don't throw out, you know, the president of a country just because I disagree with him. I don't agree with the things that [U.S.] Congress is doing right now in lots of areas. But they're ways to dealing with that with some integrity and with. I mean it's the same things when I talk about the militant versus the approach I had when I was in college. And I had same commitment when I was a college student, and so I had no problem with going to serve in Vietnam, although I didn't particularly think that was a war that was where it should be. Story_ID: 35886 Speaker 1: You can take the same argument with Afghanistan. The decision to go into Afghanistan was not on the same line as what was happening in Iraq, you know. But, you know, what I'm alluding to right now is that when you look at Saddam Hussein. When you look at, they were trying to draw the intelligence line about what happened in 9-11, things like that. There was more of a direct correlation coefficient with Iraq. As opposed to Afghanistan. If you follow what I'm saying. Speaker 2: No, I see it just the opposite of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --The more. More of a reason to go because that's where Osama bin Laden was, you know. He was in Afghanistan. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, yeah. But I'm just basically saying it was. I hope I'm not getting my countries mixed up. Speaker 2: You might be. Speaker 1: I might be.-- Speaker 2: --I was thinking you might be when-- Speaker 1: --Yeah. Yeah, Okay may, might have them mixed up, but-- Speaker 2: --Saddem Hussein was Iraq.-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --He had-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, yeah- Speaker 2: --nothing to do with-- Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --9-11-- Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --at all. You know, even though he's a bad guy, he had-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --nothing to do with 9-11. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: But it was it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: I think he did like, so-- Speaker 1: --Yeah. Speaker 2: --bin Laden-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --So bin Laden-- Speaker 1: --yeah-- Speaker 2: --it made sense to go-- Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --to Afghanistan. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Want to think about a little bit because it was something that I'm, you know, that I just said here that I hope I'm not saying it wrong and I'm gonna go back and look at that because it was. It was something about that. But anyway, what I'm saying right now, though. Vietnam in the same situation. I didn't have that line drawn where I wasn't serving my country and I believed in serving my country. Period. You know, and I don't have to agree with everything you're doing because we follow orders, and you serve. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know it may--I made it sound kinda basic but the oath is pretty specific about what you do when you sign up and you don't have the option as an officer and a leader to start not obeying orders while you're still serving, you know. I mean that's just kind of how it is. Do solemnly swear to support and defend the Constitution against all enemies foreign and domestic. That I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same. I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter. So help me God. And so it became. I didn't have that kind of problem, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. The reason why I ask is 'cause it was such a big controversy then, and people are still looking at. In fact, you most universally-- Speaker 1: Oh, I know. Speaker 2: --acclaim now as a big mistake. Speaker 1: Oh, I know. Speaker 2: That we shouldn't have gone over there. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: But, any rate. So, fortunately you didn't have go. Speaker 1: I didn't have to go. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't have to go. Yeah. And so that's fortunate. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Think it's a blessing to be honest with you. Story_ID: 35887 Speaker 1: So, Okinawa [Japan] then. So you were in Okinawa in '70 [1970] and, well you got you back in. Now '72 [1972], you're at Camp--. You're at Quantico [Virginia], I guess-- Speaker 2: --'72 [1972], Quantico. Speaker 1: --after augmentation. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So you're looking at becoming a platoon commander. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. So, you're there. '73 [1973], you move to Camp Lejeune [North Carolina]. Are you a captain by this time, or? Speaker 2: I'm a captain. Actually I made captain in '74 [1974], I think it was. Yeah, '73 [1973]-'74 [1974] timeframe. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how was it? Was it very much different from being a supply officer? (Laughter) I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Night and day. I mean it's. To serve an infantry officer was. That was actually a dream. You had a chance and opportunity to lead more troops, but you lead troops in preparation for combat. You had to practice and be good at your infantry tactics. Your map reading. All the different things go along with your weapons. A platoon of forty-something men early on. The company had over 100. But what you had was an opportunity to practice and to do what the [U.S.] Marine Corps stands for. Because the Marine Corps says every Marine is an infantryman. Every Marine. And so, I enjoyed it. What I was doing. I enjoyed leading Marines. I enjoyed the service. I enjoyed out, being out there in the field with my Marines and we would leave. I mean I'd leave home on for training now on a Monday and come back home almost weekly on a Thursday or Friday and then sometimes go through the weekend. I mean, so even though I was married that became part of the, you know, the routine. You know, it was just part of life. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 35888 Speaker 1: Now, I think you start on a course of doing something that you were known for doing. I had been known for doing every since and that is prepare personnel for combat or an activity-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --Right. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And that's so-- Speaker 2: --Right Speaker 1: --Cause in, was it was '74 [1974], you become--you serve as an instructor at the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, and then you were. You're teaching at this time. You're teaching what? What? Speaker 2: I taught psychology. Speaker 1: Psychology. Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I taught psychology and I almost taught the Marine Officer course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the Naval Academy. And that was my only three year tour of duty, essentially. I was at the Camp Lejeune [North Carolina] for a very short period of time. It was only a year there and I was. It was one of these handpick. I didn't ask for it. I got a phone call from the monitor. This is the person that gives you your assignment and he said, we're looking at you to go to the Naval Academy and, yeah. Basically you're ready to go. Yes, sir. And you go. That was it. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't have a lot of choice in? Speaker 2: No. No. Not really and I don't know. I never turned down any orders anywhere. You essentially salute smartly and move out. Speaker 1: Would you have rather have stayed with a platoon? Speaker 2: I would have. And then when I look back on it, especially I say that, but, you know, boy. Yeah because my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] may not have been hurt. (Laughter) I mean it's all kind of stuff that--. And plus I would be doing and had more credibility. Would have had a Mediterranean float at the time. Cause we were getting prepared for a Med-float. Yeah. Story_ID: 35889 Speaker 1: So, do you want me to clear that up first? Speaker 2: Yeah, if you want to, just make sure it's clear. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, because I misstated, you know, getting my tongue tied and getting my countries mixed up. But I definitely know about the antecedents that led to Iraq, because I was serving in the Pentagon during the Bush administration when actually Wolfowitz and all the folks were focused on Saddam Hussein in Iraq. The Afghanistan piece was the piece that was like, "What?" But we've lost a lot of folks over there. And so, that became a little debatable over the time, and still is in some cases. And we're still there, and we're going to be there for awhile, looks like maybe. That's kind of where we are. Speaker 2: Okay. I think you still got it mixed up. (laughter). Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Afghanistan, we're in Afghanistan right now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because I know the people that are over there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And yeah-- Speaker 2: But that was where Saddam Hussein-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I mean-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, yeah. Speaker 2: Osama Bin Laden. Speaker 1: I keep saying it wrong, but the bottom line is that we shouldn't... I mean, but the bottom line is that we're going to be in Afghanistan for a long time. We're going to be there for--it looks like--with the troops' strengths and things like that. And I think this is one of those cases where I guess my personal opinions about where we are and what we're doing might be clouding this a little bit. Because I think in Afghanistan, even though we're there, and even though there was a direct link, you know, with Osama Bin Laden, some of the decision points about how we went about that, I'm just questioning, I guess. So, that's where I am. I'll leave it alone, I'm messing that up. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 35890 Speaker 1: Well, any stories about the [U.S.] Naval Academy at Annapolis [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Well, it was a, first of all, within my first six months there I told you my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] was hurt. But it was, again, one of those duty stations, like one of the best duty stations that we had, even with the tragedy that happened with my family. I met a lot of folks there. There was a small contingent of [U.S.] Marines, about forty Marines, all very close. I was the only black Marine, but I'd worked in leadership in the law department, and I taught the psychology course and the Marine officer course. It was a tour of duty where I had a chance to teach, and my passion for teaching came out, because I enjoyed teaching. So, that came out. And so, it was an excellent tour of duty for that reason. I got my master's while I was there at Johns Hopkins [University] and went to school, you know, a couple nights a week, essentially. Took some time off when my wife was hurt, and that was on the advice of one of our senior colonels. There was a colonel named Mark Orr who, once my wife was hurt, he just gave us some good counseling and said, "You might want to stay away from that one. You know, don't go to--you know, just drop out of school for awhile, focus on the family, and do what's important." You know, that kind of thing. So, that's what I did. But I had a good tour. It was really an excellent tour at the Academy, and a good time with the family. And I enjoyed the tour. Speaker 1: Okay. In terms of a master's degree in counseling--who were, were there any significant instructors, you know, that you encountered or--? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean I, yeah, I can't really recall any instructors, because I was pretty busy between teaching and going back and forth. I mean, it was a good experience. Johns Hopkins still calls me all the time for donations, you know. (laughter). You know how that goes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 35891 Speaker 1: Now alright, so, in '77 [1977], you're stationed back at Quantico [Virginia] again, right? Speaker 2: Uh huh, Amphibious Warfare School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Alright. So, this is what the [U.S.] Marines are famous for, amphibious warfare? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's why they were created. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, this is, what does this training consist of? Speaker 2: Well, you basically learn the art of not only amphibious warfare, but you also learn the integrating between staff level proficiency--becoming not only a good staff officer, but a good infantry commander, a good fire support commander or, you know, a person in charge of fire support coordination. You learn a lot more about the [U.S.] Marine Corps. You meet your peers, who are for the first time now serving in different occupational specialties: tankers, aviators--you know, supply officers, infantry officers. I mean, people from all over the Marine Corps. You're integrated. A handful of other services, handful. And some foreign service. But it's our first school where you actually get a chance to learn more about expeditionary warfare. You learn more than obviously the basic school, but you're now getting to the point of battalion and higher level kind of things. You're learning to be a really good company commander, if you're an infantry officer. You're learning how to put together not just a five paragraph order, but how to do campaign planning, how to plan operations in detail. And so, branches and sequels--you know, things like this. You're tested. You also get some work in writing, you know, helping to write things out clearly, articulating and so forth. But a good chance to work out, get in physical shape also. So, it was just a good tour, you know, a good tour of duty. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 35892 Speaker 1: At this point, what--now, as I said, you've, you know, built a reputation on being able to get the best out of personnel. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: What is your philosophy of command? I mean, is this a good time to ask that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, this is a good place to ask it, although I didn't write my philosophy of command to a commanding staff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I wrote my philosophy of command and essentially I wrote it--it parallels with something that John A. Lejeune said: "I love my troops. I love people." And so, I convey that love to them as I'm leading, as I'm working, as I'm a part of--you know, with them. I lead with verve, but aggressively, but at the same time compassionately. But really, you know, you're moving out, and you're out front. I serve you, and that becomes part of it. But I also say I want you to have fun, take care of your families, but stay focused on that mission. You know, take some time to smell the roses. Reward your people. And I put all this in my philosophy command. Take care of your people, that's really important. So, that's what I try to convey in my philosophy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 35893 Speaker 1: So, now you go to Okinawa [Japan] again in '78 [1978], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. And you're the Infantry Company Commander [3rd Marine Division; U.S. Marine Corps]. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Now, this is, you're in command of a larger group. That's what we talked about. Speaker 2: Right. It's a headquarters company of an infantry regiment. And so, you're responsible for the infantry training and proficiency of an infantry regiment. You're responsible for helping to displace and help--when a regiment goes in the field, the Regiment Commander is responsible for three infantry battalions at that time. But I've got to make sure he gets to not only a place where he can operate, but be able to anticipate his moves; make good tactical moves to the different places; make sure that communications are set up in the right, you know, places; make sure that the weapons and placement are in the right places; plan fire support for the right places to ensure that he's covered; and then ensure that he is comfortable with my planning as he's moving up. So, I'm now thinking for the colonel, helping him do things that he shouldn't even have to think about as he's planning the operations for three or two infantry battalions, whatever he happens to be working with. And so, it helps you to--you're now focusing on a bigger piece of the operational spectrum. And that's what I did. And I did that very well, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. So, are you a major at this point? Speaker 2: I was a captain. Speaker 1: Captain. Speaker 2: Right, a captain. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 35894 Speaker 1: Now, I've noticed in looking at this outline, is that there's so many--I mean, you're sent to so many places. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Seems like you spent a year here and a year there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is that typical for the [U.S.] Marine Corps? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. For most of my peers, we had--I mean I moved, lived in--about nineteen moves with my family, even though they didn't always move. But we had, we had a lot of moves. Some of it might have been a little atypical in the sense that--like if you go back to the [U.S.] Naval Academy where I'm down there--and I wish I'd been able to stay. I didn't ask to move. The Marine Corps said, "I want you here." And I moved. The same thing goes for--I mean, I only had one three-year tour of duty. That was the Naval Academy. But other than that, everything else was they were moving me. When I went to 8th and I [Officer in Charge of the Infantry Writer Unit, Ceremonial Parade Commander, Marine Barracks 8th and I] after Okinawa--this period of time we're talking about--the tour should have been three years. I was there for two years. President [Ronald] Reagan comes in, and then they pull me out early, because somebody saw me--I was a parade commander, along with working at the Marine Corps Institute where we wrote the courses, correspondence courses. And I was the first black adjutant and first black parade commander. This is a ceremonial unit, just like the ceremonial guard. And President Reagan's people saw me on a parade deck, and said, "Who's that guy?" And they shared that story with me. That's how I know about it. And they said, "We want to interview him for this position." So, I went to the White House and they interviewed me. And the next thing you know I was an aide to the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, named John Herrington. And so, I did that for two years. While I'm doing that, I'm taking a course at the [U.S.] Naval War College [Newport, Rhode Island]. Finished the course at the Naval War College and then I'm also going, I'm selected to go to Command and [General] Staff [College]. I went to Command and Staff College and then after Command and Staff, I went back overseas, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: This is interesting. Now, in D.C., as the ceremonial parade commander-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're doing something that you sort of perfected in high school, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh yeah, oh yeah. (laughter). And that was the ceremonial part. And the other part was, you know, there was some other stuff going on, too, which was important. But the parade commander stuff, yeah, I was pretty good at that. Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright. So, are there any stories about that? I mean, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah-- Speaker 1: --ceremonies and-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I mean first of all, the funny part--the funny story is that Terry Murray, who was a [U.S.] Naval Academy grad, was the, my, the other parade commander. We had two parade commanders at one time, and two parade staffs. Terry was taller than me--is taller than me. So, Terry is about like 6'1" [height]. I'm 5'10". And so, I was the lilliputian, the 'lilliputs' (laughter). You know, the small people staff. And he was the big guys. Speaker 1: So you divided the Marines into the smallest--? Speaker 2: A little bit, yeah, for the parade staff, anyway. You know, because my guys were about my height. And so, you know, we joked about that a lot. I had the opportunity to do President Reagan's parade, only which was by coincidence. You know, they saw me. John Allen, who just left Afghanistan, was my parade adjutant. And he was a captain then, and I was a major. And so he, you know, retired as a four-star [general]. I guess that's where you get into--like I said, I keep going back to Afghanistan. I just, I had different visions of Afghanistan, and things like that. But--and I've been there. So, you know, bottom line is that the parade staff--we used to--before a parade, to relax people, we sang. In the locker room, we would literally sing oldies but goodies and just relax and chill out, and things like that, as we were taping up. Because you taped up to make sure your uniform fit exactly right, making sure your trousers were right where they should be, down the welt of your shoes, you know, things like that. We took a lot of pride in what we did, a lot of rehearsals. And you were critiqued in everything you did, everything. And so that when you did a parade, even though the public would think the parade was perfect, it was never a perfect parade. But you continued to work on it, yeah, everything. Speaker 1: Alright. So, you're the public face of the Marine Corps. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: At that point. Speaker 2: That's right, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: The most public face of the Marine Corps. Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty public, yeah. I don't know if it would be most. That would be debatable, but certainly public, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, in D.C.-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at the White House... Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: You know, that's pretty much the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --okay, I guess the group that's in the spotlight the most, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, even most--I mean, I still would--in perspective, I wouldn't say in the spotlight the most, but it certainly was very visible--and certainly very visible with a lot of the Washington--and people who visited Washington [District of Columbia]. And when the commandant or some person in Washington wanted to show something, they either went to the [U.S.] Army or the Marine Corps to, you know, show something. You know, showcase some kind of special event on a Friday night--Friday evening or Tuesday, at Iwo Jima. You know, the Iwo Jima Memorial, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hope that makes sense. Speaker 1: It does, it does. Story_ID: 35895 Speaker 1: So, you go back to Quantico [Virginia], right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: In '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. I left, when I left the Pentagon, I went back to Quantico and went to Command and [General] Staff College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And that's as a major. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Alright. So, in '84 [1984], you graduate from the Command and Staff College. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And assigned to Camp Lejeune [North Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: --as an executive officer of Infantry Battalion. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Of the 2nd Marine Division? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And just kind of a footnote on Command and Staff. While at Command and Staff, the Beirut [Lebanon] bombing took place. So, that's like '83 [1983], October of 1983, I think it was--November, '83 [1983], whenever that was. But the Beirut bombing took place, and they--I know the TV--the school, put me up to be one of the people to give a [U.S.] Marine Corps perspective on what happened, the bombing. I lost a couple of good friends in the bombing. So, they put me on the camera along with somebody else and, you know, I talked a little bit. And it was on the news, you know, the national news, that kind of thing. I was an honor graduate from Command and Staff, which was pretty significant. And I will tell you that mostly my writing ability--tactics too--but mostly writing, because I got a lot of what they call high masteries on the products I was producing to write, you know, different papers, different things while I was there as a student. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Just for record, the Beirut bombing, that was, that was perpetrated by--who? I mean, who perpetrated that bombing in Beirut? Speaker 2: I'm thinking about it now. Was it Hezbollah? I'm trying to think of what--I don't remember now. Speaker 1: Okay. I think you're right. Speaker 2: I think Hezbollah. But it's been, you know, I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 35896 Speaker 1: Alright, so, Camp Lejeune [North Carolina] in '84 [1984]. [Marine Corps recruit Depot] Parris Island [South Carolina] in '86 [1986]. So, you were at Camp Lejeune for two years. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: There's a lot in that story, though. This is--are you familiar with command screening at all? Heard of that? Most of the services, the [U.S.] Army's had it a lot longer than the [U.S.] Marine Corps had. But in order to become a commander, particularly at the lieutenant colonel level, most services--the [U.S.] Navy, the Army--now the Marine Corps, the [U.S.] Air Force--have a screening process that's held out of the local command. And they look at your records and your reputation and what you've done. And they say "Okay, here's a person. We're going to select you." And they have a board that convenes, not a statutory board, but a board. At that time, it was no command screening process in the Marine Corps. And so, selection of commanders was pretty much--it was parochial, pretty much. It was done by the local commander. "I want this person to be my commander." And there could be pros and cons, whatever way. And so, when I was at [Camp] Lejeune, I went in as a major, a senior major, XO [executive officer] of an infantry battalion. And that's a very critical time. Because right then, as I was selected for lieutenant colonel, the argument that some have made in my absence has been that I should have been afforded the opportunity to become an infantry battalion commander. I remember that. That was one of the things I said I wanted to do right from the very beginning. And I wasn't. And so, when I left Lejeune to follow my orders and go to Parris Island, South Carolina--General Glasgow, who was actually the division commander in Okinawa [Japan] the last time I was there--was then the CG, the commanding general of Parris Island, South Carolina Marine Corps Recruit Depot. I checked in, and General Glasgow was not very happy that I wasn't afforded the opportunity to command an infantry battalion. He said, "You should have been." And he said, "But we're going to right that. We're going to ensure that you command a battalion here." And so, he said, "You'll start out as the inspector until a battalion opens up, and then I want you to become our first Recruit Training Battalion Commander." Then I came out of the top level schools list. This is where the unusual stuff comes in. I was the only person out of all the lieutenant colonels there--there were quite a few who was selected for a top level school. And so, General Glasgow called me back in and said, "Some people aren't going to be happy about this, but I'm going to put you in command of the battalion immediately. So, prepare to take command, so that you can at least have this done before you go to school. And you will go to school, you should go to school. You've been selected for school." So, he did that. But when he did that, the regimental commander wasn't happy, but he couldn't do anything. The regimental commander was a colonel. I was a lieutenant colonel. So, the general puts me in command. I take command, the first time a black is now in charge of a command at Parris Island. It's a battalion. General Glasgow retires. At the retirement ceremony you know kind of what's coming. General Glasgow is retiring. General Hore (ph.), another general, he comes in and he's taking over. Colonel Ogle (ph.), as soon as the Chain of Command Ceremony is over, Glasgow leaves. I go to my office. The colonel comes over to my office, sits down, looks at me and says, "Your sugar daddy is gone. Your 'blank' belongs to me." And I'll never forget that. And I said, "Alright, Sir, I'm going to still serve. I'm going to do my job to the best of my ability." And that was it. And so, I went home and told my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley]. I said, "I think my career is about shot here. I'm just going to go ahead and kind of (laughter)--." That was one of the times I said that. And to make a long story short, fortunately General Hore (ph) also kind of knew not only my record, but also my reputation. And he just sort of hovered, and didn't allow certain things to happen. And there were a group of colonels that were peers of the other colonel, who also knew me. One happened to be, had been stationed at the [U.S.] Naval Academy when I was up in that area. He also knew me. And so, they didn't allow it to happen. So, I was blessed. I was very fortunate. But it was close, in terms of--. And he didn't do me any favors, but he didn't kill me. And so, as a result--much like what Colin Powell said in his book if you've read it--you know, I got fortunate. Because I was fortunate because of just people watching out for me, you know. And those were white officers. You know, these were seniors, you know. But the bottom line was that there was still a lot of contention. Those things didn't go away over the years. In fact, they got harder the more senior I got. The junior--what I dealt with was as a junior officer, a lot of applause. Once I made major, things started getting a little heavy. And they got heavier, the more senior I got. You know, I can't say, you know, I'm--. But that's just kind of how it was. Speaker 1: I guess it makes sense on some level. Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah. Yeah, so it got pretty heavy. Speaker 1: But you did have people around you that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --that knew what you could do. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no question. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you're at Parris Island for, until 1987, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, just a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35897 Speaker 1: And then you go on to the National War College [Fort McNair, Washington, District of Columbia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, this is in preparation of becoming a brigadier general? Speaker 2: Well, it's preparation of becoming a more senior officer in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, a colonel. It's--you got to do it in order to become a general, but it doesn't mean you're going to become a general. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because a lot of folks that went didn't become, you know, flag officers or generals, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: But you've got to go to be one? Speaker 2: Yeah. You've pretty much got to go to one of these top level schools in order to--and it's not just National War College. You have Air War College. You have, you know, Navy War College. I mean, it's different ones you go to, Army War College--. But you pretty much have to have what they call PME, Professional Military Education, kind of checked off--either on your own, or being selected. And at that time, being selected was the key, at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Is it different now? Speaker 2: I think it has changed a little bit. As long as you are PME up--you know, Professional Military Education checked off. Because sometimes within the things you're doing, like being at war, you may not have had an opportunity to go. But if you've been staying current in your professional military education, it may not be as stringent. And I know a couple of officers who've done very well, but had to do it through correspondence and on their own time, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they were already doing some of the things they-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Have to do it, yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. So, was--now, I take it you did well at the National War College? Speaker 2: Uh huh, I did. I had a, you know, good time there. I did a lot of reading, a lot of writing. And I wrote one paper that I'll never forget, which was on the fall of the Berlin Wall, which I predicted--again, now, using my imagination. And I remember the paper coming back with a lot of red ink on it. (laughter). Needless to say, it did fall. But I was actually anticipating it because of what I would call world conditions--where we were. And I was talking about it, and I backed it up with as many facts as I had at the time. Like I said--and the paper, I have it at home. And I got to dig it out of a box. Because I was telling somebody about it the other day. But it happened. And like I say, I've never forget the colonel who said, "How do you say this?" He was really not happy when I wrote that. Speaker 1: You know, this is something that, you know, had been up probably all his life. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: The wall and the whole deal. Speaker 2: And he spent time in Germany, too. I hadn't. I was just writing about stuff I'd read, and things like that. Speaker 1: What was your thinking? What did you--I mean why did you think the wall was--? Speaker 2: Because I was--well, what I was looking at was the emergence of--. We had--we didn't have, you know, I wasn't--. We didn't have a lot of computer stuff then. But this was now coming, you know. The internet stuff was emerging. The closeness of countries was merging. The economies were merging. We didn't have the, you know, the Euro then. But you could see this stuff happening--the commonalities, the borders, and things like that. I mean, I was looking at all these different things, what was happening with China and other countries. I mean, how do you separate that? And so, I was talking about that conjecture. But I said, I just don't see how this can stay, based upon the things that are happening within the world. And we were becoming more technologically sophisticated. And again, we didn't have internet. I didn't have Google [search engine]. But this stuff was happening. And I said, so I don't know what the future holds, but I don't see how the Berlin Wall can stand. And he said, "Blah, blah, blah," you know. (laughter) So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, good prediction. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 35898 Speaker 1: So, now, you became a White House Fellow in 19--. I don't want to skip over--. Now, you're in school through '88 [1988]? Is that it? Speaker 2: Uh huh, right. '88 [1988] is when I graduated, right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you do immediately afterwards? I know you become a White House Fellow in '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Right, '88 [1988], '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: '88 [1988], '89 [1989], okay. Speaker 2: Right. And then--and what happened was even though I was like the third [U.S.] Marine that had been, become a White House Fellow, the other services had a little bit more participation. And I'm not sure if you're familiar with the White House Fellows Program. But you know, the military is the only government agency that allows participants. Everybody else that participates in it, they're, you know, they're civilian, some civilian profession. And so, I was already lined for a job with Joint Staff. And I would have been going to the Pentagon then, to the Joint Staff. When the selection came through after going through the competition in the White House Fellows Program, I worked for the Director of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. And I worked for Director [William S.] Sessions. And I worked outside his door. And I was on his Undercover Review Board and helped him with his personnel policy, you know, things like that. And you take classes, informal classes. I mean, it's nothing heavily structured. You travel a little bit. We went to China, Hong Kong, and one other country I think it is, yeah. But we traveled. And you know, and then we went to a few places in the [United] States, you know. Went to New York and met with the then Attorney General [Rudy] Giuliani and then Mayor Ed Koch. Koch? Speaker 1: Yeah, Koch. Speaker 2: Koch, yeah. Speaker 1: "Koch" or "Koche" or whatever-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It's pronounced different ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay. So, you were--from '88 [1988] to '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And George Herbert Walker Bush was president, I guess then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, initially. And yeah, he was. But [President Ronald] Reagan was--it was the end of Reagan, I split. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Reagan-Bush. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like that. So, I mean that's why when you said it, I was "Whoops." I said, no, I had both of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. So, any stories from that period of time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, first of all when we met, when I met President Reagan, we were in awe. But one of the things that happened was his comments to us when we met him were, "Congratulations on your being selected as a White House Fellow. It's quite an honor, and we're proud to have this opportunity to give you this opportunity to serve." I mean it was, it was very brief. But he's President of the United States, and you had to read that. I said, "Wooooo." So, I'm like saying, "Wooooo, what's happening here?" So, I'll never forget that. And then we shook hands. It was, you know, it was something happening then. As we look at it later on, I'm saying, "Okay, that's what that was all about maybe." Because I'm like picking up on something. But we weren't putting that together then. Story_ID: 36612 Speaker 1: So you know, what's the significance to that, the White House Fellow? I mean, the occasion of meeting President [Ronald] Reagan. Of course, that was an honor to meet President [George H.W.] Bush, the first one. And we had, there were fifteen of us in our class. And we all became, you know, we were all very close. And we're going to have our reunion coming up here this next year coming up. But it was a good--it was just an excellent opportunity to learn to reflect. I kept a diary and, you know, just took notes everyday, because the experience was so unique. I had a good time--a good time, but had an opportunity to spend a lot of time with Director [William S.] Sessions [Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)], and made some good friends in the Bureau. And so, it's a year that I won't forget. You wore a coat and tie everyday, you know, that kind of thing. But it was a good year. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36613 Speaker 1: So, now you go to Australia and New Zealand, I guess in '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I was the, I was the, that was my Pentagon tour after the White House Fellows--what they call, you know, being joint. And I was the Australian-New Zealand desk officer, meaning that you are the country expert for those two countries. And so, then Secretary of Defense [Dick] Cheney was the guy that I was responsible for briefing, keeping him up to speed. Paul Wolfowitz was also one of the people that I was responsible for briefing. And, you know, so I took a number of trips to Australia, some before the Secretary, but always after--well, why he was there. I mean, basically helped him to be current on those issues. You have message traffic that you're always up on all the time. And so, we worked those issues. And in New Zealand, because we had neither confirm nor deny on nuclear issues, we--I didn't go to New Zealand, because we just diplomatically weren't going there--at least the military, anyway. So, we didn't go to New Zealand, but we worked with them. We talked to their folks here. We worked with the Embassy here, and so forth. It was a great tour of duty. I was also the POW [prisoners of war]/MIA [missing in action] Officer for the Pentagon at that time. And so, finding the remains or finding accountability of all those that were lost or unaccounted for, was part of my job also while I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. I think--I don't know if--was this the time period that Vietnam, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --opened doors to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We went to, we went to Hanoi [Vietnam]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I went to Hanoi, went to the Hanoi Hilton. Visited, you know, Ho Chi Minh in the area. You know, I mean, just--literally we just--we spent a lot of time there. Went to Laos--spent some time there. I made a lot of trips over there, a lot of trips. Speaker 1: So, this is like, you know, some fifteen years or so? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Almost twenty years after the war [Vietnam War]. Speaker 2: After the war. Speaker 1: And, you know, what was the--how did the Vietnamese, how did they treat-- Speaker 2: They treated us very well. I mean, it was transparent to us. I mean, they were very open. Now, but we were very cautious. So, in our hotel rooms, for example--like if this was the room, we didn't say anything. You know, because you weren't sure whether or not the room was bugged, or whatever was going on. So, we just kind of kept our remarks down. But from where we sat, they gave us access. We went to, you know, different sites, you know, trying to find remains. If I had even an inkling of something, I could go there in a heartbeat. We did, or we sent someone, you know, always. Speaker 1: You had pretty much freedom in the country? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To go, to get about? Speaker 2: Yeah. It appeared to be, at least to us at that time. You know, this is after Phnom Penh. This is after all the massacre, you know, Pol Pot. Speaker 1: Cambodia, yeah, that was a horrible--. Speaker 2: We went to Cambodia, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I mean, and I wasn't afraid. In fact, the only thing that happened--I remember vividly that I got real sick after the trip to Laos, because we ate something and it just--I mean I thought I was going to die. I was just that sick, you know. But it was, you know, another kind of career broadening tour, very expanding. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36614 Speaker 1: Now, was it '90 [1990] that the Gulf War, the first Gulf War--? Speaker 2: Yeah, '90 [1990]-- Speaker 1: The invasion of Kuwait. Speaker 2: Yeah, '90 [1990] and-- Speaker 1: The first part of '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: Yeah. About that time, yeah, right. Speaker 1: The end of '90 [1990], the first part of '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: That's exactly right, the fall of '90 [1990]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I was in the Pentagon then, doing the job we just talked about [Advisor for POW/MIA Affairs and Assistant for Australia and New Zealand, Office of the Secretary of Defense]. This is when the [U.S.] Marine Corps--I remember I missed Vietnam [War]. And I'd, I'm a colonel now. And just for context, I was an early select for colonel. And although in other services that's not necessarily unusual, in the Marine Corps, it doesn't happen. I mean, it doesn't happen. Oh, putting it in perspective, it hasn't happened since, okay. So, there were four of us early selected for colonel. So, I'm selected for colonel. There is some baggage, there's a lot of emotion associated with that. Because even my peers, people I'm close with were, you know, just taken aback by the selection. And then the Marine Corps, to make sure that I was properly tested, said, "We're sending you to combat." And so, they said, "But we want to make sure you have your joint record," you know, still going joint qualified. So, they kept me on the rolls of the Pentagon. They reached in and pulled me out, and I was sent down to Quantico [Virginia], and put together what they call a battle assessment team. And I did the first S.L.A. [Samuel Lyman Atwood] Marshall kind of 'Lessons Learned' war. And they said, "Okay, put together a team." I just put together initially four people here. And by the time I got in the country I had over a hundred people. And I fanned them out throughout the combat area as we were going into combat, as they were going through the breach and doing the different things. You know, helping them to give immediate feedback to commanders in the field--and what worked, what didn't work, what chem bio units worked, how different things were working, how our weapons were working or not working. Just giving, and not critiquing--but feedback to commanders. This had some mixed emotions, because it hadn't been done before. But we did it very well. And so, bottom line is that I went there. And it was supposed to be for the duration of the war plus six months. So, when I left home on two weeks' notice--literally, two weeks' notice--. You know, I told my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley], "Okay, I know I'm gone for the duration of the war plus six months. So, I'll see you when I see you." And I left, and the war was over in like a month and a half, you know, two months. So, I came back, you know, after a couple of months. But while I was there, first of all we were recognized for the good job we did. We created the first Marine Corps Lessons Learned Library, which is continued to this day. Story_ID: 36615 Speaker 1: And in addition to that, we had--I was contacted by--I think it was then General [John] Sheehan who later became a four-star [general], who was heading personnel. And he said, "Okay, Cliff, you're going to be assigned to the 1st Marine Division and, you know, get ready to go out there." And the command screening thing came out. This is that first command screening thing that I was telling you about earlier. And I was slated to go there. And I went there to the G-4, which is part of my logistics background. And command screening came out, and then I was command screened. And then I was the only colonel that was command screened to go out at that time. And so, there were, I think the division commander wasn't too happy about that at the time. And General Mundy, the commandant, actually flew out to California, and said, "Do it." And so, they did. And so I was, got a call on the squawk box. They said, "Stanley, Cliff, call--you know, the guy you're going to relieve, and set up a date." And that was it. That's not the normal way you find out about how you're going to--you're usually congratulated and things like that, and so forth. So, I went out and I took command and, you know, we had a good Chain of Command Ceremony. Speaker 2: So, where did you go? Speaker 1: The 1st Marine Division in Camp Pendleton, California. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Regimental Commander, Infantry Regiment. And it was--but you know, that was a first also. And-- Speaker 2: Well, I didn't ask--oh, I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Let me just ask you this before it skips my mind here. But when you were the head of the Combat Development Command Assessment Team-- Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: --you went to--did you go to Iraq or--? Speaker 1: I went to Saudi Arabia-- Speaker 2: Saudi Arabia Speaker 1: Right, I went to Saudi Arabia. And then we also did a little bit of incursion into Iraq. I mean, I went up to Iraq, you know, and so forth. But, yeah, I went over. Speaker 2: Okay. And so, that's where you were doing the assessment, right? Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Right there, on the ground. Speaker 2: Okay. So, now we're at Camp Pendleton now? Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: In '93 [1993]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At Camp Pendleton I also--in addition to while I was in command, the Rodney King, you know, beating took place, and they had the Los Angeles [California] riots. And so, I was the Air Alert Battalion at the time. And we deployed up to Los Angeles to help quell the, you know, the riots and the unrest that were taking place at that time. So, I was, had an opportunity to do something in a civil unrest area. And immediately after that, Somalia took place. But I wasn't in the Air Alert Battalion, and somebody else went to that. Speaker 2: What did the [U.S.] Marines do in the L.A. riot? I mean, did you do anything other than fly over, or did you-- Speaker 1: No, we actually-- Speaker 2: --march up, or--? Speaker 1: Yeah. You did a road march up with--in vehicles. And then we took--you know, our Jeeps, our Humvees, you know, up. And then also, light armor vehicles went up there. And for us, we were fortunate, because of our reputation. It was presence. We didn't have to shoot anybody, although there was one shooting incident. And thank God nobody was killed or hurt or shot where we supported the police. But because of Posse Comitatus [Act], you know, you don't--we don't--the military doesn't engage itself, you know, in police actions within the cities of America, you know, unless they lift that. And so, we were presence mostly, riding along with the police, helping them out; reporting, you know, being plugged in; worked with the Justice Department. My tour in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] helped, because the guy that the Justice Department sent was a guy named Oliver Buck Revell, who was actually one of the people I worked closely with in the Bureau. So, that helped fuse those lines. And then working with the city governments and things like that in several cities-Compton [California] and so forth, I was able to work very closely with the city governments and, you know, help out. And so, that's what we did. And so, our presence was there for a week and a half, two weeks, something like that. But it helped to quell things. Story_ID: 36616 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about this, because this is a name that pops up in a lot of internet speculation. What is Posse Comitatus [Act], the law you're referring to? Speaker 2: Well, what, you know--what it is for us anyway is that we are not supposed to--separation of our--and the way our government is set up, we're not going to have what happened in Egypt. The military is not going to be storming down the streets. In fact, the law would preclude that from you being able to engage in police actions. You're not going to find the military engaged in arresting people within the city of Chicago [Illinois], Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] or something like that, even when the National Guard is called in. Remember during the riots and things like that, they're (laughter), they're standing--they're doing things--supporting the police, backing them up. But arrest powers, investigatory powers--all these kinds of things that are associated with that--that's not what the military would be doing, is doing, should be doing, okay. And so, that's where the Posse Comitatus comes in for us. Speaker 1: And how old is this law? I mean? Speaker 2: Oh, gee. I don't, yeah--I don't remember exactly how old it is. I don't know. But it's been around as long as I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm sure it's been around during the modern era but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I know there was a time when there were no-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --police forces at all. Speaker 2: Right, that's right. Speaker 1: You go back to 1830 or '40 [1840], there were hardly any police forces in the United States. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I'll have to look that up. Speaker 1: Military would be the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --body to arrest you, and anything else. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's not the case. Speaker 1: They can't do it-- Speaker 2: You won't find us doing that. Because we were dreadfully close on the cusp of stepping over that, as soon as you get involved in shooting incidents and things like that. That is not--and you will not see that happen. That's not supposed to happen, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm glad you cleared that up for me, so--. Story_ID: 36617 Speaker 1: So, later on '93 [1993], you're in, you're assigned to Norfolk [Virginia], right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: As a Fleet Marine Officer. Speaker 2: Right. That was, these are--as you alluded to already, these are fast tours of duty. I did two years out at Camp Pendleton, California, which is pretty much normal for, you know, getting in command and doing a division tour, particularly as a senior officer. My next assignment is--and let me just give you a little bit of a cusp here. Remember, now, I'm a colonel. And I was selected early for colonel. At that time, you know, in our ranking system, I only--in your career you had--they ranked people either over you or under you. I only had about four officers in my twenty-plus year career ranked over me. And those were usually Welcome Aboard reports, when you're just checking in. And somebody says, "Okay." And you've been there for two months, and this other guy's been there for ten months or two years. And I know him, and I don't know him, and--. So, one is ranked over you. So, that happened. By the time I left division as a brand new colonel, early select, I had like fourteen or so ranked over me. And these were fellow colonels, for the most part. And so, I saw that. I also saw other subtleties that happened, in terms of the staff assignments. In fact, it proved to be one of my most daunting and most challenging assignments, as a Colonel Regimental Commander. When I needed to get officers to replace officers who left, they were slow in coming, or not coming at all. I actually had an Argentine exchange officer who served as my S-4 Officer, my logistics officer, which is highly unusual. I'm not sure it's ever happened before. But I couldn't get a replacement because of cooperation, because of other things like that. And so, I saw a lot of those different things happening while I was there and serving. And it, so it made for an interesting experience. And then as I was leaving, I mean literally, I already had orders for the, you know, USS Mount Whitney. I'm now going to Norfolk. I get a phone call. I'm in the--I've checked out of quarters. The family, you know, my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] is in the car. We're staying at the Navy Lodge, I think it is, on base. We're leaving the next day. I get a phone call from the monitor. And he says, "Hey, Cliff, we're going to keep you here on the West Coast, and you're going to go to the first fleet instead of the third fleet." I said, "Whoa, that's a big deal." Remember now, I always said I followed my orders and everything. But this is a colonel. It's a fellow colonel. So, I said, "Okay." I said, "It doesn't make sense, but I'll follow you. I've already got the house." He said, "That's alright, you're going to stay on the West Coast." I said, "Okay." I made one phone call. I just picked up the phone and I called the general that was over this guy. And I said, "Here's what I was just told. I'll execute whatever you tell me to do, Sir. It doesn't make sense, but I'll do it." He said, "Execute your orders and go to the East Coast as you were originally told. I'll take care of this on this end." And he did. And so, I executed my orders and went to the East Coast, and did what I was supposed to do. The officer who called me was a monitor at that time. He later became Commandant of the Marine Corps. But this gives you--I want to give you some insight into some of the animosity and some of the challenges, you know. And I'm not glossing over them at all, because it was bad blood. And that wasn't the only time. I haven't talked about it very much, but lots of bad blood was happening throughout. Jealousies became even more significant the more senior you get, and got. And this officer didn't forget that. And so--and at this time of course, he was junior to me. And I was, like I said, selected early. Story_ID: 36618 Speaker 1: So, I check into the USS Mount Whitney [Norfolk, Virginia, as a Fleet Marine Officer]. I was there, I wasn't there four months, and I was early selected for brigadier general. And that also hasn't happened since then. I think there were two or three of us. There might have been three. But anyway, it was a below zone select. And that was, I might have been the only one, I'm not sure. But anyway, to make a long story short, I think I was the only one. That also set the stage for a different set of expectations. And so, I'm now a pioneer, when I didn't want to be a pioneer. And so, life got pretty interesting after that. I'm now in a peer group, as I'm standing here with brand new brigadier generals who were much senior to me. They were, you know, they used to be much senior to me. They're no longer. That doesn't go over very well in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. And so, that's one of the things that I experienced right early on. And although I had no regrets about it--because I didn't select myself, the Marine Corps did. You fast forward--even though I know we're going to go back to some of this. I was not selected for major general the first time. That's transparent to a lot of folks. And I'm now back with my peers. But that's considered just about, you know, pass over. The subtleties, or not so subtle things, were that your record didn't change. But there are a lot of folks who said, okay we're going to make this right, you know. Because the people who selected me were people like this general that weighed in, and some other folks--these other older generals--who saw, who wanted, and who pushed. But I was closer now to a peer group who were a little bit senior--who didn't see, who didn't like, and who didn't support. And so, I ran into what I would call the block. And-- Speaker 2: So, every time you were helped up, there was--they made another group a little angrier. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah. And again, I mean if you had your (unclear), you'd rather just kind of be in the mix. Because I'm not trying to do anything. You're just trying to do your job and to serve. It's still altruistic, but that's not the way that's taken when someone's reaching in to do things. My peers at the other services--that happened, but they were advanced. I mean, you know, and they continued. They became four-stars. They became three-stars and things like that. But in the Marine Corps, after myself--me and Charlie Bolden [also a HistoryMaker] left. That's when things started opening up a little bit, because our move was within two, within a month of each other. Both of us were in the same position. Charlie goes down to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And both of us retired as two-stars. Both of us were continuing to be pioneers; both of us were reaching a certain point; and both of us, independent of each other, without collusion, said it's time. And we moved. And then things opened up a little bit. I've kind of gave you some narrative that wasn't where your question was, but--. Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's important narrative though, nevertheless. Story_ID: 36619 Speaker 1: So, about this time--so, well, just a little bit about the [USS] Mount Whitney. The Mount Whitney's a big-- Speaker 2: It's an LCC-- Speaker 1: --vessel. Speaker 2: --it's a communications ship, primarily. It's a communications platform. Admiral Flanagan, Bud [ph.] [William] Flanagan, was the commander on the USS--that, you know--that particular ship at that time, 2nd Fleet commander. So, he wasn't commander of the ship, he was the 2nd Fleet commander. So, he had a whole bunch of ships that he was responsible for. But that was his platform-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as he led his fleet in doing his thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36620 Speaker 1: Now, '93 [1993] is also the year that President [Bill] Clinton signed the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" into law. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about that? At the time, what were you thinking? Speaker 2: You know, yeah, gee, I'd better be careful here, too. (laughter) I thought at the time that we were waffling. And I'm where Mike Mullen [retired U.S. Navy admiral] was when he came out later, you know, most recently when "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" was overturned. Because we were asking our people to lie. Because anyone who's serving knows that we had gay folks. I'm not going to pull any punches. That didn't mean it was embraced or whatever, but you knew. And you knew, period. And you know that if you're around somebody close enough long enough, you know. You just know. So, we did. And so, I just found this to be--I wasn't comfortable with it. I didn't protest. (laughter) There was no flags or nothing like that. But I said, oh man, we're like blowing it on this. And I'm going to leave--I'm not saying certain things, out of respect. And you may even ask the question. But I'll see if you ask the question. But I'm just basically saying that I just wasn't comfortable with that at the time. And it doesn't mean that--well, first of all--and I enforced it. I mean, I was required to do what I was supposed to do as a commander, in terms of upholding and all that. But I didn't go on witch hunts looking for things like that, you know. And of course, we also had things in our Code of Conduct where there were certain things--you know, the fraternization--and officer conduct, and fraternization in general, even if you were or weren't. It didn't matter. You could be heterosexual or homosexual. The bottom line is that there are actually some things that pretty much lock you in. We don't do certain things. And decorum outside--and regardless, even if I'm married, in uniform there are certain things I don't do. And so, those things actually capture the behavioral aspects of what we're talking about, you know. And you also know that as you deploy, which we didn't talk about, folks used to say things like, "What happens in Nevada, stays in Nevada." You know, the--and what I'm saying is-- Speaker 1: Las Vegas [Nevada], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, I mean Las Vegas. So, there's, you know, I mean adultery and different things like that--even the things that are happening right now with sexual assaults, and so forth. You're not going to go down. But I'm just saying there's a lot of yin and yang here. There's a lot of--. So that "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" when it passed then--I'm like thinking that then. And I'm saying, wait a minute, you know. But--. Speaker 1: I know as somebody that's listening to this on the news, I'm thinking, well, you know, I don't know if people told, there would probably be a bigger mess than if they just shut up, you know. (laughter) Speaker 2: Uh huh, yeah. Speaker 1: So, I saw it as a step forward in some ways, you know. Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know-- Speaker 1: My position that if there are no homosexuals in the [U.S.] Army--. Well, I know they're everywhere. Speaker 2: You better believe it. Speaker 1: So, why not the Army, too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So--. Speaker 2: But with--you know, I guess you could say--. First of all, there was this--you know, if you look back--from the perspective you just said, that's success of approximations. That is, you take this little step to maybe get to another step, okay. And there's an argument to be made for that. I'm just telling you that before "Don't Ask Don't Tell," what did we have? Speaker 1: We had like--there's none. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And if there was, we'd kick them out of the service. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's what the--. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so, I'm just saying, you know. I'm just--I wasn't necessarily comfortable with it, but it's a step. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36621 Speaker 1: So, in '94 [1994], now you're at the Pentagon, I guess, right? Is this right? Speaker 2: What year is that? Speaker 1: '94 [1994], as the Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was, initially, actually my job was a headquarters [U.S.] Marine Corps job that was at the old Navy Annex. And so, it was around, up the street around the corner from the Pentagon. That same job right now is down at Quantico [Virginia] because of just the space limitations. But it's a headquarters Marine Corps job. Yeah, so I was the Deputy for Manpower--you know, and Policy--Plans and Policies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a brigadier general. Speaker 1: Alright. So, you're there for--is this another couple of years? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. Speaker 2: Two years there followed by another two years as the director of Public Affairs. And that was the face of the Marine Corps in terms of, "Okay, here's what just happened." And either I'm doing it, or I'm giving the commandant or someone else the right words to say, as we approach that. Speaker 1: What were the significant issues that you had to convey to the public from that position in those days? Speaker 2: We had a few. Do you remember the Aviano [Italy] ski docket gondola incident that took place, where an EA-6B [Prowler] plane was, they call flat-hatting or whatever it was? And it came too low and hit a ski gondola, and some people plunged to their deaths in Aviano, Italy [February, 1998]. That was one that we were dealing with. If you remember the blood pinning incident that took place where people were, you know, they'd get their wings, but they pinned their wings to their skin, okay. Speaker 1: I vaguely remember. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a pretty big issue. Speaker 1: Now, this was something that [U.S.] Marines were doing? Speaker 2: This was something that the Marines were doing. Speaker 1: Were they doing it to show out, that the Marines were tougher-- Speaker 2: Yeah, showing they're tough. I mean that kind of thing. So, we were dealing with things like that. Those are the ones that I'm like recalling right now. There were always, there was always something you were doing as you dealt with the issues from, you know, throughout the [U.S.] Marine Corps. But those were like a couple of the issues. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is in the late '90s [1990s], right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: This is? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--that's '96 [1996] through early '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's mid, yeah, mid to late [1990s]. Story_ID: 36622 Speaker 1: Okay, so, happens in '98 [1998]? What position did you take in '98 [1998]? Speaker 2: I took a, I was the commander of Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center in Twentynine Palms [California]. So, I was the commanding general of that. And that's our place where we do combined arms training. And so, all units that are preparing to deploy to war--helping them with their combat skills and efficiency--I was commanding general for it. So, I had civilian and military responsibilities. At the--I didn't include it in the write-up, but I was recognized by the Department of the Navy for what they call, I think it was a Stinson Award, which was significant civilian leadership. I also had a park named after me there, right there next to City Hall because of my efforts, you know, our efforts, really. But I was the person that kind of spearheaded it, with education and the importance of education, and things like that. And, you know, I was selected for major general. While I was there in command, General Krulak, again, stepped and made sure I had an opportunity to command, you know, as a general officer. Speaker 1: So, this would be--you made major general in what--? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: '99 [1999]? Speaker 2: '98 [1998], '99 [1999], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was '98 [1998], '99 [1999]. '99 [1999], might have been the time that I actually pinned it on. It might have been '98 [1998], but it was about that time though, yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 36623 Speaker 1: So, now, did you retire before 9/11 [terrorist attacks on the United States on September, 11, 2001], or was it--? Speaker 2: I actually was still on active duty. 9/11--actually, I was stationed at Quantico [Virginia] as a deputy CG [commanding general] at Quantico. Really while there, I was the commander of the base, the Commanding General of the base. And I actually had an office in the Pentagon and Quantico. And I had just the left the office in the Pentagon when the plane hit the Pentagon. And I mean, literally. We were in the car. I had my little showcase staff with me and an assistant, and an aide. And we were driving to catch a plane at Quantico. And then the plane was cancelled. They called us and then we got the word that the Pentagon had been hit. So, it was all happening right then. So-- Speaker 1: Was your office in that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the section that was hit? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. It was destroyed. We never went back to that office. It was--so, the plane went in at the bottom. And the implosion took place, and the office was just destroyed from, you know, from the bottom up. Because I was on like the fourth floor. So, we lost equipment. And then people in the surrounding offices, there were some people killed. You know--and you know, it was another one of those cases where I was just blessed. And I, you know, what I lost was insignificant. So, I didn't file for uniforms loss and personal stuff. I said, no way. Yeah, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: I've heard stories were people were just incinerated where they sat. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right, that's exactly right. Yeah. Story_ID: 36624 Speaker 1: But at any rate, so, this is the same year that you retire? Speaker 2: Yeah, I retired in--well, I retired in 2002. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was actually looking then. And for me, the, you know, as far as I was concerned the tea leaves were already there. You've got to get the assignments. I mean, if you don't get the assignments, you know, it's pretty much--you know what's going to happen. I was actually nominated for a third star about the time that I was actually looking, in '92 [2002?]. And that came out in the 'Navy Times'. They said "Marine General--" "Marine retires after being nominated for third star." I didn't get the third star. And I'm not sure I would have gotten it. I'm not, you know, because it's a nomination. It's a nominative position. But I was nominated for a position in the Pentagon. And General Jones, then the commandant, just asked me to hold. He said, "Just think about it for a while before you, you know, decide to get out, because I am nominating you for a third star and promotion." And I knew that the position, although it was a good position and everything, I really--. Remember now, I said I wanted to be an airfield commander, and what I wanted to do, and what my passion was. And I was continually being assigned to different things that were--I was good at, but they weren't where I wanted to be passionately. And so, I made a decision. And I was being recruited, and had some opportunities. And I said, okay, it's time. And that's kind of what it--. So, it was thirty-three years and it was a good career, but it was time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Once you've got it--I mean, did you imagine in any way when you entered the Marine Corps that you would retire as a major general? Speaker 2: No. No way, no. It wasn't even a 'Fig Newton' of my imagination, trust me. No way, no. I wasn't thinking like that. Remember now, I also said I was making plans to get out. I joined, and was already joining with the mindset, "Okay, what do I need to choose to help prepare me for my job once I get out?" No, I wasn't thinking like that. And I don't think that, that even the thought of it hit me until I was a lieutenant colonel. I had done very well in some schools, and people started whispering to me. And it became sort of a reality. Even then, you didn't verbalize it, hardly even to your wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley]. You just sort of--okay, maybe this is possible. But I wasn't thinking like that, no way. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36625 Speaker 1: Now, what were you thinking about in terms of the next move at this juncture? Will you play golf, or? Speaker 2: (laughter) Oh, no, no. First of all, I'm a lousy golfer. (laughter) So, but remember, I said at the [U.S. Naval] Academy I scratched the itch of teaching, and I enjoyed it. So, I wasn't sure how in the education field I was going to do this. So, I didn't know whether or not it was going to be superintendent of schools, whether or not it was going to be something that was, you know, a smaller level or whatever. I just didn't know. But I knew it was going to be that. So, I started putting my toe in the water in the education field. And it was already an [U.S.] Army general who had been the superintendent. He was an Army retired major general. Speaker 1: General [Julius] Becton [also a HistoryMaker], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, he was one. There was another one in the State of Washington who passed away from cancer, leukemia, I think it was. I can't remember his name right now, who had done extremely well. And so, I was saying, oh man, this might be something. So, I looked at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and actually went through a couple of interviews. But then in Philadelphia--and I was a finalist. But then the system started going through--they were, the State was taking over the school. I said, I don't want to cut my teeth on this. So, I said, forget that. And I dropped out of that. They called me back again. But to make a long story short, what ended up happening was the person who led the interview was then the Chief of Staff of the School Reform Commission, the one that took over. And he said--or the School Board at that time--I think it was the School Board at that time. And his name was Pedro Ramos. So, he's now got the School Reform Commission. He was at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia] at that time. And that's how my name got in front of, you know, the University of Pennsylvania. They said, "You need to talk to this guy. I've met him, talked to him--and you need to talk to him." And that's how I ended up going there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, that became the first toe in the water in the education arena. And then I got my doctorate through them, Penn. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you joined Penn as a Vice President? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Executive Vice President--. Speaker 2: Executive Vice President. Speaker 1: --of the university. Speaker 2: Right, the Chief Operating Officer, basically. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 36626 Speaker 1: So, this is just the transference of skills from the military to a university. Speaker 2: I thought so. (laughter). I thought so. Speaker 1: (laughter). (Unclear) over-simplified it? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, it--there were clearly some big differences, and I wasn't happy--big differences. As an executive vice president, I was like number two or number three, right there next to the provost. I mean, I'm right there working with the president. And so, I'm supposed to help her in her running of the school, and all that--Judith Rodin. But I didn't--you know, something as simple as having access to a calendar--knowing when she's going to be in town; when she's not going to be in town; what she's thinking; to be able to serve. It was a total disconnect, in terms of my experience in the military. And, because she didn't, she wouldn't let me do that. Then when people approached me to do what my predecessor was doing--. For example, there were people who wanted me involved, to be involved, in certain areas of the city doing things. My predecessor did it. She wouldn't let me do it. And then when a group approached me and they wanted me to be on their board, big board, she wouldn't let me do it. And I said, what's going on here? And I wasn't very happy. And it was already hard enough transitioning. And my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] didn't want me to get out. Remember that. I got out. I didn't have to get out of the [U.S.] Marine Corps. I said, this is not working. And so, I started, I started talking to my attorney. I started the job in October. I started talking to my attorney like in November or December. I am not exaggerating about the transition. Because I said, this is not working. And by the next October, I was gone. And then it took awhile to get the next position. Story_ID: 36627 Speaker 1: And during this time you worked on your-- Speaker 2: I was always working on my doctorate, yeah. Speaker 1: --your doctorate degree. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your dissertation. Your dissertation was entitled, 'The Importance of Character Development in American Colleges and Universities: How Two Schools Accomplished Their Mission.' Speaker 2: Well, the genesis of the topic came from my experience at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], to be frank. And the dichotomy between my experience at Penn and my experience in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and my experience in the military in general. Even though the--no environment has what you call perfect people. I found a lack of emphasis on the issues of character and higher education to be staggering. There are a lot of folks who graduate with character, don't get me wrong. But to have it nowhere--. Remember now, and I also started out in an environment where I was required to go to vespers and the chapel, and other things like this. I mean, I come and said, "Whoa, whoa." I mean, nothing, even my concern about the disabled. My wife's [Rosalyn H. Stanley] disabled. I am like, on it. Because we had buildings for example that did not have elevators that were working--high rise buildings with people in wheelchairs. And I'm saying, "Wait a minute. Let's fix this now." And the school was running counter--I mean they weren't as focused on that. The lack of cleanliness--. Issues like streets being cleaned, and things like this. All these things fell under my purview. Issues of crime, and how they handled them, and what they focused on. I'm like going through--. And then issues of allegations that are coming up from people working in the workforce. I'm identifying with the workforce. And they're looking at discrimination issues and things like that. And I'm now diametrically opposed to the attorney who's trying to push the--. Because the attorney told me in no uncertain terms, "I'm here to protect the school, to look after the schools." "Well, I am too, but this is not right." And I said, "It ain't working." And so, that became that part. Now, academically--now, the school--the reputation's off the page--good, excellent education. I enjoyed that, and they paid for it, you know. So, what I'm alluding to right now is that, okay, that was not a good fit. It paid a lot of money. That was the other thing, a lot of money. And, but it still wasn't the kind of fit that, you know, that I should have had. Story_ID: 36628 Speaker 1: So, the next five years were much better, even though I worked in Minnesota. You know, I just commuted. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you worked in Minnesota for the--you just mentioned, the-- Speaker 1: Scholarship America. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Right. I did that for five years. And that was a much different experience, and a continuing building experience. And I continued to hone my skills. But again, you're working in an environment that's like totally different. Now, you know, I mean it's--here's one of the things I didn't bring out. I mean, I never found it necessary for me to give orders to do much of anything. Leadership doesn't mean, "Do this, do this." Never. In fact, I had no illusions or delusions of grandeur about my importance, or anything like that. And so, but the perception at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--and at some point in Scholarship of America--were people who thought that all you want to do is give orders, because you're a general. Speaker 2: You're a general, a [U.S.] Marine general. Speaker 1: That's exactly right. But that was the antithesis of what you did as a leader. You inspired, you helped, you rolled up your sleeves and did it with them. You showed them how, or you learned how, with humility. But you didn't have to necessarily give a lot of orders. You may provide the overall vision or guidance, but you also have the humility to be able to say, "Okay, that's a good way of looking at it, a different way." And, but you're still responsible. You are not only authority, but you're accountable. I didn't find that transference to be as direct in my civilian life. And even to this day, I still see challenges there. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what did you do at Scholarship America? What do they do, first? And then--? Speaker 1: Okay. Scholarship America is actually one of the largest, actually, non-profit companies that raises scholarship dollars to send students to college, afford them an opportunity to go to college. The main business, though, is in a scholarship management services where we manage the scholarship accounts with a thousand companies, basically. I'm not sure what the number is right now, but it's a lot of companies, big companies--GM, GE, Ford, you know. I mean, just companies--IBM. I mean, you just name the list. I mean, these companies, they have scholarships for their students. And they also have scholarships that compete nationally for different things. We manage those accounts, and do that for a price. We also had about eleven hundred dollars for scholars' chapters that raised money in their local communities, some more successful than others. But the reason that a lot of folks don't know about it is because they're in the New England states primarily, very successful there. Very successful in the Midwest in general and the Pacific Northwest, and a little bit of California. That's where they mostly are, although we're in over forty states. But when you have in, let's say, Kentucky, one chapter. Or when you have in Maryland, one chapter, you're not going to hear about that one chapter. There's a chapter in Lancaster, PA, Pennsylvania, that's phenomenal in terms of what they give back. In other words, they--a bank runs it for them, helps them. They had some banking background, and they have a give-back. And so, what happened was you had a, I mean a phenomenal program, where the graduates promised to give back once they graduated. And they paid the money back that was given to them for scholarships. And because they--most of them paid back without having something hanging over their head. And they end up making a lot more money. And they were able to give more scholarships to people in basically Pennsylvania, and those in the Lancaster area. And so, I was responsible for leading a bunch of folks, to include several, what we call--not chapters, but basically divisions. I'm trying to think what the word was. But we had, I had different regions. I'm sorry--regions is the word that was escaping me. And I had regional, you know, leaders who were in different areas. But it's not the military. And I wasn't even looking for it to be the military. But the other thing is, is that what continues--the recurring theme that keeps coming out in my life has been those who--even if you have a difference of opinion, respecting the other person's opinion has always been important to me. We may differ on opinions, but I still respect your opinion. That is not--and also, it's required, so to speak. I mean, at least when you are successfully focused on a mission in the military, you've got to do it. And it ain't, "You got to do it" out here, so to speak. And so, that's kind of where I am. I'm saying too much. I hope you understood what I was saying. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 36629 Speaker 1: But, okay, so, now you left Scholarship America in two-thousand and-- Speaker 2: Nine. [2009]. Speaker 1: --nine [2009], okay. Now, and was this because of your nomination for [Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness]--? Speaker 2: No. Actually, well, I'd already got an inkling on a nomination. The nomination process, as you may know, took quite a while. I knew when I was leaving, that I was already being considered and being looked at. But the main reason was five years of non-profit, working in Minnesota, commuting--having now at that point lived in my house for about seven years, my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] in a wheelchair--Mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] with Alzheimer's moved here to assisted living. I wanted to be close to her, and be able to spend more time with my mother and my wife, and live in the house that I hadn't lived in because I was commuting. And so, that was about it. So, I was nominated for this position, knew that it was happening, knew it was a great opportunity. We anticipated--actually after, you know, going through the paperwork process, it was exhausting. We started it in May of 2009. I left in June, July, of 2009. And my first hearing was like October, 2009. Or interviews, hearings--November, October timeframe. And I wasn't confirmed until February, because of the way the politics worked in whole. And so, that's kind of how that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was the some of the drama around the hearings? Did they--a lot of the appointments of the [President Barack] Obama administration, I mean--. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--first of all, that what you just said is actually the drama. It's the, it's almost any appointment gets held up for--the Senate can just basically put a hold, and don't have to have a reason. One of the reasons was something happening in the voter registration, voter ballots, all that. I didn't, I obviously didn't have anything to do with that. But that was something that was there. And one guy wanted something to happen. And the only tool they have is to put a hold on somebody until you answer his mail. The other one was something dealing with the [U.S.] Air Force, and some weapons platform that I had nothing to do with. But that's the way it works. So, I ended up being--. Once (laughter) Harry Reid, Senator Reid, got on the floor--I mean literally, my face showed up on TV. He says, "Okay, we are still trying to get people nominated, and I'm going to show you some examples. Here's a retired Marine general that has nothing to do with any of these things. He is qualified for the position. But he's being held up because of Air Force platforms, and so forth. Go figure." And my face shows up. Within a day or two, things break, confirmed, and I'm in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's more drama (unclear), of course, but--(laughter). Speaker 1: Alright, alright. Story_ID: 36630 Speaker 1: So, as Under Secretary of Defense, the Secretary was [Robert] Gates, right? Speaker 2: Gates, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And he was a Republican-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who came over from the previous administration. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: So, what were some of the issues that you had to--. Now, you were the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness? Speaker 2: Personnel and Readiness. Speaker 1: Which it seems that this is a familiar role-- Speaker 2: Very familiar. Speaker 1: --I guess in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was, I was very familiar with the role, very comfortable with the role. And as I checked in--well, during the initial interview once I was confirmed--I'd already met Secretary Gates and I'd already met the Deputy Secretary [William J.] Lynn [III]. He and I were, Lynn and I were on different sheets of music. And I didn't realize it at the time, but I believe that Secretary Gates and Lynn were not necessarily seeing eye to eye on different things. That was not on my threshold of awareness at the time. Secretary Gates calls me in. We're closer than this. He says, "I'm glad you're here. We've been without political leadership here for a couple of years. And I wish I'd known then what I know now. Here's what I want you to do." He gives me a stack of stuff. And he says, "This place is messed up. We've got some real problems here, and I need you to do this." And he says, "I am--and to show you my commitment here, I am giving you the assistant secretaries from the Department of the Army and Navy and Air Force. This is unprecedented, to come help you as you focus on the heavy issues that are going on." So, he gave me like three additional people. And he said, I'm giving you my personal assistant from his office to help me. And he said, "And you keep them as long as you need them." But they helped him identify some of the problem areas, because there are real problems. As we get in there, those problems are real. But we also have an office that has been without leadership for a while, a long time. And also, you know, what I would call a serious state of denial. And so, I became the change agent. And the staff, they're rebelling now, of course. They made their first in-run at me within three to four months. Secretary Gates, again, 'sic-ced' his staff on my folks as the first reports come out. They're now leaking out and everything, because there are problems where the bureaucracy just grinds you to a halt. And so, he puts his press people on me, and they write good stories, literally. He says, "Ah, this, you know, 'boom, boom, boom, boom'". And they were good stories. And Secretary Gates, fast forward, is now leaving. And as he's leaving, what happens is, is that [Leon] Panetta's coming in. And as soon as Panetta's confirmed, "Whoo," allegations, which wouldn't have happened if Gates was still there, because it wasn't happening. So, the allegations were I was eavesdropping on people's e-mails; that I took money and created a lavish conference room; that I phone-tapped something or whatever; that I fired many, many, many, people, you know, thirty-something people; and all this kind of stuff like that. Fast forward a year, those allegations were unsubstantiated. The problem was, I couldn't do my job because of the way the system works. Because once you're allegated against, they have to investigate. It was easy to investigate, but you can't do your work. And Panetta's coming in. He's now--also has Congressional pressure put on him. Because it's not only the allegations are coming out, some of those people took the allegations to members of [U.S.] Congress. Also, you had members of Congress that weren't supporting [President Barack] Obama in the beginning. You also had people--you had allegations where for example, one of the guys--I didn't fire him. I wanted to move a person from this position to this position. But he was in a position that was close to some old guys in Congress, and they didn't like that. But the chairman of the Joint Chiefs was having problems, as I was, with this one guy in this one position who was blocking progress--couldn't do anything, holding things up. Courage of convictions--move him. But he decided to retire. And so, that became another one of the people that you put on the candidate list. So, they investigated. There was nothing to it, but I had to leave because the bottom line was I couldn't do anything. I became neutered. I couldn't--for example, "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" [policy]. We're now finishing up, and I'm the guy that's implementing it. I'm the one that's responsible for doing it. But I can't even get on TV to do it, because the bottom line is that I've got allegations out here which become the other story, as opposed to focusing on what we're supposed to be focusing on. So, my time there was shorter than it should have been. My successor lasted less than six months, with him in the job. And the person that I hired, brought in, confirmed, is now being nominated to become the next person. And so, there's been like three, three people in that position since I left. Speaker 1: Three other (unclear) secretaries in that position? Speaker 2: Yeah, all acting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One confirmed, another one probably about to be confirmed, yeah. Story_ID: 36631 Speaker 1: What were some of the problems that Secretary [of Defense; Robert] Gates-- Speaker 2: Oh, my God. Speaker 1: --you know, handed you. Speaker 2: One example, like for example, the morning-after pill. What was happening was, is that there was no--you know, he didn't approve--the [U.S.] Department of Defense didn't approve a morning-after pill, okay. The next thing you know, the Department of Defense approved a morning-after pill, and we announced it. But it came from my office. This is before I got there. I mean, he had--"What?" So, that kind of thing. A decision was made to, I forgot where it was, but to commit the National Guard at a reserve someplace. Shouldn't have been, but it was done. It came from my office. But he didn't approve it, and there was no coordination. That's another one. There were some challenges with the new--oh, Walter Reed [National Military Medical Center]. Wooooo-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Walter Reed. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Walter Reed. Now, I'm not there yet. But Walter Reed is just blowing up. That's my office. I mean, you know, the health affairs piece is right there. We're not communicating, we're not talking, we've got troops living in horrible conditions. There are roaches, rats. I mean, it's just all kinds of problems. And you read about those. Speaker 1: Right, they were all in the news, and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --now, Walter Reed is closed. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. But that's my office, you know. And these are--that's just a snapshot. If you press the right button right now, I'll give you some more anecdotes. But they're real. And then you had an office where--oh, okay. So, let's just take Black History Month, or any month, really. They were funneling money. We're now tight on the budget, but they're, we're supporting almost every event that's going on. We're short on money, and it's no accountability for it. There's no delivery. There's no correlation with investing and supporting the Urban League Conference, and what it's doing for the Department. If they don't report nothing, then nothing's coming in. So, I mean, there's not the right kind of correlation taking place. We're not responding to Congressional correspondence. That was a huge issue. What I'm saying is that--let's say that Senator Hughes [ph.], for lack of a better name of a person--writes a letter and says, I need to check on this issue. Time--cryphics (ph.)--we don't respond. A phone call from the Senator: "Hey, Secretary Gates--" You're asking, and of course, nothing. That's my office. I mean, so we were last on that. We were, I mean it was just unbelievable. And then you had people that were in positions for years. And there's nothing wrong with having been in a position for ten years, nine years--don't get me wrong. There's nothing wrong with that. But incorrigible when it comes to--okay, here's a new Secretary who's saying, "Here's what I want to do." And they're saying, "I don't want to do that." Because these are not necessarily political appointees. These are people who are there forever. So, now you go okay, let's now talk about this-- Speaker 1: This is a bureaucracy-- Speaker 2: This is a bureaucracy. Speaker 1: --that you're talking about-- Speaker 2: This is a bureaucracy. Speaker 1: --that's going to be there for a Democratic, Republican, whoever, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. I mean this is what--this is, sequestration is bringing out some of the fears in some of this right now. But you've got--Secretary Gates, for example, wanted to have the new mine-resistant vehicle, you know, for fatalities and everything. And although this wasn't all directly in our office, it was just held up. It was just ground to a halt until he finally was able to make a decision, you know, after overriding the resistance and the bureaucracy, those kinds of things. And the list just goes on and on and on. So, them cutting back--. We also have too many senior executive services. I mean, you had people doing--they're doing general office service. They're being paid as general officers, as civilians, but they're doing GS-10 work. They've been--it's just, it's bloated. And so, you've got these folks that have been there forever, not necessarily making a whole lot of money. But what I'm saying is it's just not the right kind of balance. Story_ID: 35909 Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, these are--yeah, now, the problem with Walter Reed [National Military Medical Center], just to go back to that for a second. Walter Reed has I mean, stood there for years as a, you know--I guess it's the first military hospital people would think of. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, the only one that almost everybody could name. What happened over there? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know directly, because I wasn't there then. But I will--as correctly perceived, there was a serious leadership issue of--. It's like--you know how you lead by kicking boxes? There is no position I've ever been in that I didn't get out and see what's going on, not just relying on a staff. So, there were serious leadership issues of not being aware of where our--not only our wounded and what's happening with them--but also what was happening, or what is happening, with spouses and families that have come to support them. My mother [Ellen Elnora Stanley] retired from Walter Reed. So, I mean I know exactly where it is. I used to drive up Butternut Street and Georgia Avenue to go right in that gate when it was there. It's now about a block up. So, you know, those are the kinds of things that, you know, affected them. I think the wounded warrior issue is one that's going to be with us for awhile, by the way. And I, that's one that I still think about and try behind the scenes now to do some things to help, but way behind the scenes. Because we're not doing right by our wounded warriors, you know, in terms of taking care of them, either. Speaker 1: And the stories coming out of Walter Reed were appalling. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think that people were coming back from Iraq and Afghanistan with serious problems of having to deal with deteriorating conditions over there. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 35910 Speaker 1: So, I know there was an Inspector General investigating you. And all this is going on in 2011, I guess, the summer of 2011? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: And was there any one thing that happened that made you decide just to--it wasn't working? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't any one thing. But it was, it was the duration. And after I checked, an investigation was going on longer than it should have. It could have been wrapped up pretty easy. The allegations, although serious on the surface, were easy to check out. And I knew they were easy to check out. And so, I knew that it was more to it than just the allegations. It's the politics associated with it, which I couldn't put my finger on all of that. But you have, for example, the fact of diverting funds to build a lavish office is pretty easy to check out. It's really easy to look at the forensics on that. Speaker 1: Did you spend any money on the office at all? Speaker 2: No. I didn't even--that's the point. Because the office was requested before I got there. I moved into the office several months after being there, but I didn't request it. It was an office that was already in the plans from the people that were working across the hall. It was so easy to verify. The running joke in the--also about the, I think they called it--. It was something to do with keyboard mining, or whatever. The running joke was that--I mean I don't even know how to transfer a phone call from one to the other. I mean, I know how to do e-mails and stuff. But they're, I'm not into a lot of other things. And so, when it first came up, "You're kidding me, right?" And of course, a couple members of the staff laughed, too. "Right, you serious?" But it's so easy to check out, because all you have to do is just do a forensics. And so, what I saw happening was this investigation--when I asked him, the IG apologized--because he's now gone. But the--he said, "This investigation will probably go on for some time." In the meantime, very significant things are happening. And I'm not involved, I can't involve myself in those directly. I can't publicly say anything. And the allegations were adding up. The other allegation was--which never came out publicly even after I left--the allegation caught up which was dealing with the fact that--on TRICARE [the health care program serving Uniformed Service members]. It was alleged that I was against making changes in TRICARE because I would be the, I would be a personal beneficiary, because I'm a TRICARE user. The problem was, was that I would not allow the staff, unless they explained to me, to increase the TRICARE costs in regions out here for retirees. Because first of all you didn't inform people. First of all, there were other options, and you didn't pursue those other options. This is just what you wanted to do, and you went ahead and announced it. And I said I'm not signing this. So, the allegation was that I wanted to do it, you know, for personal reasons. The problem was, is that for that TRICARE program, I was not eligible for it once I turned sixty-five [years old], and I was turning sixty-five in a couple of months. And so, I wasn't a beneficiary. So, when the IG investigated me, I said, "I'm not even eligible for the program now, I'm sixty-five." What I'm saying is that, you know--so, these things were so easy to neuter, to chop down, or whatever. But I was caught up in that. And so, I knew there was more to it. And I alluded to the fact that the Deputy Secretary of Defense, who left a month or so before me, he and I did not see eye to eye. And he and I were--and it was definitely loggerheads. In fact, we even had arguments. Not arguments in the sense of arguments, but to the point of saying, "I disagree with you." I didn't argue, I just said "I strongly disagree with you." And the baby steps that he made me go through were totally different from my relationship with Secretary [Robert] Gates, and how he wanted to do things. And so, I was doing a lot of push-ups, unnecessarily, with the Deputy Secretary, whereas with the Secretary it was a mano, it was real relationship. Secretary Gates, it was a real relationship. It was executive, it was professional. My relationship with the Deputy Secretary was petty. I met with him weekly to say what I've done. "This week I've done this, this, and this. We finished this, we did this. We're going to do this next week." I've been an executive and a general too long to be going back to doing stuff that I was, wasn't even doing when I was a second lieutenant, much less this. Story_ID: 35911 Speaker 1: One of the things I didn't mention, you know. For example, in the various--in the job, particularly as I got senior in the military--and it's mirrored over into there. It's that even in the military, I was questioned if I relieved an officer--more than my peers. But I was also held accountable for what happened. And so, if I fired an officer, there were serious roles. You were reading about it in the papers, you see things. The person doing the firing is not a part of the news. It's what happening here. When I fired someone, "Who the hell do you think you are?" I mean, it would be a total--. And so, as I'm moving anyone, "Who do you think you're--". I saw the same thing. It was the same thing that appeared. I knew what the etiology was. I understood what was happening. But I was still held accountable for accomplishing it. But you can't accomplish it, if you don't have the right people on the team. It's so basic. And it's not a question of thinking that you're always right. I know I'm not. But you still have to have the right people on the team--people that can look you in the face and say I don't agree with you, and you can go forth. Or, people who will work against you, undermine you, which is the worst. People who were working against you, smiling in your face--the old book of smiling faces sometimes pretend to be your friend. I mean, they were--they would smile, they would talk to you and this and that, but they would actually be doing the opposite. And I could see it, and it was happening, and it was obvious. And so, I had that happening at different points throughout my career, particularly as I got more and more senior in the military. And it definitely happened when I was in the Pentagon. Story_ID: 35912 Speaker 1: What we haven't talked about is my faith in detail. But my faith is very strong. And so-- Speaker 2: Just, before I leave this-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: I just to say that what you're saying, I mean, we've heard from people in all walks of life, you know--in different--you know, police departments, fire departments, and business corporations, and hospitals. And you know, almost every-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the same sort of thing. Do the black, the African American officers, have any kind of association or somewhere they discuss these issues? Speaker 1: We do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We have the National Naval Officers Association which is--they are Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard officers, where we talk about these issues. And while I was on active duty, I served as the--it's NNOA, National Naval Officers Association. I was actually Eastern Regional Vice President for the organization. And so, that was an organization that was all Naval, and Naval service officers, basically from essentially Rhode Island all the way down to Florida. And a little bit west, not too far west, because you also had a Midwestern and you have a Western. And we talked about these issues. And we met with senior leaders in the different branches of the service as we talked about it. And I'm actually now, because of--not only my background, but I hope reputation--the [U.S.] Marine Corps called me back, and I'm part of the Diversity Commission. I'm the only retired military person that's involved in this Diversity Commission, which is primarily civilian based. But it is working with the Marine Corps leadership to work on some of these issues. But that's just the Marine Corps, it's not DoD [Department of Defense] wide. And so you, so, we had that forum. And I just went to the National Naval Officers Association meeting a few weeks ago, a couple weeks ago here, you know, to help with that. My daughter [Angela Stanley] is a Naval officer, as I said. And I work with her and work with the other Marines. I went to a wedding this past weekend where a young former Marine, you know, highlighted in the wedding me and another officer for helping him in his career, you know and--to tears to a point. And what I'm alluding to right now is a very real problem of, you know, I go back to President [Barack] Obama. I don't even point to myself--where just putting the people you need in place to be able to do what you have to do, especially if you're holding me accountable, and being able to do it. It's a real challenge. And that's the challenge. For example, when Secretary [Leon] Panetta came in, he joined--and I might have the dates mixed up. But I think it was the first of July, but it might have been June. I just don't exactly remember the exact date in 2011. I didn't get my deputy until a few weeks before that. I'd been there for a year and a half, and my deputy was confirmed. And so, I used--and there was no Chief of Staff, there was no nothing. So, I had to create a showcase staff. Now, the structure I created to include getting a uniformed officer, three-star and all of that, is still in place. But it didn't exist when I got there. And it was resistance on that. And so, what I faced was this uphill battle to do what you're supposed to do, while fighting sort of a retrograde action of folks who didn't want you to be successful anyway. There were no mistakes in that sense, you know, in terms of--but I did. There were no judgment errors but, again, when you know the system, you know exactly how to stop it. And I wasn't the first one. There were others, too. So--. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 35913 Speaker 1: Now, after retirement from this position--I mean as Under Secretary of Defense, what did you do next? Speaker 2: I've been busier than I have ever been. Well, the most important part for me is church. And I was ordained even before, while I was serving. So, I'm a deacon in the church. And so, I was able to get, become more active. But I was already the president of our Men's Ministry at church. And-- Speaker 1: So, this is AME [African Methodist Episcopal]? Speaker 2: Now, actually, I used to be AME. I'm Baptist now. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (laughter). Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Well, I didn't know, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --because AME has stewards, I think-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, no-- Speaker 1: --instead of--(unclear) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: --I was kind of confused there for a second. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm Baptist, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Is your wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] a Baptist? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's Baptist. And that's the reason that I converted. I converted when we first got married. So I grew up AME, and when we got married, I went ahead like that. That's another story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, the church is part of it, a big part. I have a meeting this evening, which is what I'm trying to get back to. Story_ID: 35914 Speaker 1: But I'm also with the Monster Senior Advisory Group, monster.com. So, I'm on the-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Monster Government Solutions. So, I'm a senior advisor for them. That's pretty much a good, lucrative position that I work with, with them. I'm also a director for Seminars International, which keeps me, my foot in water, for education. Seminars International is responsible for--they're a small company based in Chicago [Illinois], but they help with overseas learning opportunities. And so, it's a handful of directors, but we actually meet a couple of times a year and help with the guidance and directorship of that element. The [U.S.] Marine Corps Task Force of Diversity, task force, that's another one that I'm on. And if you push the right button, this ain't all. Because there's a couple of other things I'm doing, too. I still mentor. Oh, I can't believe I'm missing this. We're starting a business, me and several others. The name is now officially recognized in the State of Maryland. It's, we call ourselves the EGA Group. Now, EGA, for those who wouldn't know it, stands for Eagle, Globe and Anchor. We have principals, I'm one of the principals. I'm actually going to be the CEO [chief executive officer], I am the CEO. The, and we have one person that's the CFO [chief financial officer]. The other person is administration, and the person is marketing. But we're all principal, equal partners, of a company that we're standing up. We expect to open our doors in September [2013]. Speaker 2: Eagle, Globe and Anchor. That's a, those are the symbols of the Marine Corps. Speaker 1: That's the Marine Corps symbols. And we're all Marines. And so, but we we're keeping it EGA, because we don't want to serve just Marines. And, but any Marine will pick up on it, "What's this?" You know, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, Marine culture is really sensitive to symbolism. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We spent a day in a Marine Corps restaurant in Quantico [Virginia]. Speaker 1: (laughter) Globe and Laurel [The Globe and Laurel Restaurant]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Globe and Laurel, right, exactly. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So, I mean, we were saturated-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --with it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, it's interesting. So, these are the activities you're going forward with today? Speaker 1: That's what I'm going through right now. And I'm actually being certified as a coach right now. I went through certification training down in Greenville, South Carolina. And that was two days of training there. And then I've now spent the past two months doing what we call the (unclear) certification training. I should finish up sometime either late this week or the first of next week. And then I get my evaluation, and then I become certified as an executive coach. So, that's the other piece that we're doing. And as I mentioned, I think I mentioned when I first started--we literally just--my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] and I bought a house in Charleston, South Carolina. And although we're not going to move right now, we're going to sell the one we have in Virginia and live in two places for a bit, and set up shop, play some golf and continue working, and serving. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 35915 Speaker 1: Now, looking back on your career in the [U.S.] Marine Corps and in government--well, the Marine Corps first. What would you consider to be your legacy as a Marine? Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure--I mean I've been a mentor to thousands, of all hues, all races, and gender. And I'm hoping that that's going to be part of it. I imagine because of the fact that people keep turning to me on the issues of diversity, that there's going to be some input from diversity, because I was a pioneer. I have been a pioneer. I mean, there were paths that didn't exist when I joined, that have now been blown wide open. So, there's a lot of that. And I pray that it's been with character, so that folks still view serving honorably--doing the best with what you have--doesn't mean you're the best. It just means you're just trying to do your best. And so, folks that know me, I think that comes out. You can't do this without having enemies, so I don't want my legacy to be that, you know, folks hate you. But there's a group that hates, that never liked. And would, you know, relish at the opportunity of bad news or anything like that, you know. But I've got a lot of friends out there. And even, you know, like when that stuff was coming out in the Pentagon, my last position, there was a whole slew of them saying, "You don't know the story. You know, that ain't what happened." And then out of the blue, "Huffington Post", a guy writes an article. It says, "I compare Stanley with [Hyman G.] Rickover", Rickover being the father of nuclear Navy. Rickover took on the bureaucracy and was slapped down, beat up and so forth. And Stanley took on the bureaucracy and dared to do 'X', but he stood tall, and he's man to be respected. You know, it was written differently. But what I'm saying is I would hope that serving honorably, but serving, and service being first, and setting an example would be the piece that would be there, I hope. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35916 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My biggest concern is I don't see the same passion and drive that existed when we were coming up in the '60s [1960s]--for simple things like voting, for the importance of education, although I know there's a strong contingency of folks who believe that there's just too many that are not even taking advantage of the opportunities. The opportunities are now there. But we've got a lot of folks who are just kind of kicking back. It was, I'm not saying that people don't do it now, because maybe I'm being myopic. But just as my father and your relatives and other folks were willing to migrate, to change, to move, for opportunities and take a chance--go places sometimes that, you know, had no relatives or one relative or, you know, whatever. I don't see as much there now, you know, the hunger for just opportunities, taking that chance in different places. You know, to get out, to move away. But I'm, again, now sequestered. So, I don't know if I'm seeing a representative sample of, you know, the black community. I know in my church that folks have stopped, you know, folks don't want to get away as much--and some of the youth, to get out. Almost stuck. I teach Bible Study, you know, so I'm looking at that. Whereas, when I serve in Seminars International I'm now meeting, not directly, but I'm exposed to student populations that are out there. And they're not as much--the black community is not as engaged in this, the schools and things like that. At South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], you see examples of what I'm talking about. We have now gone through in the past few years, three presidents. You know, I mean it's where we eat our own, and we air our dirty linen. You know, so those are things that concern me. So, even as I'm talking about my life in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, I've been very sensitive about trashing the Marine Corps, because I love the Marine Corps. Those are people, and they're like every organization. So, but we have a tendency to not be as generous as a people sometimes. So, I know I'm kind of rambling a little bit here. I could probably give a speech on some of this, but I hope I'm making some sense to you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 35917 Speaker 1: I also wanted to ask you what some of your hopes and concerns were for the [U.S.] Marine Corps. Because I don't know if you have a specific concern about the Marines Corps, in terms of, especially in terms of being an African American officer in the Marine Corps. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You do share a common experience with other people? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm actually, I'm telling them in this capacity right now. They've got to get beyond--every time we mention the word--the word diversity is mentioned--there's an automatic connection to we're going down in quality. It is such a, I mean, it's perverse. In other words, we're lowering standards because you mention diversity. And it stayed with us across--I mean, from my time in and beyond and before. The issue of quality continues to be an issue. And if you select someone for something, they're looking at it as you're doing them a favor, as opposed to what's happening. In other words, it's just not, it's not equitable. The current, the present Commandant is actually addressing some of this. But the problem is, is that he has a culture that he's dealing with, and he's not able to sustain that unless he picks the right people. And that's so hard to do, because our culture is so strong. It's even stronger than the retired community. So that the retired community is sometime rivaling the active community, not literally, but it's pretty strong. And so, as he's doing different things, there's just a lot of things that work against him trying to do what he's doing. And to be able to sustain it, he's got to stay. I looked at the [U.S.] Coast Guard, and Admiral Loy--and it may have started even before him. But I remember him like it was yesterday, how he came to our National Naval Association meeting and made some commitments. And I watched him put his money where his mouth was. I saw lieutenant JGs [junior grades] and lieutenants, junior officers--fast forward, they are now three-star admirals and they're, you know, admirals. They're [U.S.] Navy--I mean Coast Guard captains, the Coast Guard Academy. But he sustained it with leadership--military and civilian, putting his money where his mouth was--and they couldn't undo it. I looked at some things in the Navy. I looked at Admiral Mike Mullen, who I know very well. I served with him at the Naval Academy. And although he wasn't able to sustain everything, he was able to start some things in the Navy and then sustain some of that, and become the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, where certain things started happening. And you looked at different officers now having more promotional opportunities and jobs, and getting promoted to three-stars and four-star. Admiral Cecil Haney is going over to be the Strategic Command, you know, commander, who's a four-star admiral just leaving Hawaii, but was three-four before. And a couple years ago, was a two-star. And what I'm seeing is that there are things happening based upon vision and a commitment, and putting in the right people. We have people in place right now in the Marine Corps in key positions who are blocking what the commandant's trying to do. And they're literally blocking it. So, whether or not even the Diversity Commission I'm on right now is going to be successful, it remains to be seen, because I've seen this record played forty years ago. And we're going back to the same thing. So-- Speaker 1: So, have you seen progress in the Marine Corps since-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --in, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no question. You've got to be kidding me. I mean, yeah, no question. I mean, no question. Progress, progress, progress--exceptional. And-- Speaker 1: But we still have a fight now. Speaker 2: You've still got a fight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe that's the way it's going to always be. But this fight, as Martin Luther King said, should be judged on the content of your character and your real abilities, as opposed to your race or your gender, you know, that kind of thing. And there's still fights that go on with that that shouldn't be. And it's so subtle sometimes you don't even, they don't even know that it's there. It's really hard for people to embrace the issue of race. Because first of all, it shouldn't even be part of the equation, "What are you doing?" "What's your job." "Who's the best person for this job?" But it enters into the judgment, because you're not a part of the other network, the connection, whatever. Because our personal lives are still segregated in so many different segments, and things like that. And that bleeds over to the halo effect, for lack of a better way of saying it. It affects us. So, those are the things that are very subtle that we tend not to address--recognize that they're there. And that's sort of what I'm alluding to. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 35918 Speaker 1: What was your proudest moment in the [U.S.] Marine Corps? Speaker 2: That was taking my oath to become a Marine. Really was. And I was just on my way to Officer Candidate School. That was probably the proudest. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did your parents [Ellen Elnora Stanley and Joseph Franklin Stanley] think of your career? I mean, I don't know when your father passed. I know your mother is-- Speaker 2: He's passed, he's passed now. They were proud. To put it in perspective, Dad and Mom knew what a general was. And Mom had an idea of some of things I was doing, but didn't have a real appreciation. Dad had a better idea. But we had family members--and I'm not making this up. I remember going to the family reunion, and I was a colonel at that time. And they said, "Boy, you still in there?" "Yes, Sir." "You make sergeant yet?" I said, "Yes, Sir, I did." "Good, good. And, well, ain't nothing out here anyway." In other words, it was, it's that kind of perspective in some of the family. But you love that family, and you respect them. Because they didn't understand sort of what you're doing--the sacrifice, and all that. But it was also your family, and you loved them. And so, it was okay. But it also helped to put it in perspective that it wasn't about the rank and all that. Because I remember, (laughter) actually, it was in Chicago [Illinois]. Two things happened. One in Chicago, where I was standing out in my evening dress uniform. That's a uniform that comes out like this, you know, it's your formal dress uniform. I was a general, a brigadier general. And a little old white lady came up and said, "Would you help me with my bags, son?" And I said, "Yes, Maam." (laughter). I helped her. And somebody came up, "Oh no, no, Sir, please don't." I said, "No, I got this." You know, and then when I went down to Fort Belvoir [Virginia], there was a--I went to the desk to get some prescriptions. And I was in one of my Marine uniforms. I think it was a Charlie, you know, the short-sleeved shirt and everything. And a person said, "What country are you from?" You know, and it helped to put it in perspective that even though I'm, we're focused--and this is talking about the Marine Corps and all of that--it's a whole world out there that doesn't even know you exist. A whole world out there that doesn't--it's not appreciate--but doesn't understand what it is, and the sacrifice, or what's involved, or whether or not you're even important. Or, the fact that you're serving, or the fact that you don't have to. The fact that you weren't drafted, you know, those different kinds of things. And so, that becomes part of my concern about even the black community, where our most talented people wouldn't even think about joining the Marine Corps, wouldn't even think about it in many cases. Some do, but many won't, they won't. Story_ID: 36632 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you. Now, you've got one daughter [Angela Stanley], right? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your daughter and your family life today. Speaker 2: Sure. We're--my daughter and I are very close, always have been. And I think even from the time she was born and three months old when my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] was hurt, I was the sole caregiver for a few months while my wife was in the hospital, and all that. And so the feeding, the changing, and everything. I mean, everything. In fact, when I went to work, she cried. You know, it was almost a role reversal, until I went overseas for a year. And then things got about right. But we, we talk several times a week, and we talk for a long time when we talk. I'm able to now share with her experiences. But I mean I'm finding that because I don't talk much, that my wife and my daughter are learning things about things I went through, what I did, or whatever, that they didn't know. My daughter didn't even know that I was part of the National Naval Officers Association as the East Regional Vice President--didn't even know until we were in the hotel at that meeting. And I said, "Yeah, you know, I did that, blah, blah." She said, "Excuse me, Dad?" Because we didn't talk about stuff like that. My daughter right now is going through her challenges. She wants to be married. And she's thirty-eight years old. She was engaged for about two years, and that didn't work out. And she broke off the engagement. And so, she feels as though she lost a significant part of her life. She didn't meet anyone in college that she wanted to marry. She went to Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina]. And it's a predominantly white school, you know, in South Carolina. And so, we now talk about her personal life and her challenges, as she juxtaposes the professional and the personal. She wants a family, she wants children, she wants to be married. She also wants to succeed, but she wants these things really bad. And she's not meeting guys that aren't either threatened or uncomfortable, you know. They get around you, and they feel they got to be the one up, you know, in other words. She's working on her doctorate. She's high achieving. And so, I'm wrapped in that part of my daughter's life right now. That's just this particular time. It's very important to her and very important to me and her. Of course, Roz and I, we'd like to have grandchildren, too. We're not getting any younger--and especially when my best friend, the guy I mentioned, the guy that I grew up with and am very close with and went in the [U.S.] Navy and all that--he has great-grandchildren. I've got no grandchildren, you know. So, that part in our life is important to us, as we think about legacy in the future, and all that. But we're very, very, close, my daughter. And we see each other as often as we can. It seems like for the past, really for the whole summer, we've seen each other once a week. I was actually going to come down last night to be with her, but because I've been going so much lately, I just said naw, I won't make it. You got to make this a one day down and back, because I've got, you know, whatever, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36633 Speaker 1: When you look back again at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, or things that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I would have gone to the infantry right out of the basic school [U.S. Marine Corps]. I just didn't know then. I definitely would have gone to the infantry right out of basic school. I'm not--no, I don't think I would have--that's the one I feel the strongest about. The other things, they're comme ci comme ca [French for "like this, like that"]. You know, I mean that, it's no big deal. I probably would have transitioned when I transitioned. Timing's everything. I mean, if I had come in a little bit later, I would have been maybe the beneficiary of some other pioneer's efforts, you know. So, but I have no regrets about my role and what I've done. Wishful thinking in terms of timing. Because timing's everything, you know, in terms of when you show up, when you're there, and all that kind of stuff, you know, so--. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36634 Speaker 1: Was there anything I haven't mentioned that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've said, I've alluded to it before. But my unabiding faith in God has been with me throughout, never changed, has been unswerving. And I have been a growing Christian, continue to be growing. I'm not saying I've been perfect, and have made mistakes, but what I'm saying is that I have enjoyed, enjoyed, my growth as a Christian. And that's where I am right now. My marriage is even stronger with that growth, and my wife [Rosalyn H. Stanley] sees it. So, I'll just leave it there. And my family sees it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36635 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a good father, as a good husband, as a man who cared. And I've been using the "care" moniker from day one, in the [U.S. Marine] Corps. But a good husband, a good father, and man who cared. Speaker 1: Okay...