 Story_ID: 644763 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Nicole Smith, N-I-C-O-L-E, Smith, S-M-I-T-H. I was born and raised in Haiti. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is Nicole Smith your, your birth name? Speaker 2: Yes, Nicole Smith is my birth name, my-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause I know you're a Haitian, and I thought it would have been a French name-- Speaker 2: A French name. Speaker 1: --or something instead of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --Smith. Speaker 2: Nicole is the French name, but my father's name is Smith [Pierre Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's the story behind that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born in Haiti? Speaker 2: I was born in Port-au-Prince. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I spent my first, my first eight years in a place in Haiti called Kenscoff. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'll ask about that in a minute, but I'm just trying-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to establish who you are right now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so, now can you tell us anymore about when you were born? Can you tell us what decade (laughter)? Speaker 2: When I was--I, I cannot tell you the decade, but I can tell you that I was, that I am ageless. Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation is that I am an art dealer, and I deal with art, printing, sculptors, and other things pertaining to art. Speaker 1: All right. And you're the proprietor of Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: I'm the proprietor of Nicole Gallery, yes. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 2nd of March, 2012. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at The HistoryMakers studio on, at 1900 North Michigan-- Speaker 1: South Mi- yes. Speaker 2: --in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) South Michigan [South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: South Michigan. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 644764 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warm up questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first question is: do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. I am vegetarian, and I have several favorite foods. And one of them is green leaf salads that I make with all kinds of vegetables in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I make my own dressing, salad dressing. Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is early spring. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have, it is Shasta, Shasta Spring in California [sic. Shasta Springs, California]. Speaker 1: Oh, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: Shasta? Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: S-H-A-S-T-A. Speaker 1: Oh, Shasta Spring, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I wish you a victorious day. Story_ID: 644765 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Pierre Smith] side. But we'll start with your mother's side first so we don't get them mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Sibrune, S-I-B-R-U-N-E, Beaubrun, B-E-A-U-B-R-U-N [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My--I knew that my mother was born in 1898-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --eighteen ninety-eight [1898]. And the date really escapes me, because--oh, no, no, I remember the date. The date was the 26th of, 26th of August. Speaker 1: Okay, 1898 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen ninety--1898. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her father was the son, the son of a French, of a Frenchman. Speaker 1: What was her father's name? Speaker 2: Monsieur Beaubrun [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and let's see, what town was she born in? Speaker 2: She was born in a town called Duval [Haiti], D-U-V-A-L. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what--other than your, your, your, your grandfather being the son of a Frenchman, what else do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them? And what are some of the stories from her side? Speaker 2: Okay, when I was growing up, you know, finding out about our family was not a priority, because we know that we were part of that family. But I know that my father--my mother, my mother's mother was from Ind- from Indian descent, and her father was from French descent. And I knew also that her, her mother was the first wife of my grandfather. And, and after she died, my grandpa married somebody else. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you say Indian descent, are you speaking of-- Speaker 2: Indian of Haiti. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Tainos Indian. Speaker 1: Okay, Taino, all right. That's T-A-I-N-O-- Speaker 2: N-O. Speaker 1: Right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are they, are there, are there very, very many of them left these days? Speaker 2: No, very few, very few. Once in a while you'll meet--you'll see somebody, and you know that she or he or, is part of that tribe (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644766 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that come from the Taino side of the family that are passed down? Speaker 2: Not that I know. But I know--my mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] was a good storyteller. Every night we would gather around her. She would tell us stories. We called them conte, C-O-N-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember any of her stories? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember some of them, some of them. Speaker 1: Can you share a good one for this? Speaker 2: Let me see, oh, one she told us about a, a mother had one son, and this son, this son was very, very rich. And everybody--every time there was somebody that came to, to see the son or to--every time the son was meeting somebody, the mother, the mother objected. But finally the son decided to send for people to come and meet him. And one day the mother was there, and the person that came was a, a, somebody that was selling coal. And she had a basket on her head, and she said I want to see Mr. Anselm [ph.]. And then the mother said, "What do you want from my son?" "I want to see him." So the mother called the son and said "Anselm, my son, my only son, there is a, a merchant of coal here who want to see you." Anselm answered, "Mommy, give her--bathe her, dress her, and send her up." And then the mother said, "What?" And then she said--Anselm said, "Yes, maman--Mommy. I want you to bathe her, give her all kinds of beautiful things and send her up." The mother did exactly that, but the mother was so, so shocked, and she had a stroke and died, but Anselm married that lady. And that was this--my mother was the only person I knew who could tell that story. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But there was a song. You know, the mother would say (singing Creole), "Anselm, Anselm, mia mia, Anselm Badiou, mia mia (unclear), mia mia elle est, elle est tres sale mia mia." But Anselm will then say, "Mommy, Mommy, mia mia ascen-," (laughter), "-scendu uns- (makes sound) voye le bon a mwen (unclear), mia mia," et cetera, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. Was that--so that, that was--was that a regular feature growing up, you know, hearing stories from your, your elders? Speaker 2: Oh, every, every night, every night we will have storytelling time, every night. It was the, it was one of the highlights of the day. Story_ID: 644767 Speaker 1: So was your mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith], you know, raised in the city in, in--? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother was raised in the city, in Port-au-Prince [Haiti] (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in Duval [Haiti] when she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Duval, but she was in the-- Speaker 1: Raised in-- Speaker 2: --city, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did their family do for a living? Speaker 2: My father was a coffee--a may--how can I say that? She--my father exported coffee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, we may as well just--what's your father's name for the-- Speaker 2: My father, Pierre, P-I-E-R-R-E, Emil, Smith [Pierre Smith]. Speaker 1: All right. And is there a story behind how he got the name Smith in Haiti? Speaker 2: When I ask, somebody was--who knew about the family, she that my parent--my father's parents or father came from Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now is--can you give us your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father was born on the 27th of February, in, in a place called Soissons, S-O-I-S-S-O-N [sic.], in Haiti [Soissons, Haiti]. And, and on that, the date was the 27th of February, February 19--1896. Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-six [1896], okay, all right. Okay, so, so your parents were around when the, the U.S. Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] invaded in 1915-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were. Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: The U.S. Marines invaded Haiti according to, to history; that was in 1915, (unclear), yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay. Do they have any stories about that that they shared? Speaker 2: My aunt--I have an aunt by the name of Premesur [ph.], my father's sister. My father actually--let me say this. My father came from a family of fourteen, and he was one of the youngest of the two younger children. And my aunt was his sister, older sister, and knew about the whole thing. And she used to tell me the story, what occurred, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your family view it as a good thing or a bad thing that the-- Speaker 2: Everybody view it as a bad thing in those days, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, they would have been like teenagers I guess when--yeah, about seventeen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --eighteen years old when that--now, well, tell me now, what, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Do you know that his, his, his father came from Jamaica (unclear)-- Speaker 2: His father came from-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --Jamaica. Actually, that's really all I know about my father, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, when I want- wanted to know more, practically all the older people were gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he wasn't around when you were growing up? Speaker 2: My father with me when--my father died in 1979. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father was always around when I was growing up. As a teenage- as a child on, my father I, I would go piggyback, and I loved that. My--every time my father was coming from work I would go meet him along with my--a younger sister that I had. The two of us would be fighting to go piggyback (laughter), but-- Speaker 1: Okay. So he was in the coffee business? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 644768 Speaker 1: Did your parents have a chance to finish school? Do you know (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [Pierre Smith], I know my father, my father didn't finish school. My mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith], my mother either didn't finish school. And, and in those days also there were probably very few schools in Haiti, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how your parents met that they tell? Speaker 2: My parents, how did they met, meet? I think my--somebody introduced them. And then my father, my father lived, still lived in Soissons [Soissons, Haiti], and my mother lived in Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. So they would see each other once a week or twice a month, something of that nature. One thing I remember, my father saying that, "One day I went to see your mama, and I didn't have coffee before leaving. And I spent the whole day with a headache. And I came back, I never drank coffee again." That, I remember that part. But I don't remember exactly who, who introduced them. But they were introduced, and they were married for forty-nine years and ten months. Story_ID: 644769 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' mannerisms, their demeanor, their talents, their habits, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: After both of them. My mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] was, my mother was very light skinned, and my father [Pierre Smith] was very dark. And my father was very--the tallest man I knew in Haiti. My mother was five feet tall, 5'4"--no, not, (unclear) 5'4", five, 5'2" something. My dad was six, 6'6", and so he was considered really one of the tallest men. So, I remember meeting two lady--four ladies telling me, "Oh, we, if we went to a dance, all of us wanted to dance with your father." I say, "Oh." Story_ID: 644770 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: Right now I have two brothers and one sister, but we were nine. And I, you know, I became the youngest after the youngest one died. Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them in the or- the order of their birth and where you, you fit into? Speaker 2: Okay, Geanne Smith, Geanne, G-E-A-N-N-E, Geanne Leon [Geanne Smith Colyoda (ph.)], Louis [Louis Smith (ph.)], Ernest [Ernest Smith (ph.)], Gelmae [Gelmae Smith (ph.)], Lucy [Lucy Smith (ph.)], Denise [Denise Smith (ph.)], Madeline [Madeline Smith (ph.)], Nicole--Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], Madeline. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're the, you're the, so you're the youngest now, but there was one-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --younger than you before (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --she was six, and I, I, and I was eight when she died. Story_ID: 644771 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes. That one I cannot forget because my mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] went out and asked two of my brothers to look after me. And then they, of course they, they were telling jokes. They were doing their own things and let me go into the kitchen, and I got burned. My mother wasn't there. And so that--I was two and a half years old, and this really never left me. Story_ID: 644772 Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in? And it might have been more than one, I don't know, but. Speaker 2: I grew up in several neighbor- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Se- several ones? Speaker 2: I mean the real one that--the first one that I grew up with--in--that's a, it, it was really a beautiful area, in a place called Kenscoff, and beautiful and surrounded by flowers and a, a very nice temperature. Kenscoff is still my favorite place in Haiti. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: K-E-N-S-C-O-F-F. F like father, Kenscoff. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay, and, and you, you were there for how long? Speaker 2: For eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. And then the family moved to-- Speaker 2: To, to Petion-Ville [Haiti]. Petion-Ville is a suburb of Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay, is that P-E-T-I-O-N (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P-E-T-I-O-N-Ville, V-I-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did that compare to Kenscoff? Speaker 2: It's the, it's part of the city, the big city, so--but it was, it's a beautiful--it was very beautiful when I was growing up in Petion-Ville, very nice neighborhood and lots of schools there, especially Catholic schools, very nice (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And how long did, did you live in Petion-Ville? Speaker 2: Oh, all my life (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the rest of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The rest of my life, until I came here. Story_ID: 644773 Speaker 1: All right, well, here's a question we always ask: what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: First of all, I grew up with classical music. And in the morning, really, when, when we got up, when we turned the radio it was either French music or, or Latino music, and by noon there was classical music. And if you were going to eat, we would put classical music, and going to sleep, classical music. So and one day my--one experience that I had, I, myself, turned the family radio at noon, and then I heard the sixth symphony of Beethoven ['Symphony No. 6 in F major, Op. 68']. And that really changed my life. Speaker 1: Okay. How so? How did it change your life? Speaker 2: Well, I--well, from that experience, I begun listening to classical music, to select who I was going to, to have in my life as musicians, you know, that I would love to listen to it, et cetera. I begun listening; I begun taking notes; I begun selecting what I was going to listen to, et cetera. So it changed my life to the point that the day I listened to that piece I cried, when I heard the piece, that was the 'Pastoral.' After that, I read a book on the effect of the 'Pastoral,' a, only a young lady that was blind and so on and so. Speaker 1: How does it go? Can you, can you, can you hum a little bit of it for us? Speaker 2: (Sings musical notes), you know, that's the whole--something like that; it's like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Sings musical notes), like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, go on with the sights, and sounds, and smells. Speaker 2: Oh, the smell was delicious (laughter). The food in Haiti's very, very, very delicious. It's composition of African, Indian, French, you know, all those different cultures that were part of Haiti. But the food is very exceptionally good in Haiti. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the smell was always good, the smell. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite food growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I loved to--I used to love a sweet pea soup with rice and chicken and fish too. I, I enjoyed eating fish when I was little. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, go on (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sights, sound, and smells. Speaker 2: Sounds and smell, yeah. Then also I enjoyed going, watching the Mardi Gras. Mardi Gras was always a nice time because you see all the wonderful--the, all the masks of people that, people that were--when on people that were popular, they would have their mask. And they would have all kinds of fun things, you know. And I would go to a friend's place and sit on the, on her balcony watching the Mardi Gras and so on. The--it was fun time. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I know here in the United States, we, we only think of New Orleans [Louisiana] as having a Mardi Gras. We don't think about the other places in the world. Speaker 2: Oh no, Haiti, oh, Haiti had had Mardi Gras ever since I, I--I mean I wasn't even born, they had had Mardi Gras. And it used to be really a very, very nice experience. They had all the, all the things that you see in New Orleans if you go, because you know, it was very wonderful. In fact, Mardi Gras just ended. But I don't think they had Mardi Gras this year or the last past two years. Story_ID: 644774 Speaker 1: Was church or spirituality a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Church was a big part of growing up. My parents [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith and Pierre Smith] were both Catholics. In fact, my grandfather on mother's side was a deacon in the church where they--where my mother was born. Speaker 1: So what, what was the name of the church? Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the church. But the church, I never went that church because that was the place where my mother was in Duval [Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So which one did you go to in-- Speaker 2: Oh, the one that-- Speaker 1: --in Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. Speaker 2: --I went to, I, I was, I was baptized in Petion-Ville [Haiti], in a church in Petion-Ville called St. Pierre or St. Peter's, but St. Pierre [St. Pierre Church]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, all right, so, you would go to Mass and do the regular Catholic-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: It's true that I changed later, but I, I went to church every--sometimes we would go to church every day or at least three times a day--a week. Story_ID: 644775 Speaker 1: I want you to tell us something about the history and culture of Haiti, I guess as you understand it, since your, your interview is unique in that you are from Haiti. And most of us have never been there. Let's (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, Haiti-- Speaker 1: So, tell us something about that. Now, did they talk about the history of Haiti in school very much or talk about the, your, your history? 'Cause it's such a--it has--well let me just throw it out there. Speaker 2: Haiti has-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a very, very rich culture. You know, Haiti, first of all, when--Haiti is the island. There is the island of Haiti divided into two countries, Haiti and, and the Dominican Republic. And you will find that you are in two different, two different, two separate islands really because they are so different. But when the French--you want to hear about that part too or what? Story_ID: 644776 Speaker 1: Continue to tell us about your perception of the history of Haiti and-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, Haiti, my--Haiti was divided into two countries in (mumbles), in 1625 really. The French were given, were given one third of the country, which is Haiti, and two thirds went to the Dom- the Spaniards, which is the Dominican Republic. And later on, Haiti and the Dominican Republic were united under Toussaint L'Ouverture, when he became the governor of Haiti under the French. And so, but af- soon after, after Toussaint L'Ouverture, after Toussaint L'Ouverture was taken away to France, the country, the Dominican Republic, went back to the Spaniards. And then again the president of Haiti united the countries again for twenty-five [sic. twenty-two] years. And the Dominicans never forgive Haiti for that. But that's not-- Speaker 1: This is Dessalines [Jean-Jacques Dessalines], right, I guess? Speaker 2: No, no, no-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --that was not Dessalines. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was another by the name--hold on; I will, I will come back to that part. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't-- Speaker 2: And then Boyer-- Speaker 1: Boyer-- Speaker 2: President Boyer [Jean-Pierre Boyer], B-O-Y-E-R, he united Haiti. And for twenty-five years Haiti and the Dominican Republic were one country. And after, after Boyer left the government, the, the, the two countries separated again, and they are the Dominican Republican, and we are Haiti now. And, but the Haiti that I grew up was called the Pearl of the Antilles because it was so beautiful. And it's still beautiful, but you know the devastation, all the things that took place, and so it's very different, very, very, very, very different now. Speaker 1: Have you been back since, recently since the earthquake? Speaker 2: No, I haven't. I don't have the courage to go there yet (laughter). And I do things to help, but it is so painful for me to, to think about Haiti as, as it is now. From what--you know, it's very different from what it used to be. Story_ID: 644777 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up [in Haiti], what--you said your parents [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith and Pierre Smith] had a radio, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you all have--what, what else would you do for, you know, for fun when you were a kid? Speaker 2: Oh, for fun, oh, my god, we, we played a lot with dolls. I mean the girls played with dolls. The boys had their little cars. And we built our little homes. We, we played in the, oh, we played a lot. We had the ground--we, we played a lot. We were very, we were--how can I say that? We read a lot. We played. We, we--how can I--what can I say? We played with the kids from the neighborhood. And we, we did all the things that kids do here, really. Story_ID: 644778 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, what--how was it I guess to grow up in--most African Americans don't know what it feels like to grow up in a black country. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And at one time we only had three, I think Haiti, Liberia, and Ethiopia, you know, in the whole world, so-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --of Af- you know, controlled by African people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, what, what, what was it like? I mean, of course, you, you didn't know what it was like to grow up here, but, at, at that point, but what was it like? Speaker 2: It was very nice growing up back in Haiti. First of all, I, I rarely didn't experience anything that was distractive, you know. We, we--it was nice to be raised by a whole community. For example, if some--if I did something wrong--and I never did really as, as a child growing up--I did something wrong, somebody in the neighborhood had power to correct me. And that person could give me a spanking. And then if I went home and said to my father [Pierre Smith] or my mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith], "Oh, this lady gave me a spanking," they would say, "Okay, you, you deserve another one." You know, that's what I heard from the other kids that were more alive than I was (laughter). I was alive, but I really didn't want to do anything that was not proper. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was your role model for that kind of behavior? I mean who did, who was it you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My own mother was really my model. My mother was so wonderful, so, so, such a wonderful person. My mother never spanked us. She would talk to us. She would say, you know, this--for example, if you--were doing something, she would say, "This is not acceptable," and then she would tell us why it wasn't acceptable. And so, at one point, I remember she said--I heard her talk. She said, "I raise my kids to be with whomever they want to be, wherever they want to be." And, and she did a very good job, and to the point that when my mother passed away, I look at her in her casket, and I said, "Mother, I want you to leave me some of your good qualities, because I know you had." That was really my role model. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when you were growing up, who all was in the household? There's you and your mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] and father [Pierre Smith], right? And then you had your brothers and sisters (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god, all of us. Speaker 1: But did your grandparents live with you too, or-- Speaker 2: I never knew any of my grandparents. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: They were all gone for a long time. I never knew any grandparent except through photographs. Speaker 1: Okay. Any of your aunts and uncles live with you, or-- Speaker 2: My aunt--no. My aunt that I knew from my father's side was a very rich lady. She was married to a Frenchman, and that man was a millionaire in his country. And my aunt--unfortunately that man--I--my aunt told us, lost his fortune in France when the Germans occupied France. And then, but my aunt was very wise. She bought--she had real estate. She bought several homes, and she rented those homes; she built homes; she, she had many properties, and so. She was also one of my role models. She would, she instilled some of her quality in me too. Story_ID: 644779 Speaker 1: Where did you start school and, and--? Speaker 2: Where did I start school? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay, the first year, that was at a Catholic school in Kenscoff [Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay. You, do you remember the name of the, the school? Speaker 2: And that was Les Soeurs de la Sagesse. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you have to spell that, now. Speaker 2: L-E-S--that's one word--Soeurs, S-O-U-E-R-S [sic.], Les Soeurs, de, D-E, la, L-A, Sagesse, S-A-G-E-S-S-E, Les Soeurs de la Sagesse. Speaker 1: Okay. And that was in-- Speaker 2: Kenscoff. Speaker 1: Kenscoff, okay. All right, so, did you like school as a-- Speaker 2: Oh, I loved (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as a-- Speaker 2: --school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a teacher's pet. The students would, they, they bugged me so much that I was always by myself, except that I would go talk to the teachers about the students were really mean to me-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I--well, we knew--all I knew how to do was very--after school I go home. I had something to eat and then did my homework. And so, you know, I always knew I always would--I had great grades in school, so the students didn't really like me for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were your teachers all black, or were there, there white nuns or something (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The white nuns and black Haitians, you know. Speaker 1: A variety? Speaker 2: Variety, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had in that Catholic school real- really through all through college. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite teacher in grade school, in, in-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --Kenscoff? Speaker 2: Oh yes, Soeur Imelda [ph.]. She was from Canada, and she was so nice, so kind. Speaker 1: So she was from Canada, okay. Speaker 2: She was from Canada, yeah. Yeah, we had a lot of nuns from Canada, from Europe, from all over. You know, being, Haiti being a Catholic country in a way, you know, they, they had thing--they had lots of Catholic schools for boys as well as for girls. Story_ID: 644780 Speaker 1: When you're in grade school [Les Soeurs de la Sagesse (ph.)], did they, did they discuss the political significance of, of the Haitian Revolution in, in world history at all? Speaker 2: No. We would study, we would study that through, through the school. But then, you know, in grade school--oh, well, this part I don't remember. But I remember, one thing I remember is that we studied the history of Haiti very early in school. But what do you understand? You just read it, you know, but little on yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but not, not in grade school. What I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard other Haitians say that, that the stories were taught in school, but they didn't really grasp the significance until they left Haiti and, and understood that the, you know, the significance of the Haitian-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --Revolution on, on the world--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, the French Revolution had a devastat- had a greater influence on the Haitians because it helped the Haitians realize that they were free, also the slaves, in fact. This part really I, I did like, that part, when, when I realized that all those people, what they were doing when they heard of the, of Fort- liberte, egalite, fraternite and then they too say well, you know, we have to make it part of our life too. And so that part I was very, it was very intense for me. I studied that part very well. Speaker 1: Okay, so they just, was--did they--was Toussaint like a national hero for the Haitians and-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Toussaint, oh, Toussaint was my greatest hero. He still is, because Toussaint, Toussaint really, believe it or not, Toussaint was the grandson of a, a great-grandson of a king in Africa called Gaou Guinou. And then-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gaou, Gaou, G--G-A-O-U, Guinou, Ga- G-U-I-N-O-U, Gaou Guinou. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then he was born in slavery in Haiti. And his grandfather--I mean his godfather taught him how to read and write. And so he became very fluent in French, Latin, and he even spoke other languages too because, you know, he was part of the French Army. He was part of the Spanish Army. He was part of the, of several things. So, Toussaint L'Ouverture was my favorite. When I read--when you--when Toussaint L'Ouverture read about--father--an Indian priest had written a book about freedom. And then the, the priest said that he, he believed that one day one, one, one person, one, one man would rise and bring all the others into freedom, out of slavery into freedom. And Toussaint L'Ouverture read the book several times. He read it and still nobody, nobody showed up. So, until he realized he was that person, so that's when he get in, got into action. But Toussaint was my favorite. But Toussaint why--another reason why Toussaint was my favorite: Toussaint would never kill because, you know, he had to kill, no. He would, he would always--he would even save his masters. He, he, he didn't take part in the first part of the revolution, which was in August in 1791. Toussaint didn't take part in that. He, he, he, he saved his masters from that part. And he knew that the time would come for him to get him to reelection, and he waited for that time. And he was, he was very wise and very, a very wonderful person. He wouldn't kill because, just as I said, for the sake of killing-- Speaker 1: Or out of revenge or-- Speaker 2: --or revenge. He, he was a wonderful person, and that's my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondering 'cause we, you know, we, here, you know, we've got [President] George Washington they put up and [President] Abraham Lincoln. In Haiti you have another set of liberators that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then Toussaint had three other peop- I mean there were three other generals that he formed. In fact, when he was arrested, he said to the French, by arresting me, you have caught the--the tree of the liberty of the people, but roots are very vivacious, and they will spring. And soon after that, really, that's when the, the revolution, the war for independence started in Haiti, Dessalines [Jean-Jacques Dessalines], Petion [Alexandre Petion], Christophe [Henri Christophe]. Story_ID: 644781 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: That was history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved history, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I have to ask this too, were you an, an artist in school? Did you draw and paint? Speaker 2: My, one of my teachers, by the name of Sister Philomena [ph.], was from Belgium, told me that I would never be an artist. And I said to her later and I said, "I am so sorry for you Sister Philomena" (laughter). But I took several--I took classes on art. I took art history. I took drawing and painting. Later on I really did that because I wanted to know everything about what the artists were doing. Speaker 1: When you were growing up was there, was there a lot of folk art in the, in, in Haiti and, and even gallery art? Was there a lot of art around? Speaker 2: There was not a lot of, of art galleries then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there were some art galleries. And, but the best one was the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], founded by DeWitt Peters' son [sic.] in the '40s [1940s]. But I, I really became involved with the arts, really, in the '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 644782 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, you, did you have any--okay, so there, there was as an art center [Le Centre d'Art] in Port-au-Prince [Haiti], right? Speaker 2: Art center in Port-au-Prince, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was founded I think by, by this-- Speaker 2: By DeWitt Peters. Speaker 1: --DeWitt Peters who was a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a watercolorist from the United States. Speaker 2: From the United States, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and from what I understand, he, he gathered some Haitian artists together and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He gathered twenty-- Speaker 1: --an organization. Speaker 2: He met twenty-five Haitians that had just been back either from France or from the states, somewhere in Haiti, too. And with those Haitians he shared his ideas about opening an art center in Port-au-Prince. And that is the art center that just was destroyed by the earthquake. And that, at the time of the destruction, the art center had ten thousand artworks. Most of them would have, would, were, you know, were in storage for the museum of Haiti [Musee du Pantheon National Haitien, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], which the, the art center fed the museum in a, in a way. The artworks that go, that went to the museum came from the art center because the art center founded the museum also, as well. Story_ID: 644783 Speaker 1: You liked art growing up, but I was just trying to get a sense of how present a sense of art was in the culture. I mean, was it, were there artists selling their works on the streets, or were they, were there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, art-- Speaker 1: --sculptors and-- Speaker 2: --was everywhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Art was everywhere. Haiti is a country of artists. You know, I guess I found out why there were so many artists in Haiti, because the people were really not--there were no jobs, a lot of jobs, so the people had--they were repressed in a way. But you know, that, I think that's what came out of them, because of the repression. When they wanted to free themselves, they would paint; they would sculpt; they would, they would cook, and everywhere in Haiti was art, everywhere. You'd go to the countryside, the houses are decorated in vivid colors. The tombs are beautifully decorated, especially in Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. They were very--some of them were like homes, decorated with beautiful crosses or even painting. And so art was everywhere, everywhere, everywhere. And at one point, during the Duvalier [Francois Duvalier] period, art became really one of the main source of income for Haiti. Haitian art by 19--let's see--by 1949, according to everything that I have read, by 1949, Haitian art became known as one of the most extraordinary artistic phenomena of the 20th century. It was a whole people painting. Story_ID: 644784 Speaker 1: Haiti is also touted as one of the most African places in the New World-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because of the, I guess the liberation struggle and the, is one, and it being a black republic for so long. And were there--what were some of the African influences that--or, or did you recognize them as such when you were young? Did you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't. That was, there was no influences. You know, some, some of those things have become important in our lives, you know, after, after we've traveled, because we see how other people live but rarely. We had been freed for so long, and yet not so free, because Haiti was the first country to have had its independence in the New World. Haiti, Haiti became independent in 1804, 1804. America became independent in 1776. And do you know--have you ever heard that part, that Haitians participated in the independence of this country? Speaker 1: Oh no, that's a story I, I had heard, but tell, tell the, the listener about this. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. When, when Washington [President George Washington] needed help, and then it turned to France, Lafayette [Marquis de Lafayette], Lafayette, Lafayette was--went to Haiti and recruited soldier. He didn't go to France to get the soldiers. He recruited the soldiers in Haiti, and many of the soldiers were freed. They were mulattoes or black that were freed, you know. Their--Haiti had not been independent yet, but those people were freed by their masters or because they were the sons of the French, okay, or daughters of the French. So, Lafayette bought--went to Haiti and recruited several, several hundred Haitians to come and fight. In fact, and they, they fought on the--they fought victoriously in Savannah [Georgia], where there is now on a, a monument to the Haitians that fought there. Speaker 1: Well, I didn't know that. I didn't realize that-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh, you should go visit that one [Haitian Monument]. It's beautiful. Speaker 1: If (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Last year I went, and I saw that. Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong, I think it was Rigaud [Andre Rigaud] and Boyer [Jean-Pierre Boyer] were part, part of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rigaud. Speaker 1: Rigaud, I guess, and Boyer. Speaker 2: Rigaud, uh-huh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --became-- Speaker 1: R-G-A-U-D [sic.]--yeah, Rigaud. Speaker 2: Chavaneau [ph.], Chavaneau (unclear), even Henri Christophe who became the king was part of it. In fact, he was the, the drum boy in those days at the, you know, in Savannah, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, that should be fascinating to read about. I've got to do some reading now, just-- Speaker 2: Oh, you, you should (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) you, you got me excited about it, so. Speaker 2: --go see, go see all the--you know, they have the whole trail of where they, they fought and other thing. Story_ID: 644785 Speaker 1: That part of the American Revolution be- was fascinating because it helped--the, the Haitians helped in the independence of this country. But not only the independence of this country, the Haitian helped also when Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte] sold the Louisiana Territory, he sold it in order to keep his soldiers in Haiti. So, both times Haiti has been good to this country. Speaker 2: So the Louisiana Purchase, you're saying, would not have been made if it hadn't been the fact, for the fact that-- Speaker 1: For that-- Speaker 2: --Napoleon was trying to-- Speaker 1: --Napoleon-- Speaker 2: --take-- Speaker 1: --to keep his-- Speaker 2: --Haiti-- Speaker 1: --soldiers, to keep Haiti, because Haiti was really important to France, okay. Haiti was (unclear), we call that la cornier. That's where they, they had the food coming, coffee, sisal, other things that you cannot find in Europe, you know, sugar, everything of that nature. You know, that, it was an abundance in Haiti. In fact, they called Haiti, Port-au-Prince, Port-au-Prince because the nobility of France, you know, they were all part of Port-au-Prince. Speaker 2: Now I've heard--I've read that it was the richest colony of the Americas-- Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: --at the time of the revolution. Speaker 1: Oh yes, it was. And then, when Haiti was first discovered too, there was so much gold in the river that the Spaniards, after Christopher Columbus left Haiti and the commander, he told the Spaniards not to, not to bother the natives because they were very gentle, not to mistreat them, et cetera. But as soon as Christopher Columbus left, the Spaniards demanded gold, and so they began to enslave the people. And when Christopher Columbus came back, he was very disappointed in the Spaniards. And of course, they revolted against, the Spaniards revolted against Christopher Columbus, whom I knew was a very good person of heart, very, very, very, very good to, to the people. In fact, when his boat was destroyed, it was the Indians that help him restore it. Story_ID: 644786 Speaker 1: We were the discussing the art and the African survivals, and that's the question. Yeah, and so that leads to the one thing that, that people think about Haiti, they, they talk about the most, is Vodoun. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what, what was that, was that something that, that, living in neighborhood, you were-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --experiencing? Speaker 2: Okay, even the--even if it was, we didn't know that really until later, when you--you know, it was like we were, we were protected in a way. But voodooism came to Haiti when the, when the African slaves came. They came with their religion, their culture. And, but they were baptized Catholics, but they never, they never give up the belief. It was say, it is said somewhere that the first revolt--at the beginning of the revolution, when Boukman [Dutty Boukman], who was from Jamaica, was a priest, Vodoun priest, when, to start the French--to start the Haitian Revolution, he had a ceremony called Ceremony de Bois Caiman. And then probably you know this part. Did you know that part? Speaker 1: I, I did, but I'm, I'm unusual. I'm (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 644787 Speaker 1: Now, this is one, one of the stories of Haiti, the Haitian Revolution that all Haitians probably, probably know about, is the story of Boukman Dutty [sic. Dutty Boukman], who was originally from Jamaica, right, and came over there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: But he was the person that started the revolution with a religious ceremony, a, a Vodoun ceremony-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a Yoruba ceremony. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So tell us about that. And you were telling us about the lay--the, the, the actors in it, 'cause it's like a story, like, you know, people-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's like a story, because Boukman be- Boukman began the ceremony. And then out of nowhere came that lady, and the lady took over. And she was the one that killed the pig and gave the, the blood of the pig to the people, to, to everybody. And everybody swore that they would, they would be free. And that's the ceremony that started the whole Haitian Revolution, yeah. Speaker 1: And that night it was, was on. Speaker 2: Oh, that (unclear), that night it was on, and it, wow. They went out and burned plantations and did all the things they had to do. I am, I am never for violence, but at that point it was necessary because, you know, those people had been, had suffered so much. You know, slavery was harsh in Haiti, really harsh, because the, the Indians were the first that were, that went into slavery. But they were not used to working hard. They were people who would take nap or would read poetry or would do artworks, and so they were not used to that. So very soon they were decimated. And so that's when the first--las Casas [Bartolome de las Casas], las Casas was a Spanish man, suggested that they bring the slave from Africa. And then when the slave got there, really, yeah, that was tough. If, you know, first of all, if, if they tried to run away, they had, there were lots of dogs to catch them and so on. So that was a part that was hard for me to read when I was studying. Story_ID: 644788 Speaker 1: Now, does the art--we were talking about how the art de- often in Haiti the folk art depicts these scenes of the revolution, and Boukman [Dutty Boukman], and the ceremony at Bois du Caiman [sic. Bois Caiman], and Toussaint [Toussaint L'Ouverture], and you know, the other, other scenes of the Haitian Revolution. So, and I was asking you about Vodoun, and you said you were basically sheltered from Vodoun. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, a good Catholic wouldn't go to a Vodoun, right? Speaker 2: No, no, no. That's, that's-- Speaker 1: That's not true? Speaker 2: --not true. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's not true, because there are many Catholics who are voodooist. And it's unfortunate, but that's the way it is. But they--what I, what I learn about voodooism, I learn it when I went to the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] for my training. Because at that in those days, the curator of the Haitian art museum [Musee du Pantheon National Haitien, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], Pierre Monosiet, was a Catholic also, but he was the president of the, president and curator of the Haitian, first Haitian art museum. Pierre Monosiet visited a temple, a voodoo temple one day. And he was surprised to see the beautiful artworks there. And those beautiful artworks were the ceremonial banners that became very popular in the states because they had it shown at two different states and different museums. And it was at the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois] in 1996 too, also. Speaker 1: Now we're a little ahead of the story, but what were the ceremonial banners made of? Were they, were they paintings or-- Speaker 2: Okay, they were made of silk and sequins and pearls. They were magnificent works. They were not made for, for the public in the beginning. They were there to entice and the, the gods to, you know, to be present at the ceremony. And so they were magnificent. In fact, wow, I have some ceremonial banners that are part of my collection that are magnificent but very old and really the way the ceremonial banners used to be made. They are very, very beautiful. Story_ID: 644789 Speaker 1: So this kind of work was around, but did--when you were growing up, did you ever see a Vodoun ceremony at all or, or hear (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had never seen-- Speaker 1: --the drums and-- Speaker 2: --I had never seen any ceremony, ceremonies when I was growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I begun really investigation voodooism when I went to the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. And I, because I had to, to take--to talk to people about when these sort of ceremonial banners, what they were about and so on. Speaker 1: So would, would you, would you say that, that the people that, that you grew up with, maybe your brothers and sisters and, and people around you, were, were you all afraid of it, or did you, did you think it was something that had to do with the devil or something, or like they show on the-- Speaker 2: Part of it-- Speaker 1: --movies and-- Speaker 2: --has to do, deal with the devil really (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh (laughter). Speaker 2: And so, and you know, if you are hurting others, that's not a good thing. But there are good voodooist, and the good voodooist are generally people who are healers, and they are people that, that you won't even know that they are voodooist. But they did say that there sixteen voodoo priest that were really wonderful people, and they would not accept a penny from you if they cured you from anything. And, but the others, they are not, they are not really what, what Hollywood--wait a minute. The others are what Hollywood has described as voodooism. But the true voodooist is somebody who was born with a gift of healing, and that person would, would heal all manners of disease with his gift and would not accept a penny; whereas the other voodooists are people who are like psychics. They are people that were taking the money from, from the people. In fact, they have done more to the people of Haiti than, than the, the good priests, the bad voodooists. Speaker 1: So the good voodooists are healers. Speaker 2: Healers, um-hm. Speaker 1: And the, the bad ones typically are psychics and-- Speaker 2: Psychics and-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: --(unclear) or people who are, who take from the people, what little they had, who tell them-- Speaker 1: As payment for this-- Speaker 2: --who tell them, you know, your neighbor is hurting you. And poor neighbor, and then you know, they take--they keep getting all the monies or all the cows. That person may probably have one cow; that's all he owns. And then, if somebody tells him, well, if you don't do something about your neighbor, he will kill all your children, all your, you know, will take everything that you have. And so if you listen to that person, you give him everything that you have. And I, I read something on the, on the tap tap. Tap tap, that's the bus that, the buses are very vividly decorated with art. And one tap tap had on it, lajan (unclear), in other word, money that I get from people who are silly, you know. That's, the, the tap tap belong to a priest, so he got his money by telling those people lies, and, and they get--they believed him. Speaker 1: Sounds like FOX news, but (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 644790 Speaker 1: So, you were kind of sheltered though from the actual ceremonies and stuff. But you had a--now did you see the movies and that sort of thing that we see over here about the, the zombies and all that sort of things? And did you, do you have any, did you have a sense of that? Speaker 2: One artist, one artist I know who passed away, Wilson Bigaud passed away last year. Wilson Bigaud painted a lot of zombies, and I think that was part of his consciousness too. He painted--he was a very good artist. In fact, he was one of the five greatest Haitian artists. Speaker 1: And his name again is? Speaker 2: Wilson Bigaud, B-I-G-A-U-D, Bigaud. And he, he painted many scenes of zombies. Speaker 1: And did he depict them much like the Western movies with the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. Speaker 1: These mindless-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, because the zombies really, according to what I heard later, they are people that didn't really die, but they give them something. And then, and then when after they were buried, they would go the very night and get those people out of the tombs to get them to, to become slaves in the gardens of the Houngans or the, you know, or to make them work, do things. Yeah, I heard that story and many times, you know, after I began my search. Story_ID: 644791 Speaker 1: Now, we talked about grade school [Les Soeurs de la Sagesse (ph.)]. Now, tell me something about high school. Well, now where, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school in a school in Petion-Ville [Haiti] and Port-au-Prince [Haiti]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Anne Marie Javouhey [Ecole Anne-Marie Javouhey]. That was a Catholic school again. Speaker 1: How do we spell that? Speaker 2: Anne Marie, A-N-N-E, M-A-R-I-E, Anne Marie Javouhey--oh, god--G- no, J-A-V-O-U-E-H [sic.], Javouhey, Anne Marie-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Javouhey. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the high school. Speaker 2: High school, yes. Speaker 1: And is this a Catholic, Catholic high school? Speaker 2: Catholic school, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, all right, so, did you--now, by the time you were in high school, now this is--can you tell us what, what time this is now without revealing the timelessness of your (laughter), your age? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well, guess what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --as I said to you, well, there was one thing that I didn't tell you because for two years I was a very sickly child. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So, went to school and then I had to come, I had to stay home. And so my mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] work with--my dad [Pierre Smith] work with me as much as he could. So I couldn't go to school at all. And so, Anne Marie Javouhey, let's see, that was in 19--1965. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965], Anne Marie Javouhey. And then 1969, Externat La Providence [Ecole Externat la Providence, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay, now how you spell that one? Speaker 2: Not, not 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Externat La Providence. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell that one? Speaker 2: E-X-T-E-R-N-A-T, N-A-T, La Providence, L-A, Providence, just as English providence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Externat La Providence. That's a Catholic school too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I ended up at, at a school called Elie Dubois [Ecole Elie Dubois, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Elie Dubois, that's a school for young ladies to either become teachers or professional school. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that one? Speaker 2: E-L-I-E, Dubois, Elie Dubois, the same way, Dubois. Speaker 1: Okay, like, like W.E.B-- Speaker 2: Dubois. Speaker 1: --Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, of the woods? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And now that's a, that's a trade school, you said like a second--is it like a business (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) School. Speaker 1: --secretarial school? Speaker 2: Business, teachers, and professional school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was tough, that one. Story_ID: 644792 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in, in activities in high school, like different clubs and things, or did you play an (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I-- Speaker 1: --instrument? That's one, that's the one thing-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, I wanted too much to play the piano, and then didn't play the piano until much later, but I stopped. And in Haiti, if you were a young lady, you had to, you had to learn how to do all the things that you do in a home, all the things that you do in business, or also learn an art, an, an art for complement, com- as complementary part of your life for your--did I say that right? Complementary? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, so yes. Speaker 2: Yeah? So, you know, in order to make your life complete, you have to learn a--either play a musical instrument or be an artist. Yeah, that was part of the most-- Speaker 1: So that's part-- Speaker 2: If you are part of the society. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so you considered yourself part, part of a society of people that-- Speaker 2: Yes, and when I say that I mean, okay, when I was growing up I heard the word elite a lot in Haiti, a lot, because if you are part of the elite, you have to be beautifully raised, and be kind, be polite. All those things that you have to do, you have to do them right, you know. And so, and art was part of that, you know, to help you, so. Speaker 1: So could you be poor and be part of that? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, you can be poor and have good manners and (laughter), and oh, my goodness, that has nothing to do with poverty. It's, it's like a state of mind, a state of being. Story_ID: 644793 Speaker 1: In the American South, and even in the North to some extent, and it was more prevalent the further back you go in history, but there's color stratification, you know. I know some of the islands, like Jamaica, is very famous for having three different color--you know, you got the mulattoes in the middle of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in Haiti too-- Speaker 1: --blacks and the whites. Speaker 2: --we have a lot-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of mulattoes, un-hm. Speaker 1: Is it, is it that kind--but was that like a strong cultural feature when you were growing up, people being color conscious and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --um-hm. In fact, some of the mulattoes, I think, they were, you know, they were different, you know, so it was a good thing for me to have been part of, in between. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause your father [Pierre Smith] is dark, and your mother [Sibrune Beaubrun Smith] is-- Speaker 2: The mother-- Speaker 1: --very light. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Otherwise, it, you know. Speaker 1: So it's hard for them to put you in a, one, one camp or the other. Speaker 2: Yeah, one, yeah, and I never accepted any catego- being part of any category. I just knew one thing, and it was so strong in me. I said I am universal. I always did say that: I am universal, universal, U-N-I, uni, V-E-R-S-A-L, universal. You know, I'm, I said well. Speaker 1: Now was there anything that you read or someone you were exposed to that, that-- Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: --fostered this feeling of being universal? Speaker 2: No. I just felt it from inside. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I just felt it there from inside, and, and it stays with me-- Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all my life. Story_ID: 644794 Speaker 1: Now you said that you were a teacher's pet and got good grades. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And now, but you had been sick at some point, so it, it, it made you behind--it got you behind in school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is that what was? So you were-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you were sick for how many years, and what, what-- Speaker 2: Two years really. Speaker 1: Yeah. What, well, what happened to you? Speaker 2: To, to tell you the truth, I didn't even know that I, that I couldn't go to school, except that the doctor said that you cannot go to--you have to stay home to feel well. Okay, here is what happened, one thing that I remember. Speaker 1: And how old were you when that--about how old? Speaker 2: Probably twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ten, twelve, because I was about to do my second communion, and then I couldn't do it because I was ill. And so I couldn't go to catechism on Sundays and so on, or Sunday school. And if and all that (unclear), I couldn't do. So I, you know, I was behind. But because I was very, well, I was very smart in a way, I, I was on--because also I studied with my, my father [Pierre Smith] helped me, I was about to, to go to finish my school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you--now did you feel funny going back to school being older than some of the other students? Speaker 2: They were, they were funny, but not me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were, they objected, but I didn't. But you know, children in school are, can be very mean (laughter). That's when they call me teacher's pet mainly, because I was always, you know, even though I was behind in a way, but I was ahead, because I was always good at what I was doing. Story_ID: 644795 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask this, but, but how was it, how much of a privilege was it to go to school when you were going to school? I mean did everybody--was, were there public schools for all the children to go to, or-- Speaker 2: I truly-- Speaker 1: --or was-- Speaker 2: --I, I went to private school too. The last schools I went to were private schools; like, Externat La Providence [Ecole Externat la Providence, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] was an expensive school. And so, but this school, you know, not everybody could go because not everybody could afford-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --to-- Speaker 1: --but, but could everybody go to some sort of school? Speaker 2: School, yes. Speaker 1: Was there a school provided-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --for-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --for you-- Speaker 2: There was that. Speaker 1: If, if you, if, if you wanted to go to school, you could go? Speaker 2: You could go to school, yes. Speaker 1: It may not be the best school, but you would go. Speaker 2: Yeah, but the schools were really good schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, except that, you know, if the person didn't know that you or she had to send his children to school, they didn't. But they had the choice; they could go to, they could have gone to school. Speaker 1: Okay. So it wasn't mandatory, but--? Speaker 2: It wasn't, well, to some extent it wasn't mandatory to a certain extent, extent. Story_ID: 644796 Speaker 1: How would you cha- characterize Haiti when you were growing up there? Was it--could most people read or write in Haiti? Speaker 2: I would say that Haiti, in a way, is, has the highest illiteracy in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Highest literacy or ill-- Speaker 2: Illiteracy. Speaker 1: Illiteracy, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: Now it's more or less important for people to go to school because they have a school in Creole also. So the people who do not want to go to the French schools, you know, they go to Creole school. Speaker 1: Now that's important-- Speaker 2: Creole, that's a-- Speaker 1: --to-- Speaker 2: --you know, that's important. Speaker 1: Now what--so Creole is really the language of the people in-- Speaker 2: Creole is the language of every Haitian. Every Haitian know Creole. Creole is so easy. If you are an American you go to Haiti, within two months you can learn Creole fluently. Speaker 1: Okay, speak--give us some example of Creole-- Speaker 2: Of Creole. Speaker 1: --maybe, yes. Speaker 2: Oh, bonjou (laughter), bonjou Larry [Larry Crowe], koman ou ye jodia? You know, everybody can say that. I, I met somebody, an American, in Haiti who owned--I mean who was the owner of the art, the first art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], the place, the building. And within two months that person learned Creole and spoke fluent Creole. So every time he went--he came to the art center, you know--that was before I left Haiti. Every time he came he would speak Creole. Speaker 1: Okay. So that--well, I guess what I'm trying to get at, is that, that, okay, so everybody speaks Creole, but not-- Speaker 2: Everybody speak-- Speaker 1: --not everybody-- Speaker 2: --speaks French. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not everybody-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --really speaks the French French-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or, or English for that matter. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, yeah. Speaker 2: But you'd be surprised. You go to Haiti, people are very, very, very bright, except that they don't, they don't have the opportunity that people have in other places, like in this country. They--you would find a little boy in street, he would speak English to you, becau- he gets it from somebody he heard speaking English, and then he will speak. And what he says to you will make sense. And you will find, you know, many, many, many of the guides, they are people that learn it from what they hear the tourists, the way they hear the tourists speak; or, or they had somebody teach them that, not a school really. Story_ID: 644797 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, I guess, Jean-Claude Duvalier, ma--Papa Doc, became the president, I guess. And this is in '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did-- Speaker 2: No, Jean-Claude Duvalier became president in, in '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the son. Speaker 2: The son. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The, the father was-- Speaker 2: The father-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: --fifty-seven [1957]. Papa Doc-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Jean-Claude Duvalier. Speaker 1: Did he have a-- Speaker 2: Francois Duvalier. Speaker 1: Oh, Francois Duvalier, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Francois Duvalier. Speaker 1: So Francois Duvalier, he comes in '57 [1957], and Jean-Claude's his son. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But did your, did, how did your family really feel about the, his administration? Did you--did they--were in favor of it? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I certainly had family members that were part of political things. I, I never, I was never part of any political affiliations because I never--really I always say my politics are my, is my art. Politics for me is the arts. And then, because I couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't I, identify myself being part of a political, being part of any political parties, because I could see how they were acting, and I didn't like it, especially when I was studying in school. When you study civil instructions, you see that people were born free. They, they had to have a, a freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of this, freedom of that. And it wasn't true, because if the people said something that the government didn't like, what happened? And so-- Speaker 1: What happened (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, many times they ended up by being, by being imprisoned and okay, or, or friend killed also, you know, or ex-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --sent into exile, you know. So I said well, I don't think--at one point I said to myself, I don't think I was born to live here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's exactly what I said. I said I don't think I am bo- I was born to live in a country where you don't have freedom of speech. Well-- Speaker 1: Okay. So that--all right, so that, that-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) So that's the truth. So nobody has ever heard me say that, but that was the truth. I keep saying well, and especially after I, I, after I studied in Jamaica. I went to study in Jamaica. And then after I studied in Jamaica, I did, I wanted to come straight to the states or go to Canada. And, but I had to fulfill my destiny of being part of the arts in big time in Haiti. So that's when after I left Jamaica I went to the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Story_ID: 644798 Speaker 1: Now you're saying--I guess we're talking about high school [Ecole Externat la Providence, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Speaker 2: What? High school and-- Speaker 1: Back, back to high school. And you graduated in, in what year did--was it '68 [1968]? You, you said you-- Speaker 2: That was in-- Speaker 1: --were in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: That was in-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: In reality, I graduated in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay. Speaker 2: But, and after that, I went to the school, to the Elie Dubois school [Ecole Elie Dubois, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay, Elie Dubois school is next. Speaker 2: Elie Dubois school. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, there you, did you specialize in, in, in what? Speaker 2: Everything that the young lady had to learn-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the school at Elie Dubois I did. And then after that, that I, I went to Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so, Elie Dubois school is like a, it's like a--you said it's a-- Speaker 2: Professional school. Speaker 1: --professional school, okay. Speaker 2: Professional school. Speaker 1: And that was for how many years, for-- Speaker 2: That's four years, um-hm. Speaker 1: Four, four years? Speaker 2: That's four years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I did it in two. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's like that's college then. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, college, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it is college. Speaker 1: Okay, four years. But it you did it in two years. Speaker 2: And then I went-- Speaker 1: So, 1971-- Speaker 2: --to Jamaica and spent two years-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --more. Speaker 1: In Jamaica. Now what school did you go to in Jamaica? Speaker 2: Jamaica, that's Durham College of Commerce [Kingston, Jamaica]. Speaker 1: Durham, D-U-R-- Speaker 2: D-U-R-- Speaker 1: --H-A-M? Speaker 2: --A-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Durham College of Commerce. Speaker 1: Now, had you intended to go into business at this point? Speaker 2: Guess what, I had always loved English. And then, in Haiti, we only had half an hour every Friday of English. So what little English I learned in Haiti was nothing at all, because my te- English teacher was a Haitian with a heavy accent, more heavier than mine. And then everything that she discussed was politics in the English language, Haitian politics. And so, well, I, I went to Jamaica. In Jamaica, I spent two months, I could learn so fast; within two months I could say anything I wanted. I could write anything I wanted, except that I couldn't hear exactly what they said. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was very, very interesting, because they, you know, I have a good, good apt- attitude--aptitude for languages. Story_ID: 644799 Speaker 1: So you're in school in Jamaica, and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you're studying commerce [at the Durham College of Commerce, Kingston, Jamaica]. This is a school of commerce and--? Speaker 2: Commerce and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --English for foreigners and commerce. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so the first year really was it, well, it's a mix, it was a mixture of everything, but English was the priority. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm, because we had a section. Many, many Haitians were there for English as well as for the things. And many Europeans were there also from France for English and many Lat- other Latinos for English. Speaker 1: So, and you were saying you were thinking at that time about immigrating to the U.S. or Canada, or somewhere else that could provide a little bit more freedom. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 644800 Speaker 1: Did you have friends or members of your family that were victimized by the Haitian government? Speaker 2: Ye- many people that I knew, that, that I knew, you know either had to leave Haiti or had to be im- well, imprisoned. So that wasn't--sometimes you, sometimes you get up one morning and you hear oh, did you hear what happened? So and so was arrested and so on. It wasn't, it wasn't-- Speaker 1: Okay. You know, in this country, we, we--the perception of Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] was a pretty bad dictator. And, but of course, if you-- Speaker 2: But if you, if you look back also, because Papa Doc became a dictator after the--it was many invasions went to Haiti. You know, I've--you, if you are a, an onlooker of the, you are an onlooker, you can see most of the games. Because a, if, for example, if somebody attack me, it's my right to de- to defend myself. Oh, did I--okay. If somebody attacked me, it's my right to defend myself, okay. So Papa Doc may have got the name that he, he, he got, but the first, the first invasion came from the states. And I lost a family member in that--two family members in that invasion. Speaker 1: This is the 1915 invasion or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. I think it was 19--that was in the '60s [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s], you know, and I was a kid. And I could see this person, this person--these people that invaded Haiti, some of them were Haitians that were in rebellions, in rebellion, and they were given ammunition. They were given other means of support to invade Haiti. So Duvalier begun to become bad after so many invasions, many, many invasions, you know. And he, that's when he begun to kill people, arrest people, you know. If, if, for example, the son of a family was still in Haiti, was part of the invasion, so the people, the family would be arrested. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, those things. Speaker 1: So this is a cycle of someone taking over a country, and then the real dangers from the larger countries and invasions and makes them paranoid, and they start acting-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he started acting that way, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Not that what he did was right, no, no. But you know, I think a series of invasions made him, turn him the way he turned out to be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And that certainly--and the invasions and the international pressure on Haiti has, has all--has been there for, since 1804-- Speaker 2: My god-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yes. And that's why Henri Christophe had built a citadel [Citadelle Laferriere] to defend Haiti in case of the return of the French or things like that. Story_ID: 644801 Speaker 1: Describe the Citadelle [Citadelle Laferriere] for those who have never heard of this. Speaker 2: Oh, this, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause this is something that people--people think of Haiti as just, as, you know, a dried up place now, with everything is--but describe the Citadelle. Speaker 2: Okay. I went to the Citadelle while I have been here, because Citadelle is northern part of Haiti, which is pretty far, in Cap-Haitien [Haiti]--not far from Cap-Haitien. I went to the Citadelle. I--it was amazing to see that place, that a former slave had built. And you know, the, the width of the walls is so wide, they are so wide, like ten feet wide, things of that nature, or less than ten feet maybe but wide. And then the big cannons that were driven to the place, my good god, I--and that place is really magnificent. I heard that they had, they had started re- renovating it. It's really magnificent. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I, I-- Speaker 2: And it's overlook-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it overlooks, and to see, and on top of a mountain [Le Bonnet de L'Eveque]. My god, I said how did they do that, to drag all these materials up there to build that place? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a true wonder of-- Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: --the Western world, the Citadelle. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was supposed to be the eighth wonder. There are many eighth wonders of the world, but this place is really magnificent, the different rooms you go to, to go to the top, oh, wow, it's real- I have a, I have a painting of the Citadelle that I keep for my own collection because it reminds me so much of the glory of Haiti, past glory of Haiti. Story_ID: 644802 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this--I asked you about grade school [Les Soeurs de la Sagesse (ph.)], but who were the some of the people who guided you in high school and college as you are starting to, you know, go into your career? Who were some of the people that-- Speaker 2: Oh, my, my older sister was almost like a mother to me. My sister, when I, when I was growing up, my sister had, well, my sister got married before I was born, so I didn't even know if she was my sister or my brother-in-law was my brother. I didn't know anything. But both of them were very wonderful. Speaker 1: What's your sister's name? Speaker 2: Geanne, Geanne, G-E-A-N-N-E, Geanne Smith Colyoda [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Her, her last name-- Speaker 2: My, my-- Speaker 1: --is-- Speaker 2: --my sister was in politics, but good politician. She, oh, she, she did so many things for her village. And she was, she was good at what she was doing too. Speaker 1: Okay. So she really helped you formulate some of your ideas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and direction? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 644803 Speaker 1: Now, it says here that in '71 [1971] you began your career as a curator at the center for art [Le Centre d'Art]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Port-au, at Port-de-Prince [sic.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how did that come about? Speaker 2: Well, I, I went to the art center. The art center director was a distant relative, her, Francine Murat. And then-- Speaker 1: Oh, you gotta spell that too (laughter). Speaker 2: Francine, F-R-A-N-C-I-N-E, Francine, Murat, M-U-R-A-T. Speaker 1: Okay. So she's assistant curat- the director? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was--she was the director. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After, after DeWitt Peters passed away, Francine became the director of the art center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was there really for fifty years until 2010. Speaker 1: So she stepped down after the earthquake, yeah (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --or she couldn't-- Speaker 2: --she didn't step down. She, she, well, she had had an accident in December of 2009. And then she was in hospital, in the hospital. That accident occurred in the art center when she was putting a show up. And she went to the hospital and left the hospital on the 9th of January. That was the day before the earthquake. Thank god she didn't die in that earthquake, but she died one month later after because she couldn't go back to the hospital for treatment, and the hospital had disappeared also. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so Francine Murat, she-- Speaker 2: She was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) helped you get the-- Speaker 2: Francine Murat was my mentor, along with the director of the art museum, Pierre Monosiet. They were my, my teachers. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: My God-- Speaker 1: --so I have to stop you in the--what's Pierre's last name? Speaker 2: Pierre Monosiet, M-O-N-O-S-I-E-T, Monosiet (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Story_ID: 644804 Speaker 1: How did you find out that the job was open? Did, did she tell you, or how did--? Speaker 2: Oh, my good god, I went to see Francine [Francine Murat]. I went to see her at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. She said I've been asking you to--she called and she sent me letters asking me to come and help me. Well, I wanted to--you know, I didn't want to, to get involved too much because I wanted to come here. But well, I stayed two years with them. Francine knew (laughter)--saw me. She said, "Okay, today you are going to stay." It was a Friday. I said, "Okay, I will start Monday." She said, "No, you start today." Okay, the starting was really a part time job and all the training that I had. So Francine Mur- it was so good, I tell you. This is a very interesting part of my life. I loved the art center so much after that. The first day I arrived, you know, she said, "You staying?" "Okay," I said, "Okay, I am--I will come on Tuesday--Monday." She say, "No, you're staying today." I stayed by--it was nine o'clock. At 10:30 a young man came in, and he was an artist. I said, "My name is Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith]. What's your name?" He said, "My name is Nazaya [ph.]." I say, "Nazaya," he had a painting, I said, "Nazaya, what do you have?" He said, "A painting." I said, "Can I see it?" I saw that painting, and I fell in love. And I had some money on me. I put down a deposit on the painting. So, after that experience, okay, forget about the states, forget about everything else. Even though the coming to the states is in my mind, but the experience that I was having was so wonderful, okay. Francine made it a point of teaching me every day about the artist, about the techniques, about everything, about the history of the art center, and everything. And Pierre Monosiet would come and teach me how to select works from an artist, how to know what the artist will become, if this artist is going to a successful artist, or if you will paint a painting or two and stop there and will never be able to make it. And this was part of my life that I enjoyed the most because that helped me select works from artists in this country, artists from other places that I would not have been able to do if I had not had that training. Speaker 1: Now had you had any previous experience in-- Speaker 2: Art? Speaker 1: Yeah, as a-- Speaker 2: Yes, I had had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) put- putting on exhibits-- Speaker 2: --previous experience-- Speaker 1: --exhibitions and-- Speaker 2: --in the school, in the school where Sister Philomena [ph.] said that I would never be an artist. Speaker 1: But had you had any experiences putting up shows as a student in college or anything like that, or-- Speaker 2: Very little, very little. But the training that I got at the art center helped me to taught me; it taught me how to put up shows, to, to interview artists, to, to write things about the arts and so on. And then, when Francine was away, I was the person in charge of the art center. Story_ID: 644805 Speaker 1: Now, you came along after DeWitt Peters had passed away. Speaker 2: Oh, long-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --after DeWitt Peters-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --had passed away, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and were any of those--the artists that, that initially started with him, were they still around? Were any-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --of them still around? Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --many of them, yeah, many of them. Bazile [Castera Bazile] had died soon after DeWitt Peters. But most of the other artists that--another very important artist also had died. That was Hyppolite [Hector Hyppolite], Hyppolite. And, but most of the other artists were alive, and they would come regularly to the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], and they would also my mentors. Speaker 1: Okay. Now those, those, there are four artists that are like considered-- Speaker 2: Five of them. Speaker 1: Yeah, five of them, yeah, that were considered like the--well, talk about them, you know, those, those-- Speaker 2: In the-- Speaker 1: --five, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --considered the founders of the, of the artistic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arts and-- Speaker 1: --tra- tradition there at the center. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Hyp- Hyppolite, Bazile, who, who else? Speaker 2: Rigaud Benoit-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Rigaud Benoit, my favorite-- Speaker 1: Benoit, okay. Speaker 2: Philome Obin, Obin and then Wilson Bigaud. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Those were really the catalyst of the art movement of Haiti. Speaker 1: So there, there are works by them that are world renowned that-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: The works are in collections all over-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --especially the, the Smit- the, the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] used to have a governing collection. I don't know if it's still part of them, if they still have it. The Museum of the (Unclear) had a tremendously great collection, and then--a fabulous collection, I should say. And then the museum of Milwaukee [Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] has a beautiful collection of Haitian art. Story_ID: 644806 Speaker 1: Now I think I've, I've heard tourists say when they go to Haiti that there's so much art in the street, people painting on every possible, in every possible way, and selling these paintings so cheap. Speaker 2: You're talking about right now? Speaker 1: Well, it--I don't-- Speaker 2: Before? Speaker 1: --know about now, but before the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before. Speaker 1: --earthquake anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, tourist art is always tourist art. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, if you buy something in the street, it's a, it's a--what, what do--it's a folk art. And you can find that artist who paints that thing that he's selling, the city could be a very good artist too, but he choose to repeat the subject because it sells well. He paints it over and over again, you know. But the good artist, really, they were all artists that were part of the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] or the museum [Musee du Pantheon National Haitien, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], of other gallery, gallery, like Gallery Nader [Galerie d'Art Nader, Petion-Ville, Haiti] and some other galleries in Port-au-Prince [Haiti] now, yeah. But there were lot, there were many, many, many artists painting in the streets. Story_ID: 644807 Speaker 1: Who were some of the artists that you met in those two years at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]? Speaker 2: First of all, I met that artist that changed my life, and I don't know where he is because I couldn't find him later, Nazaya [ph.]. I bought his painting and fell in love with his work and bought the very one that I love, really love, was Rigaud Benoit's work. And Rigaud Benoit, every morning--not only his work--but every morning when I went to the, to the, to the art center, I would go to that room. It's like going into a little chapel, you know. And every morning that was my first stop after I'd put my bag so in my desk. Every morning I would go to that room, admiring the works of Rigaud Benoit, Hector Hyppolite, Philome Obin, Bazile [Castera Bazile], and the other artists, because it was the room of the masters. And there were other masters. There, there was another man also by the name of Antonio Joseph. Antonio is still alive. But my favorite works were by Rigaud Benoit. And so one day, one Friday, Rigaud Benoit came. I said, "Rigaud, what would it take for you to paint this," oh, forgive me (laughter), "what would it take for you to paint one eight by ten for me?" Rigaud said, "Oh no, you don't have money to pay for my work." I said, "Rigaud, I will give you fifty dollars, fifty dollars deposit and pay you by installment every month." He said, "No way." And then one day Rigaud came to the art center and he said, "I can't believe it." I say, "What?" He said, "I had a dream somebody told me to--showed me a painting and said to paint this for Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith] and not charge her a penny." I said, "Rigaud, you're lying." He said, "No, I'm not lying. I will, I will bring you the drawing next week to show you." I said, "Rigaud, are you serious?" He say, "Yeah. Somebody showed me a painting and say, 'Paint this for Nicole and don't charge her a penny.' And when I asked him why should not I charge her a penny, the person said, 'None of your business; just paint it; give it to her; and don't charge her.'" I said, "Well, they should tell all of you how much I love you," (laughter). My God, just one day I, I am at the cent- at the center. A lady by the name Mary Lou Hughes [Mary Lou Vansant Hughes] was their attache culturel [cultural attache] at the American embassy. She came, she said, "How lucky can you be?" I say, "Why?" "I went to Rigaud Benoit, and I saw a painting that he's painting, and I ask him to buy it from him. He said, 'No, this painting can never be sold; it's for Nicole.'" Well, not only Mary Lou, many other people came and say, "My god, you are so fortunate. Rigaud Benoit is painting a painting for you, and you, and you're not going to charge a paint--to be charged a penny," oh well. Well, my friend, I have that painting. It's been exhibited at the Chicago Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois]. It's been exhibited at the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. It's a beautiful painting about, like a tree of life. And it's a peacock sitting on a, on a tree, on a rose tree. And that rose tree has different color of roses. The roses, you know, are of different colors. And there it's beautiful. And the, the peacock has many eggs, sitting on the eggs. And then it's about life, right, the eggs. And then the roots of the roses, they're getting into the earth to be nurtured, about to be nourished. And there is a, a worm coming out of the bottom of the tree going after a fly. It is just magnificent. Everybody who sees that painting wants to buy it. I said, "Well, I'm sorry it's not for sale," very, very, very wonderful. Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Now how old was-- Speaker 2: Rigaud? Speaker 1: Rigaud Benoit, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, Rigaud Benoit was already an older man. He was probably seventy, seventy something. Speaker 1: That's what I was thinking, yeah. Okay, so, so you've endeared yourself to the greatest, one of the greatest artists in Haiti-- Speaker 2: Yes, and I-- Speaker 1: --to paint you an original work. Speaker 2: --got a painting. After he give me that painting, many other artists came and said, "If Rigaud Benoit has given you a painting, we cannot be--we cannot do any less. We cannot not do," you know, "anything, whatever; we have to give you a painting too." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I say, "You don't have to," and she say, "Well, we'd love to give you a painting." Well, that's--was the story. Story_ID: 644808 Speaker 1: But the, and, and my stay at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] was a wonderful, wonderful time. Every morning I would go to work, it wasn't work. I would go to, I would be in front of the gate for almost forty-five minutes, until I realized, my god, what are you doing in front of the gate. You could be doing something, you know. The gate is locked. So why don't you come later? So I would come, still come at the same time but go to different places to see what was going on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it was really wonderful. Like, I say that this was my greatest experience in life-- Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or my most wonderful experience in life. Story_ID: 644809 Speaker 1: Who was your clientele in this, in the, in the gallery? For the most part, were they native (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here, in this count- Speaker 1: --Haitians or-- Speaker 2: --in this country-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, Americans? Speaker 2: --or in Haiti or here? Speaker 1: No, in, in-- Speaker 2: Here? Speaker 1: --in Haiti, in Haiti-- Speaker 2: In Haiti? In Haiti-- Speaker 1: At the center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Speaker 2: --there were several--they were Americans. Tourists, tourism was still very good, so I met many of my friends that I have here now in Haiti-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --especially people from Evanston [Illinois], people from, from Chicago [Illinois]. I met several of them in, back in Haiti. And I had no idea that some of them had given me their address. And when--addresses--and when I came here, I begun looking at my address book, and to find out that, wow, this person lives in Chicago, or this person lives in Evanston, this person lives in the suburb, and I began calling. And when my first crates of art came from Haiti, I called one of, of the friends that I met in Haiti who had collected some Haitian art. I said, "My crates of art are coming from Haiti in a few days." And that person said, "Why don't we have a party in my home? Invite all your acquaintances from Haiti or your friends and your family, and we will have a viewing of your collection." And that was very wonderful. Story_ID: 644810 Speaker 1: Let me go back a step though, like what--you were having such a great time at the center for art [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], and why did you leave? I, I--it seems that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my friend-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yes? Speaker 2: --people's destiny. Your destiny cannot be fulfilled in, just in one place. And you can be having a great time, but my destiny was to come here and share my knowledge of Haitian art, my, my collection of Haitian art with the people of this country. And I didn't know it at the time I was living Haiti. I knew it after the person invited me to his house to open my crates. And then everybody who saw the collection said, I think you should show your collection to the public. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I said what public? I don't know the public. Speaker 1: So, one, you brought the--well, let, let me go, let me go, just re- re- rewind back a little bit again to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I think it was in-- Speaker 2: Francine [Francine Murat]. Speaker 1: Yeah, but--so, so you're invited to the United States by one of the clients? Is that how it went? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You, you decided to go-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --or did you just go over to just see what-- Speaker 2: No. I came over of, of my own accord. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My brother and his family had been living in Evanston [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay? So I, I called them, and I told them that I wanted to come. Speaker 1: And you brought your collection with you when you-- Speaker 2: When I first came I didn't bring my collection. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The collection came three months later. And then a, yeah, the collection (mumbles), the collection came three months later. Story_ID: 644811 Speaker 1: Now what year was it that you came to the, to Evanston [Illinois] to visit your brother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Evanston? That was in 1974--'73 [1973]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --end of '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --had already spent two years at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you hadn't intended--had, did you intend when you, you went to Evanston to stay in the United States for a while, or, or were you just on a visit? Speaker 2: I came with a visitor's visa. The intention was to stay. But how could you come in those days? You come as a visitor, and you, you get your papers organized, fixed by lawyer, and then you get your alien card and so on. Speaker 1: I've, I've heard that it's difficult for Haitians to immigrate to the United States because of U.S. immigrations laws and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Right now it's almost impossible. But when I was coming, I was sitting in the, in the yard waiting for my visa. A friend of mine was an int- an undersecretary of interior, saw me and said, "What are you doing here, Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith]?" Say, "I'm waiting for my visa." And my visa came to me. I didn't have to wait. He just went inside and got it. Speaker 1: Okay. But if you would have had to wait awhile-- Speaker 2: I wait, I mean, maybe fifteen minutes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --until it came in and then got my visa. I, I, I have to say there were about three to five hundred people there. And it was a good thing that he saw me. Story_ID: 644812 Speaker 1: All right, so in Evanston [Illinois]--so people hear about the collection, so you--and by three months you send for it, your collection to--? Speaker 2: Three months after I got here I sent for my collection, which was at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]. And then picked, we picked--my friend picked it up at, at custom, and then we opened it at his place. The rest is history. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (Laughter) History. Speaker 1: And we need to get it on (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so what--well, once your collection got here, what did you do with it? Speaker 2: Well, my friends--many of the people that attended that evening said, "My god, your collection is beautiful. Why don't you show it to the public?" And that friend of mine was a librarian at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], okay. He said, "Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], I will show you the public." First place I showed the collection was at the Aurelia Gallery in Evanston. Aurelia Gallery was on Central [Street] and Green Bay [Road], Aurelia Gallery. Speaker 1: How do you spell that one? Speaker 2: A-U-R-E-L-I-A, Aurelia Gallery. And Aurelia told me that she had had her gallery for twent- almost twenty-five years. She had never had so many people coming to it, into it at one time. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, how long did your collection show at the gallery? It was-- Speaker 2: Oh, just one month. Speaker 1: Just one month, okay. Speaker 2: One month. After that I begun showing it--taking it to, to different people home. My collection was at the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. It was at part of the cultural center [Chicago Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois]. It was at the, it was shown in, mainly of the suburb, public libraries in the suburb, like in Skokie [Illinois], in Evanston, in, in Wilmette [Illinois], in Winnetka [Illinois], in some other places. Story_ID: 644813 Speaker 1: How much was your collection worth? Did you have a--I mean in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, I had about fifty-seven pieces of paintings and sculptures--fifty-three pieces I had. Speaker 1: And now were you, were you entertaining selling the, any of the pieces at that time? Speaker 2: No, not at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just to show. I wanted to share. People were so interested I wanted to share the beauty of Haitian art with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Say fifty-seven pieces. Now did you have to insure these pieces when you showed them? Speaker 2: No. I didn't know about all those things (laughter). Well, I didn't know about insurance, so no, I, I just showed it. Speaker 1: I thought that was the case, and I thought I'd ask. That's why I thought I'd ask, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --things had become much more sophisticated these days than they were-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely-- Speaker 1: --in those days-- Speaker 2: --definitely. Speaker 1: --especially around black art, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, because-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --black art has become a, a pot of gold for many people these days. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't even, you know. So, would, were, were you lucky enough where, where nothing was damaged or nothing was, was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing was damaged, nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: God, that's amazing; that's amazing, wow, yep. Story_ID: 644814 Speaker 1: What happened after the show at the--what, what, you were showing them around town, you said libraries, schools, different places-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: --in, really, in 1983, became really, a year very important in my life because that's when I found out about the suburb. And at that point, I, I should say 1982, at the end of '82 [1982] I found out about DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. And in 1983 I was asked to co-curate a show at the cultural center [Chicago Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois] for the Du- for the anniversary of Chicago [Illinois]. What anniversary was that? Anniversary of the founding of Chicago (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. It would have been founded in the 1700s-- Speaker 2: Yes, I think-- Speaker 1: --so 1780 something, so that would have been the two hundredth I guess-- Speaker 2: No, not yet. This year, in fact, to this week, it's seven--175th anniversary of Chicago. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. And-- Speaker 1: Oh, so it must be 18, 18 something then. I guess we'll see. Well, any rate, that--well, here's--the DuSable Museum is named after a Haitian-- Speaker 2: After a Haitian. Speaker 1: --immigrant, Jean Baptiste Point du Sable. Speaker 2: Point du Sable. In fact, it's Jean Baptiste Point du Sable. Speaker 1: It's supposed to be du, du Sable. Speaker 2: du Sable. And then I met two of his great-grandnieces, whose name are du Sable. In fact, they were living behind--next door to Francine Murat's home in Port-au-Prince [Haiti]. Speaker 1: And they knew they were related to the du Sable-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --du Sable and-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh, oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, they had another person by the name of Jeremy [ph.], who was a poet. Jeremy was also part of that, that family. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know people that have been trying to find relatives of his, and-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I-- Speaker 1: --there are a lot of disputed stories here in the states about-- Speaker 2: --I tried to ask them to, to bring those two people here, you know, and then nobody was, had the means to do that in those days. And-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --had they had the means, maybe that was not of interest to them. But two, the two ladies were ready. They wanted to come. I told them if they send you the tickets to come and other things for your, for you to come to the states, would you be able to come? They said yes. Speaker 1: Well, for those who don't know, I just want to point out that there's a DuSable society [Chicago DuSable League] here in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --that's been in existence since the 1920s or '30s [1930s] I believe, and where they-- Speaker 2: Oh, DuSable, a society? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Is this part of the DuSable Museum also, or is it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. That's how the DuSable-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, got--the, the museum kind of grew out of the association of activities-- Speaker 2: Associate-- Speaker 1: --of the society that DuSable has, is a DuSable historical society. And there's one that exists now that, you know, had the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there is a Haitian one-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --heritage-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --DuSable Heritage [DuSable Heritage Association]. In fact, tomorrow they have their events. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, there's a, there's a, an old one prior to the Haitian immigration one that, that had something to do with the, the monument to du Sable down-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --in what, Pioneer Court, down off the Chicago River-- Speaker 2: Okay, yes. Speaker 1: --you know, that just was erected a couple of years ago, right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was there. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, du Sable's a big deal around here. And-- Speaker 2: Oh, du-- Speaker 1: --so he's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) oh, du Sable-- Speaker 1: --very important person. Speaker 2: --du Sable was a very important person, because, you know, well, they say that he was pretty rich. He was fur trader, and then he ended up in Peoria [Illinois]. That's where he died, in Peoria. And-- Speaker 1: Or St. Charles. I remember there's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or St. Charles. Speaker 1: --dispute. They, they, some, some say it was St. Charles, Illinois, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 644815 Speaker 1: Oh, what I wanted to ask you: what, what is the story in Haiti about du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable]? You know, what is the--? Speaker 2: No stories about du Sable until, until--let me see--1983, '82 [1982], '83 [1983], until they wanted to celebrate the, the, the anniversary of Chicago [Illinois]. There were four exhibitions. I co-curated them. I co-curated the one with a Ramon Price. You remember Ramon Price? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was the mayor's brother-- Speaker 2: Brother, exactly. Speaker 1: --Mayor Washington's brother, Ramon Price. Speaker 2: Okay. Ramon Price went to Haiti with me, and then we (unclear), we borrowed works from the museum of Haiti [Musee du Pantheon National Haitien, Port-au-Prince, Haiti], from other collectors, people who had historical pieces, you know, lend them to Ramon for the show at the, at the DuSable [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. And the show was called 'The Haitian Connection.' We, we co- I co-curated with Gregory Knight at the cultural center [Chicago Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois]. It was called 'The Art of Haiti under the Spell'--'Under the Spell: The Art of Haiti.' I curated one for the final building, 'The Art of Haiti,' and then one for the Skokie Public Library [Skokie, Illinois], 'The Beautiful Art of Haiti' [ph.]. It all took place around this same period almost, that year. Speaker 1: So this is--just put this in historical perspective here. Eighty-three [1983]--1982 and '83 [1983] was the campaign of Harold Washington for mayor. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Now, you're working with his half-brother at DuSable Museum, Ramon Price. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: One of the campaign flyers for his candidacy was actually created by me. Speaker 2: Oh really? Speaker 1: And it, it, it had a-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: --it had an image of Washington glancing at a banner with du Sable's image on it. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And it said-- Speaker 2: --okay, I remember that. Speaker 1: --"We Discovered It, We Should Govern It." And it's now in the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] and other places. But it's at DuSable now. I, I, I was talked to when Carol Adams [HistoryMaker Carol L. Adams] was there. I mean but she's still there, but, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, she showed it to me, and it's got, actually got my--it's the first, the first time I've gotten credit for it, on it. But, but that's the, but that was the attitude of the, the community, we discovered it, we should (laughter) govern it. Speaker 2: We should get it, um-hm (laughter). Speaker 1: So Harold Washington is elected in '83 [1983] as mayor of the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --City of Chicago. Speaker 2: In fact-- Speaker 1: It's-- Speaker 2: --I went to Haiti twice, one with Ramon, and then the second time, that was about the election, maybe two or three weeks before the election. Ramon called me in Haiti. I said, "Guess what, your brother will be the mayor, the next mayor of Chicago. I had a dream, you know, and I saw all this." I said, "Your brother will be the next mayor." He said, "Well, I will tell him." Yeah, because I knew Washington very well too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 644816 Speaker 1: There's another connection. Before I forget it, I just, you know, this is--it sounds like it has nothing to do with it, but I, I just--another resident of Illinois was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, who was in downstate. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Now she spent a lot of time in Haiti-- Speaker 2: Oh, she spent most of her life-- Speaker 1: --training her dancers. Speaker 2: --in Haiti. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She had a beautiful home in Haiti. And then she had a historic home in Haiti. And she did a lot of work in Haiti. Many of her dancers were from Haiti. Speaker 1: Yeah, did you--were you aware of that when you were a young person-- Speaker 2: When I was in Haiti-- Speaker 1: --in Haiti? Speaker 2: --yes, I was aware of her name, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was popular. If you went to a, to a festival by her, you know, her dancer, they were there. That was beautiful. That was beautiful. She was the queen of dance. Story_ID: 644817 Speaker 1: So here, 1983, the election of a-- Speaker 2: Washington [Harold Washington] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black mayor, in the City of Chicago [Illinois], a city that was founded by a black man from Haiti [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] (laughter), okay. This is--and, and-- Speaker 2: That was historical, yes, it was. Speaker 1: Yes. Do Haitians in Chicago feel a connection to Chicago becau- I mean do--is there a--I mean, I, I know it's, it's obviously there, but do, do, do-- Speaker 2: Do they feel that connection? Speaker 1: Yeah, do Haitians feel that in Haiti? Speaker 2: Well, I know I do (laughter) and many of them, because we, we have the DuSable Heritage now [Dusable Heritage Association]. Like tomorrow, tomorrow I won't be able to go, because I was going to have a show for them, and I, I have something else taking place. Today and then tomorrow I have another thing in the, about noon. But they are, they are working diligently. It will be the tenth anniversary or eleventh anniversary since they founded the society, the--not society, the organization. It's called DuSable Heritage. Dr. Pierre Louis founded that. Speaker 1: Doc, doctor who? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Dr. Serge Pierre-Louis, Pierre-Louis, S-E-R-G-E, Pierre-Louis. Speaker 1: Okay this is DuSable Heritage-- Speaker 2: DuSable Heritage. Speaker 1: --society. Speaker 2: They have their function at the Marriott tomorrow night. Story_ID: 644818 Speaker 1: Also, I looked at the outline, and it's not on here, but I, I remember that you had your one--I guess, was this your first gallery space, on Wabash [Avenue] in the Pakula Building [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, on, on Halsted [Street]. Speaker 1: Halsted, okay. Speaker 2: The first gallery was on Halsted. Speaker 1: All right, it-- Speaker 2: It was founded on the, the 7th of March, 1986. Speaker 1: No, no, now, before that, because that-- Speaker 2: Oh, before that I had-- Speaker 1: And you were in-- Speaker 2: Oh, before-- Speaker 1: --the Pakula Building on Wabash, remember that? Speaker 2: No, no, I would be there--I mean tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would be there with other people that had art. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I would show some work, but I was not really there. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, 'cause I thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --you had a space on the ninth-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --floor there with Kuumba Theater [Kuumba Theater Company] was there, and I would see you there often. Speaker 2: You would see me there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --often because I would go, you know, whenever they had the presentations. They were selling--having exhibits, something like that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I provided them with art also. Story_ID: 644819 Speaker 1: Now there's another figure that was around in those days that I remember because he's a good friend of [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward's. There was a fellow named Paul, a white-- Speaker 2: Paul Waggoner. Speaker 1: Paul Waggoner, right. Speaker 2: Yes, Paul, Paul, Paul died two years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul went to Haiti. Wow, Paul had been going to Haiti long before I came here. And then-- Speaker 1: And he would bring-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he had his gallery. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he would bring back artworks and-- Speaker 2: Artworks, yeah, um-hm. And let's see, yes, he had a gallery on Oak Street. He had a gallery in South Prairie--I mean Indiana, Oak, Prairie, something like that. And then he had a gallery in Lincoln, Lincoln Street [sic. Lincoln Avenue]. That was all Haitian art. Speaker 1: Now, he was doing this before you got here, right? Speaker 2: Before I got here, yes. Speaker 1: Were you aware of him before you came? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --in Haiti. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And then when I came, really I--oh, what I mean? Did I, was I aware of him in Haiti? No, I wasn't aware of him in Haiti. When I got here, people would be telling me about him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I had a show with him. Speaker 1: At, at his gallery in-- Speaker 2: At his gallery-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I had some--I showed, I showed my collection with him, part of the collection, because he wanted to have some masters' work. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yes. They were not for sale. They were there to show. Speaker 1: Now would--did he have any of the masters' work in his-- Speaker 2: He had some good artists, yes. But he didn't have Rigaud Benoit. He didn't have those artists, those five great ones, but he had works by some great artists too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 644820 Speaker 1: After coming here and seeing, what was your assessment of I guess the knowledge of Haitian art here on the part of the--you know, the people, the, the patrons of the arts, would they, did they know very much about Haitian art, in your opinion? Speaker 2: Very little. Then you--and people who are collectors of art knew. For example, there was another gallery, not just Paul [Paul Waggoner], Wa- Worthington Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eva Worthington [Eva-Maria Worthington] used to go to Haiti. In fact, I met her in Haiti. Speaker 1: What was her first name? Speaker 2: Eva. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's German. Speaker 1: Worthington. Speaker 2: Eva Worthington. I think her gallery is still on Michigan Avenue in the, in one of the buildings. Speaker 1: But she had a good collection of work (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, she had a good collection. She had some of the works of the masters; and she still does, um-hm, because I showed her collection in my gallery [Nicole Gallery] on Huron [Huron Street, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 644821 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about opening the gallery [Nicole Gallery] on West Huron [West Huron Street, Chicago, Illinois], or that--no-- Speaker 2: Oh, the gallery had been opened already. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, the gallery was open on Halsted-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --1723 North Halsted [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the first place. Speaker 1: So that's the first place you opened. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, all right, well, tell us about that then. How did that, how'd you get-- Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Everybody told me that I couldn't open an art gallery because I didn't have the money to do that. I said well, I think I'm going to open it anyway. Yes, I think I was very stubborn. For everybody said, "Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], you don't open an art gallery without money." I said, "Well, but can you show me where I can get some money to open it?" Everybody said, "Well, go to SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration]." I went to SBA. SBA said, "We don't lend out money to artists." I said, "Well, so what do you want me to do, sir?" He said, "Well, you can wait until you get the money." I said, "If I wait, where do you think I will get it from?" He said, "I don't know, but you need at least a hundred thousand, a car, and the artworks." I said, "Well, I have the artworks. I don't have a car. And, and my dream is burning my hands." And then he said, "Well, don't say that I didn't tell you so." I said, "Sir, I, I'm not going to tell you that. I will tell you that it will be okay," and so I opened really. Ramon [Ramon Price] was my speaker at the first opening. And I had NAJWA Dance Corps. Didn't have room because I had that three story little home, but there were so many people attending that opening. People were in line to get in. And I don't know how they heard about it. Of course I had it, I had a press release, but it was so amazing. It was such a cold day in March, March 7, '86 [1986]. It was so cold. And so many people came in. My god, it was amazing, amazing. Speaker 1: So, this is March 7th, 1986. So, so did business just take off immediately, or was it-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It didn't take off immediately. I had to do some doing. I--oh, wow--I began having exhibitions. And then one day I had a, an artist, who was also a writer, by the name of Gabo [ph.]. Gabos came in and Gabo said, "I heard about the opening of your gallery. I am an artist. I am also a writer. Okay, I'd like to interview you for a newspaper." I am thinking about that newspaper, and that it's no longer in existence. It was one of those neighborhood newspapers that were very popular. And then you--he, he interviewed me, put it in there. And I had a lot of people coming. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I sold some art. But the first three months were amazingly difficult (laughter). And I, I didn't know if I had made the right decision. Speaker 1: Now, at the time, were you living with your brother or were you-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Oh no. When I moved to the, the, in that little house, oh yeah, I had my room in the attic. I lived in the attic, and the fir- the two stories were my business, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is on Halsted, on-- Speaker 2: On Halsted. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Oh, so many people loved that little place. And this--some of them still tell me, still say, "Nicole, I, I had loved that little place. It was so wonderful." It was wonderful really, yeah. Story_ID: 644822 Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], so, now when did you o- open the gallery [Nicole Gallery] on Huron [Huron Street, Chicago, Illinois], when, when-- Speaker 2: Well, I-- Speaker 1: How did that-- Speaker 2: --I spent only one and half years on Halsted [Street]. I moved to Wells Street. I was at 734 North Wells for nine, almost nine years, nine years really. I was at 734 North Wells, opposite to the Brehon Pub [Chicago, Illinois], if you know where that is. Speaker 1: So this is 1988 or so? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were there for nine years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '87 [1987], '89 [1989]--'88 [1988]. Speaker 1: 'Til '96 [1996] I guess? Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 734 North Wells. All right, so-- Speaker 2: I was on the second--third floor, second floor, and then the building was sold. The new owners wanted me out. I went searching, and I ended up on Huron. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You came to Huron, right? Speaker 1: I believe so, yes. Speaker 2: If you had come to Huron you could not forget it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: --a beautiful gallery, really beautiful, beautiful. Speaker 1: Now, you exhibited Haitian art, but you also, you know, exhibited other-- Speaker 2: Oh, I exhibited-- Speaker 1: --other groups. Speaker 2: --many African American artists and Africans, yes. Story_ID: 644823 Speaker 1: I have a note here that, that one was Nnamdi Okonkwo-- Speaker 2: Nnamdi Okonkwo, he's-- Speaker 1: --from-- Speaker 2: --from Nigeria. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what, what was his work like, and how did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, he's-- Speaker 1: --meet him? Speaker 2: Oh, I was at the gallery one day on, on Huron [Street], and that young man came in from Southwest. And he said--with his wife--and he said, "I am a, I am a sculptor from Nigeria. And I have been to the other galleries, and everybody said, 'Go to Nicole, go to Nicole, go to Nicole [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois].'" I said, "Unfortunately, I cannot have your work, because I have so many sculptures here and they are so heavy. If I had a show for you, I'd have to have somebody come in to--several men come in to move the sculptures that were in the gallery." He said, "Oh." He left. Two hours later he came back. And he just went flop on his knees, said, "Please take me, take my work." I said, "Okay, okay. I have some very strict, whatever, strict"-- Speaker 1: Rules? Speaker 2: --"things I--just rules"-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --"in the, in for this gallery. I don't show artworks that I don't love. I don't show destructive works. I don't show anything that is vulgar. So, if you come here, don't think that you are going to bring nudes, you are going to bring this, you are going to bring that. I don't do that. And, and I don't do politic either" (laughter). So, he said, "Okay." Well, the first sculpture that this man showed me, I said, "I like this one. But you know something? I am going to a show in New York [New York], the Black Fine Art Show [National Black Fine Art Show] in New York. I'd, I'd like to go with you," that's what I said, and then that's exactly what I did. We went to New York. The first piece that I selected was a magnificent, a lady, and beautifully done. And this piece could have won the first prize at the show because everybody stopped to look at it. And so, it became an instant success in New York. Speaker 1: Now what medium did he--I mean he was sculpting, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That bronze. Speaker 1: --what, what was it? Speaker 2: Bronze. Speaker 1: Bronze? Speaker 2: Bronze, limited edition (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 644824 Speaker 1: We were closing out talking about Nnamdi Okonkwo. And, and so-- Speaker 2: Nnamdi Okonkwo-- Speaker 1: And another-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Allen Stringfellow. Speaker 1: Allen Stringfellow, now you met him through William Carter. Speaker 2: William Carter. Speaker 1: Now, William Carter is one of the original founders of the-- Speaker 2: Of the-- Speaker 1: --South Side-- Speaker 2: --South Side-- Speaker 1: --Community Art-- Speaker 2: --Art Center [South Side Community Art Center, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And William Carter had--I had his work. And before he died, his last show took place in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. So from 1988 I had had William Carter also, so William Carter, Allen Stringfellow. Allen Stringfellow, I tell you, he was such a wonderful, dear heart. I'm, I tell you, we worked so well, beautifully well. Allen became a success also, because when he--I first met him, he--I--William Carter introduced us. And William Carter said, "When are you going to have a show for Allen?" I said, "I didn't dare say that I didn't know Allen was an artist." He just asked me--he just introduced us, and he said, "When are you going to have a show for Allen?" I said, "Allen, you want a show in my place?" He said, "I surely do." Okay, I said, "Okay." In January we were in eighty--'87 [1987], November of '87 [1987], in the gallery on Wells [Street]. And then when Carter say that, I said, "In January this year I'm going to have a show for eight artists. You want to be the ninth one?" He said, "Yes." I said "Okay, I will need three painting by you." Well, his work was the first to sell. And the people who bought the three, they asked me, "Do you have any more Stringfellow?" Well, we continued to have shows and other group shows. And then Carter said one day, "When are you going to have a solo show for Allen?" I said, "Allen, you need a solo show?" He said, "I surely do." And I said, "Okay, come to the gallery; let's talk about it." Allen came. By that time, I had already contacted a PR [public relations], the best in the city for art in those days. That was, that was--oh, (makes sound)--that was, my god, Simon Nate- Nathan. Nathan and Nathan [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They curated a show. I saw that show. After that I said okay, I want those people to be part of my life too. And so I called. Allen came in. I said Allen, "What do you want to achieve?" He said, "I want to be a--I want to, to sell out, and I want to be famous." I said, "Okay, are you willing to do what I am going to ask you?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Okay, I have contacted a PR. They have the on--they are, the PR, PRs are people that will make things happen." Allen said, "Okay." I said, "It's ninety-five dollars an hour, and I can contact them for four months, by having twelve hours per month, okay. And then I am going to make a little sacrifice. You have to make your little part of the sacrifice. You put half, and I'll put half." Well, we had a show. We had thirty-eight paintings in the show. We sold thirty-seven in one month, for February. We had three television interviews. We had fourteen different newspapers and magazines throughout the city, the neighborhood, and everywhere, that featured the works, the, Allen Stringfellow. Okay, after that, the rest became history because New York, New York came; the gallery in New York came, Essie Green Gallery [Essie Green Galleries]. And they heard about Stringfellow being very popular, and they wanted to take Allen. Allen said, "Well, if I have to have exclusivity with you, Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith] has to be part of it." Of course it wasn't the idea, okay; they did not want me to (unclear). Allen said, "Well, if you don't want Nicole, I am not going to sign." So they waited for one and a half years. When they saw that Allen was not going to sign, they called him. They said, "Okay, Nicole will be part of it. We want to--we want you, okay." That's the way--and I--Allen Stringfellow left in 2004, and I never signed a contract with him, never signed any contract with him. His work is still in the gallery. Before he died, he sent for his work in New York to put them in the gallery. The collection belonged to a friend of his. And then, but it has to be sold through the gallery. Story_ID: 644825 Speaker 1: We just had a show. I mean last year I had a show that ended in June at the museum of, Waterloo museum [Waterloo Center for the Arts] in the, in Iowa [Waterloo, Iowa], okay. Allen's [HistoryMaker Allen Stringfellow], before he died, his work has became part of the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], the Harrison Museum in, in Virginia [Harrison Museum of African American Culture, Roanoke, Virginia], the Schomburg in New York [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], and the--he had participated in group show at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. His work is part of the history museum in Chicago [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois], DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]. And Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] purchased several works. President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] has his work. Who else? The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] commissioned him. So that was wonderful. Speaker 2: That's a wonderful connection then for you. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: William Carter, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh yes, Carter (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644826 Speaker 1: Now tell us about Frank Louissaint. Speaker 2: Oh, wow, Frank Louissaint. Frank Louissaint is the first artist that I began promoting. Back in Haiti at the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] I would take Frank Louissaint's work to friends and to relatives. And I would say, "Okay, here is a master's--a master, that I am sure this man is going to be a master." Well, I wasn't, I wasn't far from that at all. Frank Louissaint has been written about in ARTnews as a master flight--master of his technique. And yet, Frank Louissaint had only five months of lessons per correspondence from his school in Paris [France] called ABC [Paris ABC School of Art]. And Frank Louissaint, the best works that I have in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] now that I have in my collection are by Frank Louissaint, works, museum quality works. Speaker 1: He's still painting, still-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. He was born in 1949, and he has four daughters, all of them very talented. Two of them are in Eur- in France studying a, a violin and piano, and they are teaching those too. And then one is an architect. She's in Haiti. The other one is in high school in Canada. Story_ID: 644827 Speaker 1: Another aspect of your gallery is Shona sculpture from Zimbabwe. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, now, now, now how did--now, they're, they're world famous now, these sculptors are. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: My gallery made them even more famous because nobody had the works except the Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]. And I had several of the artists come in to, you know, to, for openings to show solo exhibitions, especially Henry Munyaradzi. Henry-- Speaker 1: Now give us his name, Henry? Speaker 2: Henry Munyaradzi-- Speaker 1: How do you-- Speaker 2: --M-U- M-U-N-Y, Muny-, Y-A-R-A-D-Z-I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This man certainly was a, he was a farmer, didn't know how to read and write, and he lost his job. When he lost his job, he had already had eight children, and he was only thirty-eight years old. And he lost his job; he was desperate. He took another route home the day he lost his job. And on the way home he heard a noise coming from a home, and he went there, after he asked himself, why are they making so much noise. And he went to (unclear) sculptors sculpting, and he asked them, "What are those?" They said, "Sculpture." (Unclear), but made me do the same--and then he said, "Sculpture." And he said, "Do people need training to do this?" They say nobody--he said nobody answered. And he said--he look at all the sculptures piece--sculpture pieces on the ground, and he said, "I can do those." The next day that man came back. Believe it, within six months his work was selected to be at the Rodin Museum [Musee Rodin] in Paris [France]. He took off. His work is part of Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II], Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Wales], Sir Richard Attenborough, Lord (Unclear), Cicely Tyson, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, Farrah Fawcett, and to name a few in this country. And he became known as--I mean, his biography, written by Michael Shepherd of London [England], entitled 'The Magic of Henry' [ph.]. So I had his work. First solo exhibit I had for Allen, that was the exhibit I had for Henry also. It was called 'Paper and Stone' [ph.]. And that was the successful exhibit that I--really very successful. Speaker 1: Now why 'Paper and Stone'? I get the-- Speaker 2: Because [HistoryMaker] Allen Stringfellow makes, col- made collages. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Now I, I got it now, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. So these-- Speaker 2: Henry, when Henry came here, my god, everybody wanted to hug him. He stood in a corner. He said, "Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], why do they want to hug me?" I said, "Because they love you; they love your work." Three hundred people attended on opening night, three hundred un- unheard, unawares. Speaker 1: Now, a couple of years ago, Shona art, the large pieces were in the Atlanta airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they are still there. Speaker 1: They're still there, okay. A few-- Speaker 2: And they have been there for a long time. Yes, and my, one of my associates was part of that. He helped put it there. Story_ID: 644828 Speaker 1: Tell us about Fritz Mill- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Millevoix. Speaker 1: --Millevoix, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Fritz Millevoix called me from an art supply store and then said, "I am Fritz Millevoix. I'm from Haiti. And, and the manager of the store just gave me your phone number. Can I show you some of my work?" I said, "Okay. I have one of your paintings in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] that a customer brought for me to sell for her." And then Fritz Millevoix said, "Okay, I'm coming." He came in with eight paintings. As we were talking, two ladies walked in. I sold the first two within five minutes after I met Fritz. I didn't even ask Fritz any question yet. I sold two paintings, and then the rest became history. Within a month we sold over thirty paintings by him, and then he went to New York [New York]. I called him, and I said, "Fritz, all your paintings have been sold. And everybody but one wanted to know when I am going to have a show for you. Do you have any work ready for that?" He said, "Yes, I have." I said, "How many?" "I have forty-five paintings." I said, "Are they finished?" He said, "No, because every one of them I put a detail in this. I, I paint a detail in this; I paint a detail in that; I paint a detail in that." I said, "Okay, Fritz, you want to finish them for a show." So we had the first solo show. People came. We put it in 'Art Now,' in color. People called me from all over the country. People came from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], from Indiana with the catalog: "I want to buy this painting." "I want to buy this painting." My god, it was amazing, totally amazing. And Fritz Millevoix is now, he has illustrated two books for children, 'Sweet Fig Bananas' [sic. 'Sweet, Sweet Fig Banana,' Phillis Gershator] with--Whitman [Albert Whitman and Company] put that together--I mean was the publisher. And then '(Unclear)' with a, Glenview [Illinois], a--on Lake Street they have that, uh, Scott Foresman, pulled that together too, published that. Speaker 1: He's an oil paint- painter? Speaker 2: No, they are, they are acrylic. Speaker 1: Acrylic, okay-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --acrylic, okay. Speaker 2: In the beginning he would paint in oil, but he became allergic to oil, and so and begun bleeding through the nose and had to stop. Speaker 1: Does it matter what, whether a painting's in a acrylic or oil to collectors anymore, anymore? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: I've, I've heard people say they don't refer--they don't like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People used to prefer oil, but rarely. The oil and the ac- the acrylic is synthetic oil, but it lasts just as long as the oil. And furthermore, so many artists have lost their lives, and they didn't know. They would paint with oil in places, you know, that were not ventilated, well. So many artists today--almost, practically all the artists I know paint with acrylic. Story_ID: 644829 Speaker 1: Tell us about Ify Ojo. Speaker 2: Oh, Ify Umeike. Ify is from, she's from Nigeria. She came to--she was at the festival on, in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And one of the artists, I think it was Bayo [Bayo Iribhogbe], Bayo told--show his work--her work. Bayo said, "Why don't you, why don't you go to Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith]?" Okay, Ify called me. I said, "Ify send me some photographs. I don't want to waste your time or mine." And then she sent me some photographs. And I am looking at them. I say, "Oh, this young lady is pri- practically--is very good." She's a collage artist. She's very good. I called her. The rest is history also. First time I showed three of it, of her work, two ladies were in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] for the opening. The works were on the floor, because they arrived fifteen minutes before the opening, and they were on the floor. And two ladies buy, bought the three and asked me, "When are you going to have a show for this artist? Do you have anything more by her?" Well, the rest is history too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, um-hm, she now lives in Canada, but I still carry her work. I still have her work, yeah. Story_ID: 644830 Speaker 1: Does a good gallery curator--now, so this is an obvious question, but you, you, you have to kind of--you cultivate a clientele, right, of people? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, definitely. And then you have to, you have to have good eyes for, you know, the works you want to put in your gallery, because, well, many artists like, like Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith]; many don't like Nicole, because they are works. When I saw them--when I see them I say, "Well, you are good, but you have to continue to work on them, continue. Keep in touch with me." And some of them are madder when I say that, but you cannot take everybody's work, you know. It's unbelievable, unthinkable. And so I was, I'm, I'm very, very selective about what I put in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], what I want the clients to have. Speaker 1: Do you have any--what are your, what's your--I guess, do you have like guidelines, or do you--is it more of a feel or a sense that you get when you look at the work or-- Speaker 2: Oh, there are many times-- Speaker 1: --or looking for something. Speaker 2: --you can't do work. There are many times you can't do work, I know. It's, you know, that's why I said Pierre Monosiet was, and Francine [Francine Murat], they were very, very important to me, very good to me, because Pierre Monosiet sat with me, to, to, and, and showed me--went through all the works in the art center [Le Centre d'Art, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] and showed me why certain artists would not make it, why certain others would make it. And among the artists he showed me, there was the work of an, a young artist, a young lady. She's still trying up to now. But her works, you know, she sent some work. My god, I said oh, my god, Pierre was right. Yes, she will not be an artist in this life. Story_ID: 644831 Speaker 1: Do you have an artistic philosophy? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What I--first of all, when I opened the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], I agreed to open the gallery. I said okay, this gallery will be, will be there for the benefit of humanity. And then it will be there because I want to help them beautify the home, and the homes and surroundings by art that, that'll believe them, that make them feel good, that balance their lives and so on. So that's why I never can show anything that is not beautiful or proper. Story_ID: 644832 Speaker 1: How many galleries do you have open now? I think at one time you had several open, right? Speaker 2: Oh no. One time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No? Speaker 2: --I had two. Speaker 1: Two, okay. Speaker 2: And (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just two? Speaker 2: --one was on, in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It lasted four years there. When I realized that, that people were not supporting it anymore--I mean people were not supporting it period. But my landlord over there was really wonderful and understanding, so he gave me a good price. And also he--when I realized that I couldn't stay I called him and I said I tried because I wanted to help bring that neighborhood back to its former greatness, and then, but people are not supporting it. So what do you do you? I cannot do that, continue. I had to spend money from the other gallery to keep that other open. Story_ID: 644833 Speaker 1: As the African American com- community I guess expands its horizon in terms of art appreciation, because in the past I know that, that, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --we had the South Side Community Art Center, and that's about it, you know, on the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. That was all we really had. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: As, as we are expanding and I guess our appreciation of art, do you see a time when there'll be more galleries in the, in the black community? Speaker 2: Well, for the moment I only have my studio. But I--yeah, there are galleries right now. There are galleries. And really, what I really would like to see, I would like to see more support from the community to the art, you know, for the arts, because artists, an artist creates more. You are an artist. You know that you create more if you have the support, and you are more inspired also if you are not thinking about your bills to pay, your, you know, when the next meal, where is it going to come from. You are inspired because you are supported. But if you are not supported, that's when artists begin to create things that are depressing, the things that are not uplifting. Speaker 1: What used to be, I know throughout the '80s [1980s], when we had the African American Arts Alliance [African American Arts Alliance of Chicago], I think we had like three galleries. There's you, [HistoryMaker] Isobel Neal (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Neal, yes. Speaker 1: --and, N'Namdi [HistoryMaker George R. N'Namdi], I think-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --then. That was before Akainyah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, let me see. Which one you said? Speaker 1: Isobel Neal-- Speaker 2: Isobel Neal and me. Speaker 1: --your gallery, and N'Namdi, George N'Namdi I think was in town, at--was he-- Speaker 2: George N'Namdi was not in town. Speaker 1: He wasn't in town then-- Speaker 2: He was in-- Speaker 1: --okay. Speaker 2: --Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was in Michigan. He used to visit Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he began--he came to Chicago in 1996, when I opened on Huron [Street]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yes. Speaker 2: --because he was there too. Speaker 1: I know Isobel Neal clo- her, her gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] is closed now. Speaker 2: Yeah, closed. Speaker 1: She closed, yeah, closed it. Speaker 2: But the first gallery-- Speaker 1: She retired. Speaker 2: --that opened in the city was Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I opened in March, and then Isobel opened in nine--in, in October-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the same year. In fact, I remember when she came to visit. That was the first time I met her. She came to visit me. And then I moved. Well, where do you think I moved to? Next door to her. I was, I was on Wells [Street] and under two--there was a, a glass wall that separated the two places, the two buildings. So that was amazing, wonderful. I had no idea that it was that close. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And today I think the still life, he's still, still-- Speaker 2: Still life, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, life gallery. Speaker 2: Yeah, Guichard. Speaker 1: Guichard right, yeah, Andre Guichard. Speaker 2: Yes, I had worked with all of them. I had shows for them too and then Guichard and still life, [HistoryMaker] Samuel Akainyah may be-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --still, yeah. But Samuel wasn't--well, I hope he recov- he has recovered by now. And then who else? Speaker 1: Patrick [Patrick Woodtor], I guess Windows to Africa [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Patrick, Windows to Africa-- Speaker 1: --you know (unclear) see that, yeah. Speaker 2: --yes. Speaker 1: With Dio [Dio Lee (ph.)] and--yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Dio, yes. And Bayo [Bayo Iribhogbe] was here, he left for New York [New York], but Dio-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 644834 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the future--especially in this time of economic depression, what's the future of, of black art like here in the city? Speaker 2: What, what helped me tremendously when they had it was the Black Fine Art Show [National Black Fine Art Show] in New York [New York]. And they had two other shows in New York that I used to attend. All three stop because of lack of support. Black Art Show was really wonderful, a wonderful show to be part of, because it had been an institution for almost fifteen years. And they moved from the first building. Had you ever been, have you ever been to New York? You have? Okay, so they were in, in SoHo [New York, New York], and then they, they moved to 36th Street and something like that. And the, the price of that place was enormous they rented for the show. We only spent one year there. And then after that--that was in 2009. We're still waiting for the show to go back. But it was going to take place this year in November. I just heard that it's not. It was a wonderful show. When I went there, I was with [HistoryMaker] Allen Stringfellow in the beginning. Everybody came to the show practically who knew Allen--Mr. Stringfellow, Mr. Stringfellow. After three days, my god, I said, "Mr. Stringfellow, you are a popular man here." He said, "Oh yes. I had to come to New York to get it and bring it back to Chicago [Illinois]." I said, "I thought it was the opposite" (laughter), because I knew that he started in Chicago. But in New York he became an overnight success too. And so, that show, it's a, it's a, it's sad to see that show going down really. That was a good show, worth up to five hundred thousand dollars people would buy. For--I mean they didn't pay five hundred for it, but they, you know, they would negotiate. They would sell works like that. Allen--I went--first year when I went we sold fourteen out of sixteen works in three days, ranging from fifteen hundred to forty thousand, yes. Speaker 1: Was that your biggest, was that your biggest I guess success I guess, as a-- Speaker 2: Frank Louissaint, Fritz Millevoix, Allen Stringfellow, Carter [William Carter]. And then another artist the, Okonkwo [Nnamdi Okonkwo] became part of it, too. And then another artist by the name of Akinola [Ebenezer Akinola], Akinola from Nigeria became a very successful artist, yeah. Story_ID: 644835 Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for artists, young artists that want to have their works exhibited? What should--should they fall to their knees or should they--what should, what should they do to get their (laughter)--? Speaker 2: What should they do? Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: They (laughter), they should get organized, because lack, they lack organization. They don't have a portfolio. They have to get a biography in order, their portfolio organized so that they can go any place because people are interested now. It's not the time when I opened. Only artists could show only my gallery or black artists could show in my gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] or Isobel [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], no. People are interested if they are good artists, but they have to be organized. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and then work at it, work at it, work at it, because truly, oh, my god, it can be wonderful if the artist is organized. When [HistoryMaker] Allen Stringfellow, I am working with him, he would come and help me when I had the shows. William Carter, even though he couldn't come out, he would send somebody to help me. And his work would be framed and ready to be hung, and the biographies ready, certificates of authenticity ready; everything. Story_ID: 644836 Speaker 1: What about the preparation of work? I think what you said a moment ago prompted me to ask about that. You know, should the artist frame their work, or do you, would you prefer to do it yourself, or? Speaker 2: I had a, an example in the gallery. One time I had a painting by [HistoryMaker] Allen Stringfellow that he had framed. And then the client who saw the work said oh, maybe--she saw everything, and she said, "Maybe this little piece I would like, but the frame, I don't like the frame." I said well, "That's not a problem. We could change the frame." And she still said, "Well," she said, "oh, okay." She didn't buy it. And then after she left I called Allen. I said, "Allen," and Allen was a professional framer from Armand Lee [Armand Lee and Company, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois]. And then he was the manager of that place every, and everything. And I said, "Allen, your painting, this one lady saw that collage and liked it, but she didn't like the frame, so I think we should change the frame." Well, we changed the frame. The lady came back for a book signing and saw the painting. She run to me. She said, "Why did you do that for? You changed the frame. I love it." Okay, I sold the painting collage right there. And then Allen said, "Okay, Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], from now on, frame all my work." I pay for the framing. That's exactly what I did. And then really, if people love them, they buy them, beautifully framed, beautifully, yes. Speaker 1: Is there--do you have a--what's your opinion about how to frame, say a, a piece of classical Haitian art? What would you--how would you frame that? Speaker 2: Okay, this I would know exactly depending on the piece. I would know, I know exactly what to put in it immediately. That too I had an experience with a Haitian painter. Clients loved the work of that artist that came to the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. In fact, I invited them for lunch, and they came in. I put the piece next to the place they were sitting. And they saw it, and they remained cold. Okay, I called the person who had given me the piece for sale. I said, "You need to reframe that piece, and it will sell." Okay, we reframed--I reframed the piece for them. And then my clients came, and they say, "Oh, Nicole, when did you get this" (laughter)? So, you know, you learn through experience, and I watch what the clients, you know, what they do. I-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but on a classical piece of Haitian art, would you prefer--I mean does a fancy frame work-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --better than a-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --plain frame? Is it-- Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --depending on the, on the work of the artist. You know, a fancy frame or just a plain frame, that depends on the style, and that depends on the colors that this artist use. Story_ID: 644837 Speaker 1: What's in your future right now? What are you seeing as your future-- Speaker 2: My future-- Speaker 1: --for the next--? Speaker 2: --is right now because I am (laughter), I am sitting talking to you here. My future, I, I do what I have to do. I don't have to go through the pressure that I went through the last past three years. And I am, I am very grateful for the opportunity that I had to serve so many that were very happy with my gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. I have--it's as though I had found my family through the arts, because people, the paid ones that I have, they are part of the whole country. They come from all over, and, but mainly Chicago [Illinois]. And I have so, so many that have been so happy. I'm very grateful for that, and I am grateful to God and Chicagoans and this country for having helped me fulfill a great part of my destiny, which is the divine plan of my life. I'm very grateful for that. And right now I am, I am going to work on the Internet a lot because I have a lot of great art in storage, beautiful art in storage. I have a small studio, and I'm, I'm going--in fact, I met somebody last week for the website, an advisor, and then I, and I have the person who will work on the website. And meanwhile, I call clients if they want to come and see my studio. It's beautiful, and it's not as big as the place that I had. The place I had was forty-six hundred square feet on the first floor. So this one is about one thousand square feet for the art, and then I have another thousand for my living. Story_ID: 644838 Speaker 1: Now I wanna bounce to something I should have asked a long time ago, but it just occurred to me. And I wanted to know since you, you, your foundation is in classical Haitian art, is there a Haitian art aesthetic that-- Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The same as all art, but I was very careful, and I'm very careful about what I present in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] because there are artists, whether they be Haitians or otherwise, who are copying others. Those are never part of my, not part of my place or part of my consciousness. In fact, several Haitians have called me. And I, when I ask them to show--to send me a photograph or, or emails, you know, and as soon as I see that I said unh-uh; you're not part of it, friend, sorry. I don't discourage them, but I, you know, I have established a clientele, and those people, they want me to give them the best. And that's what I have given them throughout the years. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it must be original. It can't be-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, original. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't even sell prints by well known artists, okay, because I always say to the clients it's better to buy an original because it will be more valuable to you later, more helpful to you later, than a print, unless you find a print of very well known artists like Picasso [Pablo Picasso]. Some of them sell for a lot of money. But if you are talking about, you know, artists who are living today, they'll make the prints, but it comes to, practically to nothing. Talking about it, I sold two collages to a young lady. That young lady came and said, "Oh, I love that little one, but the frame is too bad." She bought six paintings from me by Stringfellow [HistoryMaker Allen Sringfellow]. And she needed some money after Stringfellow passed away. I sold those two collages for her. She paid eight thousand five hundred [dollars] for the two. I sold them for fifty-seven thousand for her. Story_ID: 644839 Speaker 1: Now do you have any outreach to the, to the African American community in terms of the--'cause a lot of people are just not aware that, that we have any galleries, I mean to tell the truth. Speaker 2: Well, not, like na-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, because if they don't go to galleries, how can they know? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Or you did--don't read any journal, any publications about art, they won't know. But I had been, my god, I was fortunate. I was in newspapers so many times. The press really did give me a great support, I have to say. I had interviews on (background noise) Channel 9 [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois]; I had interviews on Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]; I had interview on Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]; I had on Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]; I had on 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois], you know, and the newspapers, the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], I had several appearances on the Tribune. So, you know, the people don't go--if you don't go to where-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, where you find out, you don't. Story_ID: 644840 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Okay, for anybody I would say, everybody, I would say leave--don't forget the past, because you can't forget your past; it's part of your life. But if you think constantly on the past, you don't advance, because every time you think about the past, if you think about your past constantly, you bring back into your feeling what you experienced in the past. If what you experienced in the past was bad, you bring it to right back, and then some of the experiences that you will have in the future will be practically similar to the, to that experience, to those experiences. In other word, don't put new wine into old bottles, because you have to think; you have to forgive; you have to let go. Let go, and then let God also, because the, this country was founded on strong religious principles. And I have read a lot about this country and about the forefathers and things like that, about the different things. This country, right now we are experiencing all kinds of problems because we forget our source. It says on the dollar bill, "In God We Trust." That's the motto of this country, right? Yeah, that's the motto of this country, in God we trust. Look-- Speaker 1: I don't think it's the official motto, but-- Speaker 2: That's the official motto. Speaker 1: Is it? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in God we trust. And then if we trust in God, we cannot trust on--we cannot put our trust on the dollar bill. If we our trust in the dollar bill, God will force us to think of him first. Because when we trust just in the dollar bill, we tend to, to forget that the principles that make life valuable, more meaningful. I don't know if I said that right. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: But that's what I feel. But you know, I have been--I have guided many of my clients, when they ask me questions like that, you know. And I, I help them understand why certain things take place. Certain things take place because certain times we have to balance, either because we did something before and then in, in, you know, in--let's say yesterday I did something, but today I have to do something else to balance, to make what I did that was not right, to make this thing right. Story_ID: 644841 Speaker 1: I think this is a good time to ask about--now, in, in 2010, they had this devastating earthquake in Haiti. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And it seemed to be the, the latest blow to a country that's experienced so many hard-- Speaker 2: Hardship. Speaker 1: --hardships over the years. I know you held a fundraiser in your gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had for-- Speaker 1: --the Haitian cause. Tell us about how you feel about that and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Still I, I pray a lot for Haiti, okay. But I always ask Haitians, I always say to Haitians, before the earthquake I said to them, don't think that some other countries are responsible for your hardship or your wellbeing. You have to do what you are here to do, to make things better for Haiti or better for the world, because we live in a world. But Haiti, I have to say one thing about my countrymen and country- fellow Haitians. For a time, they thought that, you know, they thought about France. That was two hundred years ago that Haiti gained its independence, right. In 2004 was, was two hundred years. Okay, I said well, it's time for you to put France behind you and look forward. Don't blame what happened, because you know, what happened already happened. Now it's time for us to go forward and, and do better. And then they would say, "Oh, are you Haitian?" (Laughter) I say, "Yes, I am Haitian, Haitian with a good view, Haitian who think about the wellbeing of Haitians, not just Haitian but of the world, yeah." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then some, and some of them blame America. I said don't blame any country. It's part of human beings. We blame others because that makes us feel less guilty for not having done our work. We blame, we blame everybody, you know, and sometime--Adam blamed Eve. Where do you think had--that happened? He blame it--God asked Eve--Adam, Adam said, "Eve did it. Eve gave me the apple" (laughter). When God went to Eve, Eve said, "The serpent." When God went for the serpent, the serpent had disappeared. And we are still blaming, you know. We can't blame--we can't grow when we blame. One person in Haiti, in fact, said something to me after I said, "Oh, my god, these people did that to me." He said, "Young lady, come here." He sat down with me, and he said, "Don't ever blame anybody for what happened to you. That's not good. It's because either you give permission to that person to hurt you, or you bring it, you brought it on yourself. So, don't blame anybody, because if you don't--if you blame people you will never grow." I said, "Wow." You know, up to now every time I said to Haitian, "Don't blame," I thought about that person. He, he wrote a book and he--I mean the, the hand--he, he typed it. And he put in that book everything that Haitians should know. But he passed away, and the book, he gave me the manuscript. He said, "If one day you want to do something, publish this book and then let every Haitian read it, okay" because he, he, he, he was adamant about blaming, blaming, blaming. Don't you think that's a good thing, not to blame? Because if we blame, what do you think happen? We don't really see that we that we are responsible in a way. Speaker 1: Now, just to put some- something in perspective, how many Haitians are in Chicago [Illinois] that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About-- Speaker 1: --would you estimate? Speaker 2: I would say about maybe ten thou- five to ten thousand. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just want to make that point. Speaker 2: Many in the suburb, many in the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], many in the other suburb, especially in Evanston [Illinois] and Skokie [Illinois]--many. Speaker 1: That's a significant number of people. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Story_ID: 644842 Speaker 1: Tell me this: when you look back over everything you've done to this point, and I know you're, you're timeless though (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I am. Speaker 1: --yes, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think I have done my very best to bring beauty into the lives of the people, and I will continue to emphasize beauty, because what you focus upon you become. If you have beauty around you, you, you can too, to be uplifted by it. And then I would think that's, would be what I would always emphasize and also to have faith, to trust that all of us have a maker. And that maker wants us to come to him, especially at this time. We--I see so many people that are seeking; they are seeking; they, they are seeking. They are desperate for the truth, for things that make life meaningful. And so, I, I always have my word of encouragement, whether it be for a client or for anybody who come to the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. In fact, I, if I had kept all the letters that I have received throughout the years about people who came when they were there--they came from other states or from the state here, and then they had something. They just had--they opened their mouth, and I say well, I think it could be better. Story_ID: 644843 Speaker 1: Now, do you have any hindsight about what you, you, you might have done better if, if you could go back and do it? Speaker 2: Well, I always say that if I, if I were to open another art gallery, I would, I would save some more (laughter) money to open it. But it's not important anyhow because I had, I worked at it, and it was very successful. And you know, having had to close it because people--I had to close it because people were not--they were in panic; they were not buying. Speaker 1: This is the Bronzeville (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they came-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --they came to the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. They say, "Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith], I love it, but you know, right now I have to save what I have." And I heard it for two years. After two years, you know, I became in debt myself. And so I said, "Okay God, what do you want me to do, because you, you inspired the opening of the gallery when I didn't want to open it? So, right now what do you want me to do? You want me to close the gallery?" And I continued praying. I continued doing what I had to do. I had Willard Wigan come. I had other important artists, and then nothing. People were not buying. So I said okay, I get it. Story_ID: 644844 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you something about your family. Who do you consider to be your family here? Do you have children? Are you married, or? Speaker 2: No, never was married, but I have plenty of children, all the artists (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so, because I look at them as my friends, as my--well, they come to me also like, as though they were my children or my own relatives, because I really love the artists. I think artists--well, I, I talk about them because they have been part of my life for so long, and also artists are really wonderful people. They are special, and they have, they have, they have a special mission. That's why I don't show any, just any work in the gallery [Nicole Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]. The ones that I have worked with that have accepted my guidance, they have become very popular; they have become very, very good artists, very successful artists, and I am very grateful that they have--we, we have crossed paths, the artist and I. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I, I bless them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, I--is there anything I need to ask before I ask my last question? Have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What is your last question? Speaker 1: Oh, and--oh, let me ask you this. I didn't ask this. You still have relatives in Haiti, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have--oh, my goodness, my father [Pierre Smith] came from a family of fourteen. I may not know many of them. My--I have relatives all over the place. I have relatives in Florida, relatives in New York, relatives in D.C., relatives in Canada, relatives in Chicago [Illinois]. All over the place I have relatives. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But the ones in Haiti itself, are they, how they, you know, you stay in touch with? Speaker 2: Some of my best--I mean my closest relatives are in Haiti. We see each other. They visit here very often. They come often. They are all right; they are doing okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the last (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of them. Story_ID: 644845 Speaker 1: Well, the, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a, as a person who loved life, who loved the world, who loved human beings, and then that I--that in my own little world, I did my very best to make this world a better place for others...