 Story_ID: 613771 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Andrea Rander. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Hilary Shelton, H-I-L-A-R-Y, S-H-E-L-T-O-N. Speaker 2: All right, now is there a story behind your first name, Hilary-- Speaker 1: Well, I asked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause it's-- Speaker 1: --my mother [Frances McCain Shelton] about that years ago. And her response was she knew about a, an explorer named Sir Edmund Hillary, liked the name a lot, and decided that would be mine (laughter). We, but we spell it differently. His is with two Ls, and mine is with one. Speaker 2: Okay, I knew it had some sort of a British background. So I wondered if it was a West Indian thing or what (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I've, the only people I've, only males I've met with the name Hilary were either from Britain, some British former colony in Africa, or from the West Indies. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so it seems to be a popular name that way. As a matter of fact, our gynecologist's brother--our gynecologist is a woman, but our gynecologist for--our OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] for our three children has a brother named Hilary as well. Speaker 2: Okay, that's okay, that's, that's-- Speaker 1: And she's from the West Indies (laughter), by the way. Speaker 2: Okay. And sir, what is your--now do, do you have a middle name? Speaker 1: I do. It's Otis. Speaker 2: Okay. It's O-T-T-I-S [sic.]? Speaker 1: O, one S--one T. Speaker 2: One T, okay. Speaker 1: Though my, my youngest son [Noah Shelton] is, has a middle name Ottis as well with two Ts. Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw the two Ts in your son's name, and I thought-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --maybe it was the same, okay. Speaker 1: Well, my, my [maternal] grandfather's name was Ottis as well, Joe Ottis McCain [Ottis McCain]. And he spelled his with two Ts as well. But when my mother named me Hilary Otis Shelton, she spelled it with one. But when we were talking about what to name our third child, we decided to, to go with the, the old biblical spelling, as a matter of fact. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: August 12th, 1958, St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I direct the NAACP's Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.]. That's the government affairs office for the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization. My job is primarily to serve as the chief lobbyist for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. But to make a, a, a long job description even longer, that means that, if it were not for not for profit organization like the NAACP, our lobbying leverage actually is our membership base. So I kind of translate in two different directions. I translate to the [U.S.] Congress the policy positions that are set by the NAACP through our legislative process at our national convention. It looks like any other political party national convention. But I then translate to our membership base what Congress is doing on issues that are important to us. So it's kind of a very interesting communications responsibility. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Now, sir, what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is July the 28th, 2008. Speaker 2: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're in Washington, D.C., in the Coyne Building [Marshall B. Coyne Building], which is 1156 15th Street Northwest, at the corner of 15th and M [Street]. Story_ID: 613772 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels us to ask of everyone. And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Very good. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: I like crepe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, fruit crepe to be exact. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: There's nothing you can't get done if you're willing to let someone else get credit for it (laughter). In, in my line of work (laughter), you know, I, I deal with the 435 members of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and 100 members of the [U.S.] Senate, not to mention the White House and all the government agencies (laughter). So, so sometimes I could be just as effective, or even more effective just whispering into some congressperson or a senator's ear (laughter), you know, here's what I think we should do (laughter), and by the way, it was your idea (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, there's nothing you can't do--can't, can't, can't get done. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: If you're willing to let someone else (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you're willing to-- Speaker 2: --take credit for it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. That is something. We'll, we'll have, we'll have to revisit that, you know, later on in this interview. Story_ID: 613773 Speaker 1: I want to talk about your family history first. And-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --I want to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [C.W. Shelton] side, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, very good (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Oh, very good. Speaker 1: Can you, you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Frances May McCain Shelton [Frances McCain Shelton]. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And it's F-R-A-N-C-E-S, M-A-Y, and the McCain is M-C-C-A-I-N, and Shelton, S-H-E-L-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And well, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's December 14th--oh, my goodness--1946, I think. I'd have to check that, that. Speaker 1: It couldn't be '46 [1946] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it can't be, it must be '36 [1936]. Speaker 1: Or-- Speaker 2: She is, she's twenty-seven years older than I am. And I'm fifty this year. So she's-- Speaker 1: That's '26 [1926]-- Speaker 2: --seventy-- Speaker 1: --nineteen twenty-six [1926]. Speaker 2: Twenty-six [1926], thank you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --nineteen twenty-six [1926], thank you. Speaker 1: Yep. Okay, and, and where, where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Grenada, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, I've heard of that. Speaker 2: Actually, to be exact, on a farm just outside of Grenada, Mississippi, in a place called Gore Springs. Speaker 1: G--G-O-R-E? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Springs, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Gore Springs, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? Can you trace them back to slavery and-- Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my, my grandfather [Ottis McCain] often told stories, my mother's father, often told stories of his mother traveling from North Carolina to Mississippi in a covered wagon. The stories are often told about her hav- her having a, I guess it wasn't a white husband, but as, as they used to say in those days, living in the little house behind the big house. So we, we, we've gotten stories along those lines. She--my grandfather, again, was, was a farmer as a matter of fact, as the story is told, my grandmother [Eupora McCain] was the oldest of the girls in her family. And her mother passed away when she was just a, a teenager. Her father asked her to stay around and, and help raise all her younger brothers and sisters, and so she did. She stayed around even though my grandfather had been courting her. She--he knew that she had to finish her responsibilities with, with, with her, her brothers and sisters. So, he went off and did everything from help dig some of the subway tunnels in Chicago [Illinois], to, to digging some of the subway tunnels in New York [New York]. So he kind of moved around a little bit until, as they tell the story, he, he got a letter from her. When her baby brother, the youngest, was old enough to, to move out--as a matter of fact, he moved to Chicago, for him to come back, and they could get married. Her father gave them the farm. And so they, they had about five, between five and six hundred acres of farmland in Gore Springs, Mississippi, that was primarily used for cotton, soybean and that kind of thing. They also ran a little community cotton gin in the area. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were, they were doing fairly well, I guess during the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I, I think for-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the, the community cotton gin meant that all the people in the community shared the cotton gin, but they pretty much ran it. So yeah, they, they did pretty well. Story_ID: 613774 Speaker 1: They're pretty much raised in what we consider a, a middle working class community but with all the, the challenges of Mississippi and a segregated South. Many stories were told about the challenges along those lines as well, everything from, from the lynchings to the, to the other problems related to racism and segregation in our society. Speaker 2: Now, now is, is there a lynching story that they tell about that-- Speaker 1: Well, the, the story I think about most is, is kind of an almost lynching. My, my [maternal] uncles, after they'd grown and moved off, one uncle moved to Gary, Indiana, and, and worked for a, a steel mill. The other moved off to Los Angeles, California, and worked for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. But once a year they would come back and just have a great time. I, I always enjoyed seeing the relationship between my grandfather [Ottis McCain] and, and my uncles. They'd go out together and, and have some fun, doing a little partying as a matter of fact, hit the, the bars as much as you could--and it was pretty much a dry South at the time--and just, and just enjoy being together. But one year my uncle came back to visit during the time when my fa- my grandfather used to do these big picnics, he'd do a whole week of, kind of a festival picnic in his pasture, yeah, where normally his cows would graze. And one day the, the white sheriff pulled up looking for him and--assuming that my uncle, the one that'd come in from Gary, Indiana, had done something wrong. Part of the challenge was they, both of my uncles, did pretty well. Working in the steel mill you got paid pretty good money, along with all the benefits of that day; you were a member of a union. So he was able to save money, insurance, and raise his family. But he was also able to buy a nice car. So every--and just about every other year he would trade in his Cadillac for a new Cadillac. He just believed in those General Motors cars and liked the ride of that Cadillac. Well, this year he brought his Cadillac down, and when the police came up on him at the, the family picnic, they told him they believed he had some contraband in the car. So they began dismantling his car in the middle of that pasture, everything from taking the lining of the trunk out to pulling the seats out, pulling the wheel covers off and then the wheels behind those, I mean, just very maliciously destroying his car. They didn't find anything, of course, so they left. But word had gotten around that they were gonna come back looking for him, and they were gonna bring the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] that night. Speaker 2: Did they leave the car disassembled? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, just part by part right there in the middle of that pasture. Speaker 2: Now this would be about what year? Speaker 1: This would be about 1967, as a matter of fact. So they--he got word they were going to, they were going to come back and bring the Klan looking for him. And so it's amazing, even in 1967, the kind of networks that were maintained between black folks in the South. They got him to one road where somebody picked him up and took him to another road where somebody picked him up and got him to a train station in Memphis, Tennessee. And then he was able to take the train back up to, back up to Gary, Indiana. Speaker 2: So did they--so they, they didn't arrest him or anything on the spot. They just-- Speaker 1: No, they didn't, they didn't. They didn't find anything. And I guess there are other things they could have done if they wanted to, but there were so many witnesses when they came out, 'cause they actually came to the, the picnic and began harassing him and, and searching his car and pretty much destroying his property. So those stories, and we've heard other stories of things like that. And we are talking about Grenada, Mississippi; we're talking about Gore Springs [Mississippi], not far from Greenville [Mississippi], you know. So there, there are a lot of stories of, of challenges around that area. Story_ID: 613775 Speaker 1: Now, how did people basically manage--as you said, they, they had a network, you said. That's how they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --kind of managed that kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, absolutely. Well, a couple of things they had going for them: one is they did have a network. Almost everyone that lived around my [maternal] grandfather's [Ottis McCain] house was related to us. My uncle lived about a quarter mile up a dirt road, had his house with his family and his kids. An, an uncle live across the next pasture, and another uncle across yet another pasture. So, in, in, in that time, in that part of Mississippi, almost everyone living in the same area was related. So you kind of had your back covered in a lot of ways, I guess as much as you could in Mississippi in the 1960s, and '70s [1970s] for that matter. So it, it was, it was challenging, but I think that kind of support network--they were also independent. That is, since they owned their own land, that meant they controlled their business and their destinies. So in many ways even if all else failed, they could grow their own food; they had livestock on the farmland as well, everything from chickens and goats, hogs, pigs, and cows, so all the usual livestock that goes along with a farm area. So they did very well, did very well maintaining things. As a matter of fact, I almost accused my grandfather of being a little bougie, not that anything in his personality or his attitude was aloof. But there's a great picture of my grandfather sitting on a chair, much like the chair I'm sitting in, with riding boots on almost up to his knees, with my mother [Frances McCain Shelton]; at the time she couldn't have been more than two years old, with a matching pair of riding boots, standing on his knee. And it was a classic father/daughter picture but not one one would normally relate to the African American community. So I thought that was just fascinating that, that was very much a part of who they were and what they were or they took time out to have a professional photograph taken like that. Story_ID: 613776 Speaker 1: Was the property that your [maternal] grandfather [Ottis McCain] had, was that passed down from the, the white ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: It, it was; it was passed down by white ancestors, however, on my grandmother's [Eupora McCain] side of the family. My grandmother's father had actually inherited the property and kept the property and farmed it. My grandmother, as I mentioned before, stayed on the property because at that time, in the 1930s, a lot of African Americans and others who were beginning to move away from the South and into the industrialized northern areas, manufacturing jobs, automobiles, wiring, whatever the case very well might be, they were moving out where the economy was actually stronger. I mean, don't forget, Mississippi even today is one of the poorer states in the union, so it's not surprising that he would leave. As stories were told, in many cases, when slavery was in, very much in place, the African Americans, they worked the plantations. As we moved into the 1920s, we started seeing more people beginning to just educate their children. White people began to educate their white children and sending them off to college to go into professional areas. But they then allowed their, their slaves or the ancestors [sic. descendants] of their slaves to actually either inherit the property, buy the property, or own the property one way or another. So, as I said, in those families that the, the white master had black children, they would sometimes give the black children or their descendants the land. But their white children all the time were using the, the profits of that land to, to get an education, to become a doctor or a lawyer or get a college degree or whatever, then go off to do other things. Story_ID: 613777 Speaker 1: Now what were your mother's stories of growing up in, in Gore Springs [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Well, she told many stories of, of not only the challenges of racism but just family and community, e- even stories of--as--she met my father [C.W. Shelton] when she was fourteen years old. And to tell you how classic these stories become, they met at a church picnic. One of the challenges of, of meeting a husband or a wife during those days is that, as I mentioned before, as comforting as it is to have so many relatives living right around you, you don't date your relatives. (Laughter) And so as a result, how do you put, you know, your children together with other children that might be potential mates, husbands, and the like? And one of the ways they did it was at church picnics. A lot of the social life of African Americans, and many other Americans for that matter, centered around the church. So, my mother [Frances McCain Shelton] tells a story of her church taking a bus over to another church in a place called Calhoun County [Mississippi], where my father grew up, and meeting my father. Now, my mother was fourteen, and my father was seventeen. And they met and I guess began kind of dating for that time. But as she described, dating during those days was the, the, the boys living in Calhoun County would borrow--I don't know how legitimate this was--but borrow the, the community bus. There was a community bus used to get people to church, get the kids to school and that kind of thing, owned by the African American community. And on a, a Saturday night, they'd take that bus and go looking for girls in another town because they had the same challenge. Everyone that lived in, in their area of Calhoun County was related. And so they'd make that, that drive over to Gore Springs and to Grenada [Mississippi], wherever they were gonna go, and they'd drop him off at my grandfather [Ottis McCain] and grandmother's [Eupora McCain] house. Show you how innocent this stuff could also be, in my grandmother's farmhouse--my grandfather's, well, of course--they had a parlor. And that parlor had a doorway to get into--that took you through my grandparents' bedroom, kind of a, not a really a shotgun house, but essentially a L shaped house. So, in order for the, the young suitors to come to see my, my mother or her baby sister, they'd have to come in through their bedroom into the parlor, where they'd play Chinese checkers; there was a piano there; and I guess talk and visit; some books and, and so forth. And that's how they'd kind of court. But they would always see them both coming and going. And when, of course, bedtime came around, there was no such thing as them staying up after you 'cause you had to go out through that bedroom. So (laughter) it was very, it was a fascinating story of how she grew up. My father and she courted, is a time they often used, and, and, and moved on to later on getting married-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's an interesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) quite-- Speaker 1: --story. Speaker 2: --quite a few a years later getting married, as a matter fact. Speaker 1: All right, now, now did you mother, did, did she go to school in Mississippi, or did-- Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She did. She went to grade school and high school and even college. She attended college in Grenada at a little school called the Grenada Colored Girls College [ph.] where she mastered in home economics--or majored in home economics. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like a--was this a normal school? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, exactly. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: One of those schools created just for, for African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay, more like a teachers college. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: You get like a teachers degree (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a teachers college, home economics, those ki- kind of bachelor's degrees, exactly. Story_ID: 613778 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is C.W. Shelton. And there's been a lot of speculation as to whether C.W. actually stood for something else. But we haven't been able to find anything indicating that it did that formally. They called him Sam growing up, as a matter of fact (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And as I mentioned, he grew up in a little section of Calhoun County [Mississippi] called Duck Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Duck Hill, okay. Speaker 2: Duck Hill, Mississippi. It's amazing that you can actually run into people that know where Duck Hill is. It's such a small community, almost a, that fork in the road. Speaker 1: In Calhoun County, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, sir (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Now, you know, this is the name, now this is something that I remember when I was in school, there were a--there was O.Z. and O.S. in school with me and the name--the, the letters didn't stand for anything-- Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) except the letters. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And now I guess it's, it's probably some, some literature or some investigation as to why this takes place. But I think--you know, I don't know what the speculation you have is, but I think that maybe people are named for, after a fashion or famous white people in the community who use their initial but not really realizing the initials stand for a name. Speaker 2: Well, I have a--I have an uncle that just passed away, as a matter of fact, named R.A. Shelton. But R.A. was actually for Ruben Anderson, which was my grandfather's name, but they didn't name him Ruben Anderson; they just named him R.A. So I think there's, there's, there's some consistency with that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so C.W. Shelton, and, and what, what, what was his year of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in 19--I guess that'll be '28 [1928], 'cause he's thirty years older than I am, and I'm fifty-eight, yeah, 1928. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: On March-- Speaker 1: --or-- Speaker 2: --the 10th. Speaker 1: Okay. How, how old is he now? Is he, he still-- Speaker 2: He is, he is now eighty years old. Speaker 1: Eighty, okay, all right. Okay, so, well, what, what, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: In many ways the same. My father's father was Ruben Anderson Shelton [Ruben Shelton], and his mother was Delilah Roberts Shelton. They both came from the Calhoun County area as well. Now, my grand- grandmother, I, I know very little about her history. My grandfather was actually the descendants of, again, a, a white former slave master [James Shelton] and a, and, and a black slave. We don't know a whole lot about her, but we know a little bit more about him, that is his father, same area. His name was Ruben as well [sic. Miles Shelton]. And the Shelton family there, they owned the plantation in that area. And much of the property that they owned, they inherited as well from the white slave owner. Speaker 1: Okay. So they had--all right, so how much property did they have? Speaker 2: They, they had about three to four hundred acres. But they also ran the, the saw mill and the, the corner store. I actually call it the corner store. It was a country store (background noise). They was utilized-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, so, so they had like a sawmill and-- Speaker 1: A sawmill and, and also they, they had, they had the grain mill inside the store. Speaker 2: All right, so, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: So they provided, I guess, those services that, that the country store provides, sold the dry goods, traded the dry goods and other goods and so forth, just kind of controlled that market, and of course, they farmed. Story_ID: 613779 Speaker 1: Now did your father [C.W. Shelton] go to school in the area too? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. As a matter of fact, they controlled their community schools as well, grade school, high school. And, and my father went to Alcorn, as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is that Alcorn State University [Lorman, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: That's it, but wasn't called that then, but (laughter) it's the same school. Speaker 1: What, was it Alcorn A and M [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College] at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A--is it A and M or A and T? Speaker 1: A--and yeah. Speaker 2: It's, it's one or the other. Speaker 1: Or the other. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A and M. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think it was A and M, I think. That's right, Alcorn A and M, okay. So it was designed as an industrial school-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --like in the model of Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and such. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Exact--really to, to educate and, and train African Americans in the fields that were available to them. And certainly education is one of the fields, engineering, technology, agriculture, yeah, those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Yeah, agricultural and mechanical, yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right, so did your, your father meet--marry your mother [Frances McCain Shelton] before he, he went to Alcorn, or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, after. Speaker 1: Oh, after-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, he'd gotten--when she finished the colored girls college [Grenada Colored Girls College (ph.)], she moved to Chicago [Illinois] and lived with my, my uncle, her brother, in Gary, Indiana, actually, but worked in Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was drafted to the Korean War. And when he came back, they got married almost immediately. They had been-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --they continued to write and communicate. I've seen all kinds of, kind of, I guess the, the standard paraphernalia that, that girlfriends and boyfriends sent to each other when they're, they're separated like that, everything from Korean silk pillows to (laughter), all kind of letters. I once asked my mother how romantic my father was, and she laughed and said he's probably just about as romantic as a country boy could be (laughter). Story_ID: 613780 Speaker 1: We left off with them courting I think. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Well, okay, you had, you have some more information about courting-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: --or-- Speaker 1: --now that, it was just those stories. And as I mentioned shortly after, he [Shelton's father, C.W. Shelton], he got of the, out of the war [Korean War]. And he, he did one tour of duty in Korea; came back; they got married; had a big wedding in Grenada, Mississippi, at, at the community church. Pleasant Grove [Pleasant Grove Baptist Church], as a matter of fact, was the church that my mother [Frances McCain Shelton] grew up in, played the piano and, and organ, and, and, and just kind of helped shape her life. They got married and moved to St. Louis, Missouri. My father's brothers, who were pretty much older than he was, and grandparents [Delilah Roberts Shelton and Ruben Shelton] as well, had moved to St. Louis. And there was a big industrial boom going on. You're talking about a city right on the Mississippi River. And most African Americans from places like Mississippi that migrated up north usually stopped off in Memphis, Tennessee. But then the next big stop was St. Louis, Missouri. Then many went on to Chicago [Illinois]. And Gary, Indiana, was almost a suburb of Chicago in many ways. And some went as far north as, as Detroit [Michigan]. So we-- Speaker 2: Or Milwaukee [Wisconsin] on that route. Speaker 1: Or, yes, and Milwaukee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Usually Milwaukee, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --moved off that as well. That, that's exactly right; that's exactly right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, we have a lot of family in Memphis, St. Louis, Chicago, and of course the surrounding Gary, Indiana, early- area, and some in Detroit as well (simultaneous). Story_ID: 613781 Speaker 1: What did your father [C.W. Shelton] do in St. Louis [Missouri] for a living? Speaker 2: He, his first, he started a business first. He started driving taxi while looking or another job, worked for a General Cables Corporation for over twenty years, bought apartment buildings. He believed that he could take his, his G.I. money, and at one point he was set on buying one new apartment building, two family flats, four family flats, and even something as large as an eight family flat, every six months. And every six months he added on another building. The first building he bought--well, I mean when he first moved to St. Louis, he actually lived in a basement apartment. It was owned by a, a white family. They'd gotten a basement apartment set up for their daughter who decided not to stay in St. Louis. She got married and moved away, so this white couple had this fully furnished basement apartment. My parents had gotten all these, these nice wedding presents, refrigerators and stoves and all of those kind of things from their parents since they'd gotten married and ended up putting them all in the storage. So they lived in that basement apartment until his, his mother [Delilah Roberts Shelton] and father [Ruben Shelton] moved to St. Louis. He'd sold the farm in Calhoun County [Mississippi], bought a four family apartment building, and then lived in one apartment, and leased the others out to first he and my mother [Frances McCain Shelton] and then another uncle and his wife. Then I think the fourth apartment was, was leased out to someone that wasn't related to us. They saved their money, bought their own four family apartment building, and then started buying other apartment buildings and so forth and while he con- continued to drive a taxi and continued to work for General Cables Corporation. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is General Cables do, what? Speaker 2: General Cables makes wiring and basically electrical cables for everyone from the telephone company to one of their biggest clients in the St. Louis area, who was General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], believe General Motors, Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], and had a, a couple of big manufacturing facilities in the area, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 613782 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities and their, their talents and their, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There are times when I catch myself saying things and, and acting like my father [C.W. Shelton]. And there are times I do the same thing with my mother [Frances McCain Shelton]. I probably take my personality more from my mother's father, Ottis McCain. And he was somebody I just idealized. They, they used to tease us as having the same nose. My grandmother [Eupora McCain] loved teasing him about the size of his, so consequently, I got teased about mine as well (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. But, but he was a, so he, he was around a lot and was an influence? Speaker 2: Well, he was. We would see them about twice a year. We would see them around the Christmas/Thanksgiving season, and we would see them for at least one week every summer. So usually around Christmas or Thanksgiving they'd come to St. Louis [Missouri] from Mississippi. It's about an eight hour drive up highway 55 [Interstate 55] north--or south for us going to Mississippi. Every summer we'd go and spend a week on the farm and just en- enjoy farm life. Whenever we'd go see them at the farm in the summers, my, my grandfather would go looking a canal, someplace for us to swim. These were canals that were used just to drain water off roads and all that kind of thing. But he'd find a good one, and in his words, he'd just go and chase the snakes off so (laughter) he'd have a nice place to swim in the summer. Speaker 1: That's something, okay. So now that's the one that had the, the riding boots. And that's your, your-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --mother's father, right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right, Ottis McCain. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Now my, my grandparents [Delilah Roberts Shelton and Ruben Shelton] on my father's side had moved to St. Louis. And I remember them living in the same, that same four family apartment building they bought when they moved up. As a matter of fact, they, they bought the four family flat, and they bought a gas station. And at that time, you could actually buy a gas station and you know, sell the gas product, whatever the oil company is that produced the product. And you made most of your money dur- doing auto mechanics and auto repair. So he had a few mechanics that worked for him and you know, that kind of thing. They were, my, my grandparents on both sides of the family, were really what we would call entrepreneurs these days. They owned their own companies, their own stores, their small businesses, and that's how they actually took care of their families and educated their families. On both my mother and father's side of the family, all their siblings were college educated, all of them, Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi], Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], or whatever the case might be, but they were all college educated. Story_ID: 613783 Speaker 1: Do you have an, an earliest family memory? Speaker 2: Earliest family member, probably, probably my grandparents coming to visit in St. Louis [Missouri], my mother's parents coming to visit and staying with us. We called my grandfather, Papa Ottis [Ottis McCain], and my grandmother was Mama Pora. Her name was actually Eupora McCain. And I remember going sightseeing in St. Louis with them, going to the, later on the, the Gateway Arch, but prior to that, going to the art museum on Art Hill [Saint Louis Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri]. I remember those kind of experiences. Story_ID: 613784 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the neighborhood that you grew up in, in St. Louis [Missouri]? What's, what did they call it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We grew up in the North City [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my parents still own the house we grew up in. I was actually born on Greer Street [sic. Greer Avenue] and stayed there until I was five. I have four brothers and two sisters. At the time I was five my--I had a, a younger brother and younger sister, an older brother and an older sister. And that one bedroom apartment in the four family apartment building was getting a little too small. So, even as my father [C.W. Shelton] was buying these apartment buildings and we lived in one of the apartments in one of the apartment buildings, we stayed until I was five, and then with the five of us, moved into the house that our parents still own down at inner city St. Louis on the north side of the city. Speaker 1: Well, well, well, can you name your brothers and sisters and, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --put yourself in the order, in the order-- Speaker 2: Sure-- Speaker 1: --that they-- Speaker 2: My, my oldest brother is Marvin Shelton; Marvin's five years older than I am. My older sister is Vanessa Shelton; Vanessa is three years older than I am. Then just under me is my younger sister, Pam [Pamela Shelton Seales], who is two years younger. My younger brother, Craig [Craig Shelton; Imani Na Umoja], is three years younger. Then there's a, a little bit of a gap until my, my younger brother, Raynard [Raynard Shelton], who was thirteen years younger, and then my youngest brother, Maurice [Maurice Shelton], who is sixteen years younger than I am. So it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's a, yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: --nice size family (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: But, but it's not extraordinary. Again, that is typical for a lot of farm families, and they're part, my parents are both of that tradition. My mother [Frances McCain Shelton] comes from a family with four kids, which is considered a little bit on the small side--well, five including her. My father came from a family of twelve kids. And again, he's closer to the end. I believe he's number seven in line of twelve. So, it's, it wasn't that extraordinary for the seven of us to grow up in, in one house. I guess these days growing up in a house like that with one bathroom took a little more doing. It, it, it really helped you hone your diplomatic skills; let me put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 613785 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: You know, we grew up, I've spent most of my life growing up in that house on Kossuth Avenue in St. Louis [Missouri], north side, right across the-- Speaker 1: Konsuth, that's spelled C-- Speaker 2: K-- Speaker 1: K-- Speaker 2: --K-O-S-S-U-T-H. Speaker 1: U-T-H. Speaker 2: Kossuth Avenue, at the corner of Kossuth and Fair [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. What, well, tell me this before we get into sights, sounds, and smells-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --what was the racial makeup of the neighborhood, and what characterized the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, when we first moved into the neighborhood, I believe that I was, I was five, about nineteen sixty--1963, I guess. The neighborhood was, was pretty well mixed, African American and white. But we were right in the middle of what was referred to as a, the white flight. That is, is, as integration was really taking route, there was a fear that as African Americans moved into the traditionally white neighborhoods, property values would depreciate. So it became almost a self-fulfilling prophecy. As we were moving into the neighborhood, about half the people on the, the block of, of twelve houses were African American. But within the, the next say ten years, it was all African American, and the neighborhood was very much the same. By the time I started high school, there was one white person attending our high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri] as a student, and by the next year, even he was gone. So it was a big transition of the north side of St. Louis City transitioning to become a predominantly African American community, which it is even to today. Story_ID: 613786 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh very good. We grew up right across the street from a park. In that park was a lake, a swimming pool, and tennis courts. I learned to play tennis, as a matter of fact, in that, at that tennis court. Speaker 1: What, what was the name of the park? Speaker 2: It was Fairgrounds Park [sic. Fairground Park, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now is this on the site of the old St. Louis World's Fair [Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Missouri], or? Speaker 2: No, not exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, the site of the, the 1904 World's Fair was actually Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri]. But this was a, a park that actually had a, a bear pit, kind of a--it wasn't there at, at the time we moved in, but the, the structure was still there. Speaker 1: A bear pit? So it was like a, like a mini zoo or something too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a kind of a mini zoo. So it was a park that, that was, that, that was pretty diverse. They, they stocked the fishing lake with, with fish on a regular basis. In the winters, when the lake froze over, the park faculty staff would go out and make sure the thickness of the ice by driving a stake through it. And if it was safe enough to ice skate, they'd build a bonfire on the side of the lake. In the summers I took swimming lessons, as a matter of fact, from the time I was five in the swimming in the park as well and took city sponsored tennis lessons in the tennis courts across the street in the park. So, the, the sights and sounds for me were always, there was an inner city area, a lot of kids growing up down the street from lot in my age group. And I'm, I'm part of, of that baby boom age, so it had a lot of, lot of children my age. We went to the community school around the corner, the public school, Harrison elementary [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri], as a matter of fact, just three blocks from the house. The high school we attended was on the other side of the park, Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri], on the, the corner of Vandeventer [Avenue] and Natural Bridge [Avenue]. So, growing up, that's what I saw in my community. We lived in a corner house. We spent the, the days cleaning the house, trimming the hedges, cutting the grass. Everybody had their chores to do. We usually had a, at least one dog in the backyard, usually some combination of German Shepherd and something or the other, German Shepherd, Collies, German, who knows, but just all kind of dogs along those lines. And of course, with so many kids, we always had pets. In addition to the dogs, we, we had rabbits and gerbils and guinea pigs and fish and turtles, and I know I'm forgetting something along the way but always something like that. The house was always full of, of life, energy. Being the third born, by the time I started remembering anything, I had at least one younger sibling as well and then on from there. So there was always some kind of movement, and as we got older, friends visiting all the time. But I, I remember that. Story_ID: 613787 Speaker 1: But I also remember, like too many other communities, it became very crime ridden as the, the economy went south and the, neighborhood began to, to turn over. We'd, we'd see shootings from time to time and-- Speaker 2: Is this in the late '60s [1960s] or, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This-- Speaker 2: --or-- Speaker 1: --this is more-- Speaker 2: --or in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: --more, yeah, late '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --into the early '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --we started seeing more of that. I remember high speed chases where guys were shooting at each other. I, I saw my, my first actual shooting as a third grader walking to school [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri]. You know, sometimes on the corners when we're trying to get to school and some of the guys, the older guys, would shoot a little crap on the corner and, and drink wine. You know, we had our--during those days, it wasn't as much a, a drug problem as it was an alcoholism problem, the, the corner wino and that kind of thing. So we had our challenges along those lines (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, St. Louis [Missouri], you know, it does have like a lot of--well, black communities in the urban setting have a lot of violent-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: --you know, gunplay. And, and, and it's, it's almost become famous for it on some level, almost like Detroit [Michigan] and some other cities. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: St. Louis Argus paper used to cover all the violence and put it on the front page. Did you, did you all read the Argus? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We knew the owners of the Argus, the Argus, the, the Sentinel [St. Louis Sentinel], the St. Louis American, and there was a real rag that covered--and I'll probably get in trouble for saying it like this, but called the Evening Whirl [St. Louis Evening Whirl]. The Evening Whirl came out I think weekly. Apparently, they send their reporters down to the police station to read the, the crime blotters, you know, the, the-- Speaker 2: I think that's the one I must be referring to 'cause there-- Speaker 1: I'll, I'll bet you are (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there was one--yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They--as a matter-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I know there's a St. Louis paper in the black community that was known for presenting the most sordid crimes on the cover of it. Speaker 1: That, that's, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --got to be it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The St. Louis Argus was a little different. The Argus, the Sentinel, and the American were a bit more mainstream. They were still weekly papers, of course, owned by families, as most African American newspapers are. But they are also kind of set in highlighting the, the great things about the community, whether it was someone's cotillion or, or, or if someone bought a new business and had an opportunity with the distributorship, or it was just more of the good news than the kind of if it bleeds it leads kind of incentive. But the Evening Whirl was quite different. The Evening Whirl, as a matter of fact, they'd go and they'd read the blotters, and in many cases, they'd actually create details around the story. It's, as a matter--interestingly enough, the Evening Whirl, as the other three newspapers are, is still in business, and does better than the other three newspapers. I think someone told me there they moved to twice a week now. And apparently, it sells better in the predominantly white suburbs than it does in the black community (laughter). How about-- Speaker 2: Now this, I don't know. Is there a relationship between--is--in Detroit and Chicago [Illinois] and some of these other cities there's a, the, the white suburbs actually fear black people. And this kind of feeds that kind of-- Speaker 1: I think it, in a lot of ways-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it did. St. Louis is interesting. It's one of the few cities in our country that is incorporated as one county entity. Most cities, as you know, have, have boroughs or, or counties that kind of break the city up some, your, your Bostons [Boston, Massachusetts] and your New Yorks [New York, New York] and, and other cities along those lines. But St. Louis is incorporated in itself. It's St. Louis City as a corporation, but then there's St. Louis County [Missouri]. And what we started watching happen is we looked at migration trends. As more African Americans moved from the South into St. Louis, moved into the north side of St. Louis, working class white Americans controlled and maintained south St. Louis. As a matter of fact, even the police departments, as informal as it was, actually enforced that segregation. There have been some interesting studies done along those lines. Story_ID: 613788 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, St. Louis [Missouri] is a city that's divided north and south, black and white, not by a railroad track, but by highway 40 [U.S. Route 40]. So when the sun went down, if you were African American, you wanted to be on the north side of highway 40. And consequently, if you were white, you wanted to be on the south side of highway 40. We've done some interesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --testing for other issues. And there's an, an, an interesting interview where we took a white American and a black American with almost the same background and so forth and sent them into St. Louis to do everything from the, look for an apartment, look for a job, try to buy a car, go shopping, you know, the usual things (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now this is--let me just pause it here and set this up, 'cause this is a study that appeared on '20/20'-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --back in 1995-- Speaker 1: It was-- Speaker 2: --or so. Speaker 1: --something like that. That's exact-- Speaker 2: It was in the mid-'90s [1990s]-- Speaker 1: That's exactly right. Speaker 2: --was a study, black young man graduated from college. He, he had the same grades and credentials as the white young man, the same college, right? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: And they-- Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, if you saw them, with the exception of the color of their skin, you'd almost assume they were related, same education background, approximately the same age, very similar demeanors, just, you know, hardworking, very bright young men. Speaker 2: Yeah, now this study was sponsored by an organization, right? Speaker 1: Right, there's the-- Speaker 2: The, the-- Speaker 1: --as a matter of, the Midwest, Midwest Institute [ph.] out of Chicago [Illinois], I believe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right. Speaker 1: --as a matter of fact. Speaker 2: We, we--I used to work around the corner from them-- Speaker 1: Oh, very good, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --Mid- Midwest Institute, okay. Speaker 1: --excellent, excellent. So, it was-- Speaker 2: Okay, so just to set it up, okay. Speaker 1: --it was fascinating to see it's the exact same piece. That was the St. Louis I grew up in. But keep in mind, the St.--even the St. Louis you saw there was a, was a little more integrated than the St. Louis that I grew up in. Speaker 2: Well, tell what happened in the study. I mean, since we--I just, I just wanted to settle it and make sure we knew who did it-- Speaker 1: Sure, sure-- Speaker 2: --and all that. But what happens? Speaker 1: What happened is that they sent these two guys in separately, again, same, basically the same resume, same level of educational attainment, grade point averages, same level of experience. They sent them in to look for a job at a, a dry cleaners for a help wanted sign in the window. They go in individually. One goes in. When the, when the white goes in, great. You know, "Here fill out the application and what not. We're hoping to fill it. You look like the kind of person that'll be great for us to consider for a job like this." The African American guy goes in. Again, it's a white owned dry cleaning store. He asks about the job. They say, "Oh no, it's, it's already been filled." And he says, "Well, the sign is still in the window," they say, "Oh no, we just hadn't taken it out yet, but it's already filled." They go to an apartment building to look for an apartment. The white guy [sic.] goes into the apartment building, and the apartment building was in south St. Louis, and goes in and asks about the apartment. And the guy says, "Well, you know, we've got, we've got some people that look like they're gonna take it. But if you really want to see it, you know, we can go around there with you." And they take him around with the key and let him see the apartment and so forth. When the, the white guy comes in, they say, "Oh, great, no problem; the apartment is still available." They hand him the key. He goes by himself, no supervision, no problem. He comes back, but in the conversation the white guy is asking about the neighborhood. And the, the white manager of the building says, "Well, you know, the, the community is great. You know, there's a Catholic church right up the street." I guess the assumption is he's a good Catholic kid and so forth. "And we--but you know, some of them are starting to move into the neighborhood. As a matter of fact, there was one of the, one of them came by to look at the apartment a little earlier today," that kind of thing, those kind of, you know, kind of problems. They both go into a music store, and at that, at that time CDs [compact disc] and, and record albums as well. When the white guy goes in, a, a store clerk comes up to him immediately and, "May I help you, and can I, can I show you something?" That kind of thing. And he said, "No, I just want to look around." They leave him alone, and he goes on, continues to look at music. When the African American guy comes in they ask him the same thing, "Can--," they follow him around for a while; asked him if they could help him but then linger in the area, as if they're, they're watching him the whole time, very different. They both go to look at a, a car dealership to look for a car. The, the white guy goes on to the lot, (unclear) nothing. An African American salesman comes up to him and said, "May I help you? You know, what can I do to put you in a car? I'll give anything," you know, just the whole salesman pitch. "I want to be there to service you and be very helpful. Take it for a ride. We'll find you great financing," and so forth and so on. African American guy walks on to the lot, the same guy ignores him. He kind of walks around for a while. Ten minutes passes, fifteen minutes passes. Finally, he comes up and ask him if they could help him. And then the assumption is, "The cars we have are probably too expensive for you. Now you know this car costs X amount of dollars." This is amazing how that works. And as we talked about the policing issue, they went walking on the south side. The African American guy was on the, the south side of the city for a minute. A police cruiser comes up right around dusk, almost dark. And the police kind of rolls his window, "You're, you're a little lost aren't you? Can we, can we help you get back where you're trying to go?" That kind of thing. In other words, we know you don't belong over here, so maybe we can help you get where you belong. So it's that kind of thing. Story_ID: 613789 Speaker 1: And even growing up in the '70s [1970s], I was a teenager in the '70s [1970s]. I had a girlfriend that lived in one of the suburban areas, a predominantly white area. Her father was a lawyer, did very well. They worked for the transit company in California, Los Angeles, for a number of years, moved into the St. Louis [Missouri] area to work for the, the transportation company. Bi-State [Bi-State Development Agency] was our, our bus transportation company. And he, he, he was--he made a very good living. So they lived there, a very pristine, predominantly white suburb. But every Friday or Saturday night when I went to drive out to pick up my little girlfriend as a teenager to go to a movie or out to get some pizza, you know, the usual teenage kind of things, I'd get stopped. I'd get stopped in my car as I moved from St. Louis City into the first suburban western band. When I got to the second band--and, and just so you understand, the further west you went, the, the more affluent the communities were and the more homogenized white the communities were. So as I moved, the further I went out, the less likely you were to see African Americans. By the time I got to that third less than integrated band of suburban area, I'd get stopped, and for any kind of reason. They'd pull--I'd never get a ticket, but they'd stop me and ask me where I was going, could they search my car. Of course, in those days you just said yes, nothing to hide, want to get out of here just as fast as I can. And for those of us that were fans of 'Leave It to Beaver' growing up, we'd do our best Eddie Haskell. So and for me in that, those days, "Yes, sir." "No problem, sir." "Whatever you want, sir." "Sure, I'll, I'll turn my civil rights over to you. You can search my car or look in the trunk and open my toolbox and all that kind of thing." I remember once being stopped, and usually at the end of the stop, as I was getting back in my car, to always ask, "Oh, by the way, officer, why did you stop me?" 'Cause they wouldn't tell me. "Why did you stop me?" And I guess it would catch them off guard a little bit, and they'd laugh a little and say, in one case, "Your turn signal stayed on too long." Now we know that our turn signal is automatic, but that didn't stop them. Another time they said, "Well, you know, we thought, I thought your tailpipes were hanging too low." And I'd ask, "Well, oh, sir, I apologize. Do I, should I adjust it?" "Oh no, no. After closer inspection, it's just fine." Those kind of things. So it's a, it's amazing how that worked during those days and kind of going--those are kind--those are my sights and sounds, from the park [Fairground Park, St. Louis, Missouri] to dealing with the, really a segregated city, a segregated high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and grade school for that matter. In the, in the fourth grade--I'm sorry, the third grade--I was part of the, an integration, more of an experiment I guess, in St. Louis. Integration usually meant busing, and busing was always done voluntarily. But busing was always a one way process. Busing for the purpose of integration in St. Louis was always African American students being bused into a white community. But it wasn't even a more affluent white community. It was a poor African American public school community being bused into a poor white south St. Louis community. Story_ID: 613790 Speaker 1: Now you started school at--what was the name of your school again that you started? Speaker 2: Harrison elementary school. Speaker 1: Harrison elementary. Speaker 2: Harrison School-- Speaker 1: And that was an all-black school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All-black, yep, in north side of St. Louis City [Missouri]. Speaker 1: All right. And now did you like school as general rule, or-- Speaker 2: Generally I did. As I, I got into my, kind of that, those, those preteen years, twelve, even thirteen, the neighborhood had become a little more challenging. And there were more kids dropping out and just hanging out. So sometimes you'd have, as we talked about, that crime issue, hanging out. And sometimes the kids would get guns and-- Speaker 1: Was St. Louis a gang city? Speaker 2: It wasn't really a gang city in that respect. But--or maybe we never thought of it that way. It wasn't a Crips or a Lords [Vice Lords] or you know, that kind of thing. But, but there were, were groups that kind of hung out and got in trouble. So with that, I, I worried about, you know, being, being attacked, you know, from the folks hanging out and whatnot that didn't, didn't have anything better to do. And the unemployment rate, of course, was very high. As kids dropped out of school, there, there was no place to go, and that's why that, that issue of their shooting craps on the corner. You know, there's a shoe shine parlor in the area that many of them hung out and were able to get, you know, part-time jobs to kind of carry them over. But-- Speaker 1: You said you saw some- someone get shot for the first time when you were, how was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: I must have been eight years old. I'm walking to school one morning, as a matter of fact, and was surprised that, that the older guys, you know, the older guys being the older teenagers, early twenties, kind of hang out on the corner looking for something to do, shooting craps, you know, gambling a little bit with each other. And apparently, one, one group was stooped in the, the doorway shooting craps against the, the, the door pane. And a car pulled up, some screaming, the guys yelling at each other. A guy opened fire with a shotgun blowing the other guy straight through the plate glass window of a dry cleaning store that hadn't even opened yet for the day. So, it was a, kind of a hard thing for an eight year old to see, but it was indication as to how challenging the community was at that time. Story_ID: 613791 Speaker 1: Now, when you were at Harrison [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri], did you have any favorite teachers that you want to discuss, or-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I, I remember my, my first--my kindergarten teacher was Ms. Fields [ph.]. My fourth grade teacher was Ms. Moore [ph.]. I thought Ms. Moore was, was pretty, was, was, was fascinating. She was--she'd worked as a, a model for years. And during those days--we're talking about now the, the early '70s [1970s], she wore, wore her hair natural, you know, at a time when, when most, most young women pressed their hair or you know, put whatever chemicals they needed to straighten their hair. We were into the black consciousness movement. And in how she carried herself and how she dressed and even the things she taught us in the classroom was very clear that, that she was one that ascribed to that black consciousness movement. So that was always fascinating. You always felt like she was really dedicated to teaching us well from wherever we were in our developmental process. She talked to us about issues of the day. And during those days, we were, we were still dealing with the, with the Vietnam War one way or another and all the other challenges, the protests and breaking down the walls of segregation in our country. So she talked to us about those things while teaching us math and, and history and, and everything else then, social studies that go along (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so this is about 1968 I guess or so, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Let's see-- Speaker 1: --'cause you were like born in '57 [1957], right? Speaker 2: Fif- fifty-seven [1957]-- Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], yeah-- Speaker 2: --fifty-eight [1958]. I was actually born-- Speaker 1: --yeah. Speaker 2: --in '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], okay. Speaker 2: And, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --about '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: I think '69 [1969], yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact-- Speaker 1: You're about nine years, in the fourth grade, yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And my birthday is August, so that'd be right on target. It was also around the time that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, 1968 in April--so though, even talking to us about that. And St., St. Louis [Missouri] was, of course, one of the few cities that did not erupt into a riot after King's assassination. But-- Speaker 1: Now that's surprising in some ways 'cause St. Louis, you know, has got a, a hood that's as volatile as any other in the country-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --you would think. But, but there was no riot. Speaker 2: Sure, there was no riot. It, it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as fascinating. I can't, I can't tell you why. The, the city was pretty spread out in many ways. Maybe that contributed to it. There, there weren't as many of the, the kind of tenements and people kind of really stacked on top of each other. Geographically, St. Louis is a pretty nice size city, so it may have been that. But for one reason or another, no, there weren't any riots. There was a call for peace and calm. And I, I remember how eerily quiet the city was, at least my neighborhood was, during that time, shortly after King was assassinated. Story_ID: 613792 Speaker 1: Did your family discuss politics at home a lot, or-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but in a different way. My, my parents were, were by no means radical revolutionaries. They talked about the challenge of the color line growing up in--both of them growing up in Mississippi, but really spent very little time lecturing us about it. It kind of just came out in conversation from time to time. I think they believed very much in an integrated society but also believe very much in their, their heritage and traditions. We talked a lot about who was running for president or any other office right around election time. I grew up in that kind of middle-class, working-class family. Then by the time I came along, my mother [Frances McCain Shelton] stopped working outside the home, and with seven kids, she didn't have time; she was able to stay inside. But it also meant my father [C.W. Shelton] worked, you know, three jobs or more in addition to his normal, you know, clock punching job, as I called it, you know, whether he's working the eleven to seven [o'clock] shift or the, the seven to three or the three to eleven shift at General Cables [General Cables Corporation]. Whatever time he wasn't working there, he worked for his, himself. He managed his apartment buildings. He, he got a license as a plumber and began working as a plumber and a handyman and, and all that kind of thing. So, he worked most of the time, and my mother stayed at home and took care of us, worked in the house and whatnot, which with seven kids, you're working as hard, or harder, than anyone else; you're on call twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, so kind of growing up that way. Whenever they went to vote, and they voted every election cycle and talked to us about it, that meant we were sitting at dinner, if my father wasn't at work, he was sitting at the head of the table. If he was at work, then my mother was sitting at the head of the table. But we all sat around that same kitchen table every evening and every morning. We had breakfast together, and we had dinner together. And the issues would come up, you know, and we'd ask my parents. You know, we're excited 'cause they went out, down to the street to the same school, the same grade school we attended [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri], to vote. And they'd come back, and we'd ask them who they voted for. And they'd tease and talk about it. And we'd, we'd sit down and get an understanding of what the issues were, whether it was them voting for Hubert Humphrey in- instead of Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --or, or whatever the case might be. I remember the conversations about, about Kennedy when, when he ran and of course, when he was assassinated as well. There's probably not an, an African American home of, of my parents' generation that didn't have that picture of, of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, in their living room or their parlor or someplace in the house, and, and we were very much the same way. Story_ID: 613793 Speaker 1: Since we're on it, when were you first aware of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Pro- I was, I was about eight years old. Ms. Lee [ph.], one of my Sunday school teachers, sold me my first NAACP membership card at a table set out just outside the, the sanctuary of the Antioch Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri], which was the path you went to go from the sanctuary where the adults went for, for the, for the morning service to the Sunday school. All the kids attended Sunday school at the time. So I remember going up one day, on my way to meet my parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] just outside the sanctuary, and Ms. Lee was there with the table set up. And it was the NAACP membership card. We--of course, I'd heard of the NAACP. And she said, "Well, you should join." And at that time, a youth membership was one dollar. And for one dollar not only did I get a membership card, but I got Crisis magazine [The Crisis] coming to my house. So, that, that was my first. Speaker 1: Now that sounds like, that sounds like something that, yeah, that sounds like something that would impress a eight year old, I guess. You, you, you, so you have your own subscription to Crisis magazine? Speaker 2: One dollar (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter). But it--it was, it was a, exciting in many ways. My church really was a place that civil rights and activism was strongly promoted, probably like so many other African American churches. Speaker 1: So this is Antioch Baptist Church, right? Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's your earliest, I guess, memory of religion? Speaker 2: The Sunday school at Antioch. We were always there with other kids. We, we had Sunday school lessons. We talked about Sunday school. We talked about--we were Christians, of course, growing up in a, in a Baptist church. My, my mother's father [Ottis McCain], my--excuse me, my mother's--my father's mother [Delilah Roberts Shelton]--let me put it that way--my, my father's mother was also very religious. In addition to all the lessons from church, in that more formal way, she always had her radio turned on to the, the gospel or religious station. She always had her Bible out. She read regularly. She was one of those people with all kind of markers inside her Bible, highlighted and that kind of thing. She, she was a very devout Christian woman. So like I said, that was pretty much it. But in that religious understanding was also a commitment to activism. I remember as, as a, I guess I was probably closer to twelve when the, the Native Americans held Wounded Knee [South Dakota], the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] headquarters at Wounded Knee. And during the time they held it, our church actually collected canned goods and dry goods to have dropped into the Native Americans that were holding the, the FBI building. We just believed in that level of, of activism. The church oftentimes talked about political issues. Whether it was an election coming up, the pastor would talk about who was running for president and, and probably who's working in the best interest of the African American community. Speaker 1: Now who, who was the pastor? Speaker 2: At that time, it was William Collins [William Collins, Jr.]. He's since retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother tells me our first pastor was a Reverend Cook [James E. Cook], but I guess I was too young to remember Reverend Cook. But Reverend Collins is the pastor I remember pretty much my entire life. He's the pastor that, that we'd see and hear preach all the time. He's the, the pastor that baptized us, as a matter of fact in the baptismal pool inside the church. Story_ID: 613794 Speaker 1: Now, St. Louis [Missouri], I know has a strong NAACP chapter [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and a tradition. [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson and [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman and other people-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --that--lots of people in St. Louis-- Speaker 2: No, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: They're there. [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith-- Speaker 1: Wayman Smith. Speaker 2: --always provided a, a great deal of involvement and kind of bridging that, that gap between Corporate America and the civil rights community, and, and many others, Dr. Jam- Jim DeClue [James F. DeClue, Jr.] was the, the president of the NAACP at a time and then many others. Oh yes, it's (unclear)-- Speaker 1: So, so were you, you aware of some of them when you were a youth? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --absolutely, certainly. Margaret Bush Wilson was right in the community. My, my cousin worked at the same law firm Margaret Bush Wilson was partner in, Wilson, Smith and McCullough [sic. Wilson, Smith and McCullin]. Will--it became Wilson, Smith and Seymour at a time and so forth. So certainly we knew of Margaret Bush Wilson and her great work with the NAACP for that matter. Dr. Donald Suggs, a local dentist that actually bought the St. Louis American newspaper. Dr. Suggs, as a matter of fact, was somebody that also supported many of the civil rights initiatives and again, covered it from that very rich black journalistic perspective. I remember Dr. Suggs and I would talk from time to time. He used to--yeah, he, he's quite a bit older than I am, but some of his kids are the same age as I am. But we'd talk sometimes about what was going on in communities. And he once told me that he--if he had it all to do over again, he would have started out in the newspaper business and never gone into dentistry. But of course, dentistry was one of those areas that an African American could do very well at during a time when he was growing up. So Dr. Suggs was somebody I knew quite a bit about; the Sweets family that also owned the St. Louis--I wanna say the Sentinel. No, no, the, the, the Argus, the Argus [sic. St. Louis American] for a while. Fred Sweets, as a matter of fact, is a pretty renowned photographer. But again, their family is very actively involved in the black newspaper business. And most of the families involved in black newspaper were also very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement. They were the ones that reported the stories. They're the ones that digested what was really going on. They're the ones that actually interpreted what was going on in our communities throughout our state, of course, and our country, and our world. So, those kind of families I think were very actively involved. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. There's a, there's a rich tradition there. Were any members of the Malone family still around, of, of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, like the Annie Malone family? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know at this point, but I-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I know that the contributions they made to the north side of St. Louis City was just extraordinary. They actually founded a foster home. You may be aware of the Annie Malone's children's home [Annie Malone Children's Home; Annie Malone Children and Family Service Center, St. Louis, Missouri], that there's still a parade once a year celebrating their great work and raising money to take care of children that, that are orphaned-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --among other things, of course. Story_ID: 613795 Speaker 1: All right, so this is a pretty rich, you know, background in the black community of St. Louis [Missouri]. And so when you're in the--is it fifth grade that you had to--you were part, part, part of this experiment to-- Speaker 2: Fourth grade. Speaker 1: Fourth grade, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: We were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so did your parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] volunteer you for this? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, they did. They were asked if our families would do it. And my mother said we should try it; we should see. And, and so three of us went together. And my, my older sister, Vanessa [Vanessa Shelton], my younger sister, Pam [Pamela Shelton Seales], and myself, all, were all bused together. Every morning we'd walk around the corner, wait with the other black kids to get on the yellow school bus to drive over to south St. Louis. Speaker 1: Now, now, what--can you walk us through what your first day was like? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: At this--what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: It was Humboldt. Speaker 1: Humboldt School [Humboldt Academy of Higher Learning, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Humboldt School. It was--we, we drove up to a standard public school, institutional type building, brick, white granite trim, looked like a traditional, maybe Central High School [Central Visual and Performing Arts High School, St. Louis, Missouri] type structure. You know, they built schools like that in those days, a, a, a, a playground, two yards, one that came off one side of the building for the smaller kids, and then you could walk down a set of steps behind the building to a larger yard and field that the older kids utilized most of the time. I remember getting off that bus and, and actually feeling welcome the first time. We got off; we walked in. And, and maybe I was too young to pick up on the nuances, but we were placed in classroom that were predominantly white. But there were maybe, maybe three or four African American kids in the same classroom that pretty much rode the bus with us. So it was, it was kind of like that. Got to know my, my teacher that, that I actually liked. She was very supportive. She talked about how she taught and what she expected. And, and you worked hard, and she seemed quite fair. I remember the principal, and one of, one of the stories I, I found to be fascinating and didn't truly understand until I was a big older. Some of our neighbors in St. Louis City were, were kind of, were, were very supportive, of course, in communities like, like the community I grew up in St. Louis. Order--the adults pretty much watched out for the children to a great extent as we were younger. We knew that if we did something wrong, even a block or two away, somebody was gonna call my mother. And by the time I got home, she was gonna know what we did, and we'd get punished for it. But they also supported when we were--when we did things they thought were commendable. Some of my responsibilities around the house was to pick up paper. We had a, a big hedge, a bush that ran along the side of the corner of our house. And paper would blow in and so forth. And my, one of my responsibilities as a kid, one of my chores, was to clean up all the paper and cut the grass and that kind of thing. One of our neighbors across the street from our house was, was kind of impressed with that, called my mother and just said how much she appreciated seeing such well mannered kids. I guess she didn't see us once we got in the house, but nonetheless, she was impressed with that. So, she decided she would call the school and tell the principal what I'd--how commendable that was. So I remember getting a, a call from the principal in the classroom, that is over the intercom, you know, would like to see [HistoryMaker] Hilary Shelton. My teacher said, "This is great; the principal wants to see you, so nothing for you to worry about, but you know, go and see him." So I remember going in, and I remember a surprised look on the principal's face. And it--I didn't understand why he seemed surprised, 'cause he was the person that sent for me after all. And he just said, you know, said, "We got a call from one of your neighbors that said that, that she just thought you were commendable. And I wanted to bring you in and commend you as well." I couldn't help thinking, thinking about how, in many ways, that surprise look on his face was because I was African American and that that was not to be expected of African Americans, for us just to, to do the right thing during those days and in my case, just to do what I'm told by my parents. Nonetheless, I thought this was pretty extraordinary. It sent a very interesting signal and something that kind of haunts me a little bit. Story_ID: 613796 Speaker 1: But you say every day there were bricks thrown at the bus and, and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. If bricks weren't being thrown at the bus, the older kids were getting into fights with the white kids. It was, it was just not a good situation. And, and I know that I was a little younger, and-- Speaker 1: So the kids, how did the kids treat, treat you on, at the nine year old level, or-- Speaker 2: Well, for, for the most part, just fine, for the most part. It was the older kids that were the problem. I'll, I'll never forget a group of older kids that must have been about sixth grade walked by, and I'm, I'm playing with one of my, my white friends, and we're doing what little boy kids do. We're wrestling and boxing a little bit. "Hey, hey," and he, he grabs me. And the, the white kid I'm playing with said, "Oh, we're just playing," and I said, "Yeah, we're just playing." And he said, "All right." Then he looks at me, and he says, you know, "So what are you? Are you a N word or a Mexican?" Those were the options he gave me, a N word or a Mexican. And I didn't say anything at all, didn't know what to say behind that, quite frankly, 'cause I certainly wasn't an N word. I wasn't a Mexican either (laughter). But, but you know, it was, it was fascinating in that way, especially thinking back on it, just how challenging those times were-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and for a kid. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I also remember, we had an, an adult supervisor or--that also, part of the, the exchange program is one black teacher went to the school with you. And that black teacher rode on the bus and monitored you on the bus and, and supervised you and so forth but then taught one of the classes in the school. And I just remember, during lunch period, white kids throwing paper on the floor. And, and he would scold them and try to get them to pick it up, and they just ignored him. And I remember the frustration in his face, you know, as an adult that had gotten a, a, a teaching degree, as just a, a, a committed man. But for some reason, because of his race and the race of the kids he was dealing with, they didn't have to, have to mind him. They didn't have to do, do--so he had no recourse. He got very little support from the, from the administration, if any at all. It was usually his fault if something like that went wrong. I just remember that and, and how he had to deal with those bricks being thrown at a busload of black children and I guess probably the helplessness he sensed, as the police wouldn't come out. Or, when they did, they, they took a, they took a report and kept going. But we never heard of any of the, the kids or the adults--sometimes adults throwing those bricks at the buses. Speaker 1: Now was there ever a time when your parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] thought about removing you from this program? Speaker 2: If they did, they never told us. I think they just believed that, that we should do it. We, we, we never got, got hurt or felt threatened. I don't even know if we told them half of the things that happened there and whatnot. My older sister [Vanessa Shelton] may have told them some of those things, but I don't remember even having much of a discussion. I do remember how pleased she was that we were developing other friends too, that we were kind of looking outward as well, that we had lots of friends in our neighborhood. The African Americans grew up down the street from us that we'd known from grade school, part of being bused over and that kind of thing, but that indeed we were trying these other experiments, you know, that the world was bigger than north St. Louis [Missouri] and that maybe going to south St. Louis, kind of helped open that door for us to see beyond, you know, those, those kind of narrow boundaries. Speaker 1: Well, what things did you learn about white people, as such, by going to Humboldt School [Humboldt Academy of Higher Learning, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well, that, that mo- mostly that, that there're good white folks and bad white folks and, and a lot of gray area in between. It's just like black folks. And you know that there's some good black folks, and there are some bad black folks as well. And again, there are folks that kind of run the in between gamut, and the same thing is true of white folks. We saw a lot of ugliness, but we made a couple of good friends too, so kind of worked both ways. Story_ID: 613797 Speaker 1: So did you finish grade school at Humboldt [Humboldt School; Humboldt Academy of Higher Learning, St. Louis, Missouri] then? Speaker 2: No, no. It was just a one year project. Speaker 1: Oh, one year, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we were there for one year. And then they canceled the project the next year, and we were back in our, our community school at Harrison [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Harrison was the school that went to the eighth grade; finished the eighth grade, and you went to high school from nine to twelve; went to Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Again, Beaumont was a predominantly black high school. I think at the time I got there, there was one white family, a boy and a girl. But by my sophomore year they were gone as well, so it was all-black. The challenges at Beaumont were of course the challenges of the community itself. All schooling then was community based schooling, you know, if--that you would go to Harrison elementary school, and you knew you'd go to Beaumont High School. And going to Beaumont, again, had many of the same challenges. We went in with a freshman class of 1,500, 1,500 in a school of 3,500. Again, and we were part of that baby boomer generation. But by the time we, we graduated from high school four years later, we graduated with a class of five hundred. So we'd lost two thirds of our all African American class by graduation. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a familiar pattern in, in black schools-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --even in those days. So, now you started in what, nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay. Speaker 2: Started in '72 [1972], graduated in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what was your favorite course of study in high school? Speaker 2: I loved social studies, but I also loved the band. I, I was a musician during those years. I learned to play the saxophone beginning in the fourth grade at my elementary school. And by the time I got to high school, I was halfway decent. I, I tried out for the, for the varsity band and, and got on the band. The band played all year around, so the entire four years I was in high school I played the saxophone, marching band during marching band season. We did the pops during the pop season, and we did orchestra during the orchestra season, so we played all year around. So it was, it was great; I, I really enjoyed that part of it. But I enjoyed most of my classes. I loved social studies, again. I, I liked history. I thought history was fascinating, kind of helped us understand kind of where we are and what we are. I liked psychology and sociology, kind of an analysis of who we are and what we are as a community. So I, I enjoyed all of that. I, I was lucky. Again, I, I did pretty decently, and, and academically I all, was always able to get into the advanced placement courses and enjoyed doing that, had some great teachers in high school, from a Ms. Hendricks [Pamela Hendricks], that also served as our, our advisor, counselor for the student government, to Richard Overby, who was my band instructor, band director, and a great trumpet player too by the way. Story_ID: 613798 Speaker 1: We're at Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri] and-- Speaker 2: Beaumont High School, yes, sir. Speaker 1: And now this is, this high school is a predominantly black high school and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were saying-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --you were talking about the, the high dropout rate. And, but you were in, interested in political science and-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --and you were talking about your teacher, I think Richard Overby, and, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Overby, my band instructor-- Speaker 1: --the music teacher, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Overby was probably about 5'4", a very, very engaging instructor, outspoken, you know. I mean he, he controlled a band. And we had a, a seventy piece band, and we all practiced together. So he knew how to keep order, but he also knew how to bring out that creative element. From time to time, he'd have all kind of great jazz musicians, Clark Terry and, and others, Freddie Washington, and, come over and just do clinics for us. So, Clark Terry would come over and do a, a trumpet clinic. And Washington would come over and do a saxophone clinic. And he'd invite some great percussionists to come over. And these were all folks that we knew were professional musicians. But because Overby was also a professional musician, he was a member of the musicians' union. So whenever the big acts would come to town, he'd end up sitting in the orchestra pit for Gladys Knight and the Pips or, or, or whoever came through the city and so forth. But he was just, he was just great that way. But he used to all- always focus in us, us learning the basics. He wanted us to know how to play, you know, the, the great orchestral arrangements, the, the great pops of the day. But he always knew that during those days, everybody that was a member of the band or the choir--we had a choir in our high school at that time as well--also broke off to create little bands, you know, play more of the pop music and that kind of thing, and we were no different. But Overby would refer to as, as the Joogie Boogie Boys [ph.]. He wanted us focused in on playing the, the Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] and the Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven], even though we knew in the evenings he was playing the good jazz stuff and whatnot any place he wanted to play. But he just believed you needed a good foundation. He was very supportive throughout the process. The la- my last two years in high school he actually worked out a deal that we ended up playing and getting paid through the two summers. Manpower Training Institute [sic. Manpower Business Training Institute, St. Louis, Missouri] provided resources to allow us to come in and get paid to rehearse. And then every other evening we were performing in a retirement home or some, some other facilities, someplace for somebody. It was great; it was great. He was a great instructor and a good teacher and just, and genuinely a good person. Speaker 1: Yeah, really it sounds like a great job for a high school kid that's interested in music to be able to play professionally in some way, you know, over the summer, to have a job where you're playing your instrument. Speaker 2: Absolutely. It was great. We'd rehearse in the morning, take a break in the afternoon, and then come back late afternoon to hop on a bus and go to some block party or some local park recreational program or whatever the case might be. So it was, it was fantastic. Story_ID: 613799 Speaker 1: You came along in I guess the funk era, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: This is the--so were you a funk fan? Speaker 2: I was, I was, among other things. I, I, I had a--with, with those kind of influences on my life, like the Richard Overbys, you had quite a range. And because I considered myself a very serious musician at the time, it meant that I, I liked everything from the Parliament Funkadelic and Rick James. Earth, Wind and Fire was very influential on us during those days, the Commodores. I liked the--I loved bands that had horn sections because I was a saxophone player, you know. So, of course, Grover Washington [Grover Washington, Jr.] made the crossover from mainline jazz to kind of the pop jazz that, you know, 'Mister Magic' and those kind of songs crossed over into. So, it was, it was an incredible time in a lot of ways, a good time for music. But I liked all kinds of music. I loved the rock music. I was a big Led Zeppelin fan and Yes and The Who and, and, and the Stones [Rolling Stones] and Jimi Hendrix and all this. Jimi Hendrix had died before I actually really got into his music, but I have an older brother [Marvin Shelton]. And of course, with an older brother sleeping in the same room, you're influenced by, by a lot of things that influence him as well. So I just liked music and good music. I liked live music. Yeah, I'd go out to the concerts whenever I could. We had two major music venues for pop music and rock and jazz and all that kind of thing. One was the Kiel Auditorium [St. Louis, Missouri], which is still there, and the other was the St. Louis Arena [St. Louis, Missouri], which has since been closed. The Kiel Auditorium had all kind of concerts and programs and so forth. And the, the Arena was primarily where the hockey team played for St. Louis [St. Louis Blues]. But on those weekends and the off days during the week you'd get a good, good arena style concert, you know, there as well. As I got older we, we, we'd be exposed, of course, to the, to Powell Symphony Hall [Powell Hall, St. Louis, Missouri], which is where the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra performed. And again, as a music student, as a, as a child in the, in grade school and then into high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], there were opportunities for us to go and hear the St. Louis Symphony. And then the Fox Theatre [Fabulous Fox Theatre, St. Louis, Missouri] was converted at a point from a movie theater to more of a concert hall and the same kind of thing there. I actually got a chance to hear everybody from Ella Fitzgerald to Gerry Mulligan [Gerry Mulligan], and all kind of great jazz musicians perform there as well, Miles Davis, a, a little bit of all of them, as a matter of fact, at one point or another. Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri] is another one of the German sort of cities in the United States (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: And I think they, all of them, had like good music instruction from, you know, in the, in the public schools. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And sadly, and when, when it's time to cut budgets for public schools, it's one of the first things to go. That's unfortunate. I think music is still extremely important to our society and for people to really develop as a, a full human being. I think music just has such an incredible influence on all of our lives. It's, it's too bad it's, it's something that gets thrown out the window whenever times get a little tough. Speaker 1: Well, were there local bands here in St. Louis that, that emergent during the '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that-- Speaker 1: --that made up-- Speaker 2: --there, there were some. There were, there are few bands that kind of emerged. None of them that I can, I can point to actually made it big. There were musicians, you know, the Ronnie Burrages of the world and those kind that became professional drummers and other professional musicians. Lynne Fiddmont is a background singer for Stevie Wonder even today. There, there are friends that, that we knew that just worked hard and, and did well that got a break and were able to continue to play. But other friends, Kelvyn Bell and others are, are doing just fine making a living as a musician but not in that kind of big, maybe you might see him on TV kind of way. Story_ID: 613800 Speaker 1: Now were you involved in clubs in, in high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Were you, were you-- Speaker 2: Sure, absolutely. I got actively involved in student government very early. Student government, the Black Student Union were also very important to me. I actually ran for president of the student government my sophomore year to serve my junior year, and they said that was kind of record breaking. Usually the student government president was, ran in your junior year and served your senior year. But I ran my sophomore year and served my junior year and ran my junior year and served my senior year as well. I got involved in student politics very early. The Black Student Union was something my older sister [Vanessa Shelton], who's three years older than I am, told me I should get involved in. There was a, a great teacher that, that, again, also provided supervision for that club. But we actually talked about black history, and then again, we were also the products of that era. So we're talking about the, '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Now someone asked me yesterday--I asked them if they were involved in a black student union on the campus of a, it was a black college [HBCU]. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And they said well, the campus was black. We didn't need a black student--you know. But, now, I had--I, I didn't want to come back with him with an answer, but, but like, can you explain like, why a black student union would be important in an all-black school? Speaker 2: Oh, extremely important for a number of reasons. Number one, particularly during those days, they weren't teaching black history. Just because you're in a predominantly black school--in this case it was an all-black school--doesn't mean you're learning about the history of, of, of African Americans, so having an opportunity to sit down and talk about those things. There's something I didn't mention early, is black history was just being introduced in the St. Louis Public Schools when I was in the sixth grade. And we actually looked forward to it. But even then, there were two history books. There was the American history book that had no black faces. American history book was about five hundred pages thick. Then there was the black history supplement that was about two hundred pages, and it was just an addendum. As a matter of fact, I'll never forget my, my high school te- my high school--my grade school teacher in the sixth grade sat down--see, he loved baseball. He was, he was a white American and whatnot. He was a good teacher, overall. But when it came time to talk about black history, in a school that was all-black--my grade school [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri] was all African American, not predominantly, totally. But he said, "Listen, here's your American history book. This is mandated. We have to do this. Here's your black history book, which is an addendum to this. During the slot we utilize for history, we're supposed to do both of these, but we have to do this one. Would you rather do your black history as well or have more time to play baseball?" What a thing to ask a, a bunch of sixth graders. And I'm sorry to say that we didn't do any black history there either. So (unclear), talked about getting into high school, joining the black student organization was just a good idea if you wanted to know what's happening with our folks. And during those days, we were talking about everybody from the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and talking about Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and just those who were part of, again, the black consciousness struggle in the United States at that period. So it's very important. It's very, very important. Story_ID: 613801 Speaker 1: Now what about popular culture? I know the television in the seven- in the '70s [1970s], I--everybody had a TV in the house. Radio, the FM--the black urban-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --contemporary stations were starting up. And then at the movies you had the, what they called the blaxploitation, ex- exploitation-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --film explosion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --with-- Speaker 2: Well, I came in at the--kind of the tail end of that. Those were all R rated movies. You're talking about 'Shaft' and, and 'Super Fly' and 'Dolemite,' and was it 'Mr. Mean'? And you know, those, those blaxploitation movies. But they shouldn't be confused in some ways. Some of those were true exploitation. Some of those were actually good black commentary. When you think about [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks and you think about 'Shaft,' you know, even though, of course, all the trappings of Hollywood had the drive--draws people into the movie theaters, the violence and the sex and all that kind of thing, it was certainly there as well. But there was a, a, a subtext that was much more consistent with real African American life. But some of those movies, the so called black ox- exploitation movies, really were taking a stereotype of African American life written by someone that didn't experience or understand African America life and then exploit it in a way to drive people into the movie theaters to see those films, and that was just awful. But, but it was a fascinating time. I think Gordon Parks did a, a, a pretty good job of opening those doors and making sure that some of the great stories were being told, some great (unclear) stories. Believe it or not, even [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles did a pretty good job of raising some of those issues in his own exploitive kind of way as well. But nonetheless, the, it was a good text in context of the period of time we were living in. Speaker 1: Okay. What about TV? Did it have much influence on you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, of course-- Speaker 1: --coming along? Speaker 2: --we didn't have cable during those days. You had four stations. You had ABC, CBS, NBC, and PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. Later on we got UHF [ultra high frequency]. We added a little converter box to the top of your television and pulled it down off microwaves or something along those lines and moved into that era. So, we're kind of growing up during that time, remember everything from the old 'Batman' series to 'Julia.' I remember 'Julia' being ground breaking, putting African American in a starring role in a weekly-- Speaker 1: Yeah, with [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll. Speaker 2: --story. Absolutely. And then, of course, 'I Spy,' with Bill Cosby and Robert Culp, the same kind of period of time late six- middle to late '60s [1960s] moving through, then came into the '70s [1970s] eras with the, the 'Good Times' and so forth. And then finally, we, we reach the point where we grew into 'The Cosby Show' and 'A Different World' spinoff and, and so forth, so, and of course, some of the breakthrough in the shows in the '80s [1980s] like 'Miami Vice,' you know, Philip Michael Thomas, and so forth, you know, this, this cool, debonair detective working with his white partner again but, you know, dressing well and you know, taking a few prisoners along the way. So, those kind of shows were very much there for us but not a whole lot that provided real substance. I think it wasn't until I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and 'Roots,' you know, opened the doors as, as a, a miniseries, you know, beginning to tell an in depth story of, of African Americans or an, an African American family from slavery to the present day. It was extremely important. And then I think it was one of--we had a series called 'The Africans' ['The Africans: A Triple Heritage'] that was fantastic on PBS coming up through that time period and so forth, so we came--and then the 'Eyes on the Prize,' of course, capturing the civil rights era of our day. I think that was also in the, in the '80s [1980s]. So, we saw television evolving quite a bit and telling more of the stories of, of, of our fight for civil rights and, and liberation in that, that nonviolent tradition that we call the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 613802 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri] though, so the movies weren't as big an influence on you in high school as-- Speaker 2: No, not, not in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause you didn't-- Speaker 2: --not in that respect. I loved movies. I was--you know, it was not extraordinary for, for me to rush home after church and have my parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] drop me off with one of my best buddies and spend the whole day in a movie theater. It was also a time where there were, double features were the kind of the lay of the land. But there were also days that we'd cut a coupon out of the newspaper and go and watch--I used to love old horror movies. Starting at twelve noon we'd watch horror movies from twelve noon until about nine o'clock at night. And my mother would come by and pick us up and take us home, you know. So in, in relation to this high--I really look at the world around me and, and my commitment to civil rights and the kind of work I do now, that didn't play much of a role. I mean it, it's fascinating in that I, I appreciated the way stories were told and the way films were made. I was a big James Bond fan during those days and whatnot, so very much akin to the popular culture. My parents were very strict about the kind of movies that we could go to and that we couldn't go to, that we, we weren't allowed to go to R rated movies during those days and whatnot, and, and they would ask. They'd want to know what we were seeing. So, you know, I liked the cowboy movies. I was a, a big fan of the Man with No Name, the Clint Eastwood movies, 'The Good, the Bad and the Ugly,' 'Hang 'Em High,' 'Fistful of Dollars' ['A Fistful of Dollars'], 'For a Few Dollars More.' And of course, during that era we were very heavily influenced by the Japanese or Chinese kung fu movies, Bruce Lee. We showed Bruce Lee movies at our school sometimes, you know, that kind of thing, so there. But, but then we had some of the blaxploitation movies that somehow or another we kind of snuck into. I remember 'The Mack,' you know, the, the story of a, a local pimp, you know, glorified the way that those things were exploited and glorified. And of course, 'Super Fly' was one of those, a drug dealer, kind of the same kind of thing and whatnot during that area as well. As a matter of fact, they often show those two movies as a double feature. Somehow or another, the pimp and the drug dealer worked well in drawing audiences into movie theaters in the black community. We knew about them, did not appreciate them, got into an interesting debate, as a matter of fact, in my high school. We wanted to show a movie, and at the time the, one of the biggest movies out there was 'The Mack.' And my English teacher raised a protest and said, "I don't think we ought to be showing movies like this in our school and whatnot. And what it show--this--what it demonstrates is something that is not good for anybody." But what was about that experience--I was the student president at the time--was the debate that incurred. Parents came in, and students debated and discussed the issue. And we, we really delved into what those films were all about and kind of the, the, the, the subtext in those films: what were the real mores presented in these films, and why is this so problematic for us and whatnot? I mean, it was, it was a very healthy community debate and a, and a good exposure for me to even how things worked today here in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 613803 Speaker 1: Was your NAAC- youth chapter [NAACP Youth Council] active during-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during the time that you were a youth in the-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know, at that time, the, the youth chapters did, did programs that were more community based. We did, we did some programs in churches and that kind of thing, but they weren't, they weren't really civil rights hard hitting. They're more introductions to civil rights and black history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like educational-- Speaker 2: More educationally driven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: 'Cause the old, old NAACP Youth in the '50s [1950s] would stage sit-ins. And-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, you, you read about Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] in-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --in Wichita [Kansas], you know, staged a sit-in in '56 [1956] or '7 [1956], you know, and people like those, those kind of stories, the Mitchells, you know, in Baltimore [Maryland]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --doing the same thing, being beaten by the cops as teenagers and you know. Speaker 2: And St. Louis [Missouri] in the time I was growing up, again, and I'm growing up in--I'm reaching my teen years in the '70s [1970s], so a lot of though, the, those demonstrations were gone. We were starting to recognize and celebrate Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday and thinking in those terms. There'd be a, a march on Dr. King's birthday that the youth division would participate in. If some store wasn't integrating in its hiring of staff and, or in its contracting of, of public relations services or other things, we'd march on that store on Dr. King's birthday. Or, if some hotel was, was not treating their employees right, not promoting from within, or hiring from without, the same kind of thing would happen. But we'd gotten, during the time I was a teenager, we were kind of past the sit-in years and more into the more institutionalized forms of racism, that were fought in, in many ways in a different kind of way. Speaker 1: Did--were educational sessions conducted about affirmative action and the threat to--I know the Allan Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] was, it was-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) starting to-- Speaker 2: --well, those, those-- Speaker 1: --emerge-- Speaker 2: --the Bakke, that was after I was-- Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: --a teenager. Bakke was '77 [1977], I think, '77 [1977], '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: I, I thought it was a little bit before that, maybe, but okay. Speaker 2: I, I was in college. We, we actually-- Speaker 1: They didn't resolve it for several years, but I think it emerged around '73 [1973] or '4 [1974] when they actually filed the suit. I'm not--but-- Speaker 2: And it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We, we held demonstrations here in Washington [D.C.] around the Bakke case. I, I was a college student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We all came to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] to participate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't want to get you in-- Speaker 2: --in those demonstrations, but yeah. Speaker 1: --into how--Howard yet, but, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, very good. Speaker 1: --I'm just trying to set the stage for what was going on and-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and what you were doing. So you were involved in government and, and leadership activities in high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --both at, in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], at church [Antioch Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] and at school? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah and-- Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I, I, I met Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] as a high school student, as student government president. They invited a bunch of the young student government presidents I guess from the high schools in the city to come and meet him at one of the downtown hotels. And that was my first exposure to a real sitting president. Speaker 1: Now did you follow the Watergate hearings with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes, indeed. Speaker 1: --with Sam [Sam Ervin]--what's his name, the- Speaker 2: Yeah, not--it was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I can see his face as clear as day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can too, and I-- Speaker 2: I know exactly who you're talking-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --about. But oh yeah, yeah, we followed the Watergate hearings. We followed the, the presidential elections. All of that was the kind of something that only a small group of us were really interested in, 'cause it was so, so much bigger than the communities lived or the neighborhoods we lived in. But to find someone that you could actually talk about presidential politics with was pretty extraordinary in grade school and high school. Story_ID: 613804 Speaker 1: Now did you ever run across [U.S.] Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas when--in the St. Louis [Missouri] days, when you were a youth? Speaker 2: No. And he he's a bit older than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My--I have an, an older cousin that, that knows him well, a cousin that's a lawyer in St. Louis. As a matter of fact, when Clarence Thomas was being considered for the Supreme Court, I worked for the United Methodist Church government affairs office. And I got a--and we were deciding to make a de- to take a--well, to decide how we were gonna frame our supporter opposition to Clarence Thomas. And I'd gotten a lot of troubling information about Clarence Thomas, mostly beginning with his work with the [U.S.] Department of Education and, and going up from there. And I, I got a call from the same cousin that, that recommended that we give him a, a chance, that, that as much as he had played the game to be considered seriously by the conservative factions or the Republican Party, that he would be a good Supreme Court justice, and that as much as he came across in a very right wing, almost extremist kind of way, that once he had that permanent slot in the Supreme Court, you'll see a very different Clarence Thomas. I did what I needed to do to get there. So I remember talking to him about it. Clarence was a member of the Mound City Bar Association, which is the black bar in the city-- Speaker 1: In-- Speaker 2: --of St. Louis, no doubt (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) St. Louis, right, that's right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: That's why I asked about him, he's sponsored by John Danforth of Ralston Purina [Ralston Purina Company, St. Louis, Missouri], the big-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --the millionaire family there. Speaker 2: Well, and keep in mind-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Danforth was never one of, one of those kind of right wing extremist. Danforth was one of the very moderate republicans. Kind of for, for those who seek bipartisanship, he's, he was always kind of the, the person you went to; he was kind of the go to guy. When we were working on the Civil Rights Act of 1990 [Kennedy Hawkins civil rights bill] that became the Civil Rights Act of 1991, it really was John Danforth that help break the stalemate with George Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush], so we can get it through and whatnot. You probably remember the bill was vetoed, and we pushed through with an amendment from Danforth that we were actually able to get it passed. But also, some of that was part of Danforth's support for Clarence Thomas, that Danforth really carried Thomas' water, you know, through the, the [U.S.] Senate. The Senate's the only place you have to carry water for a Supreme Court justice or any federal court judge for that matter. And, and just that hard work, part of the, and the tradeoff with the administration was, you know, help us get Clarence Thomas through no matter what, and we'll revisit the Civil Rights Act in 1990. And, and indeed they did, and, and the bill ended up passing. But Danforth was always much more moderate in that respect. Speaker 1: It's, it's odd that he's, he's seen as more moderate than the person he sponsored, you know, really. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But, there, there, there are many theories about Clarence Thomas. Even that same cousin from St. Louis I mentioned to you talked about Clarence Thomas as someone that was, you know, really a, kind of a, a, a friendly guy, outgoing, you know, the kind of guy that would just talk a lot of stuff with the guys, you know, smoke big cigars, and you know, you'd meet out on the golf course from time to time and whatnot. He, he attended the bar association meetings and was involved in a lot of the, the social activities of black folks in St. Louis and whatnot. But some believe that it was going through that process that really began to change him too. Who knows? Speaker 1: What, the, like bumping up against the, the established-- Speaker 2: Civil rights community. Speaker 1: --civil rights community in St. Louis (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, his--them--everything from Anita Hill to civil rights organizations coming out very strongly in opposition to him. The--just him being personified as, as somehow not part of the established African American community, civil rights community was something that, that some argue, may very well have, have kind of had him dig his heels in and began isolating himself. Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson said that he spent two summers in their home. And-- Speaker 2: I wouldn't be surprised. Speaker 1: --every night he argued with her husband [Robert E. Wilson, Jr.] about politics and taking a right wing, you know, kind of a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --stance. But you know, when he was interning, you know, back in the day, he spent-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --two summers in their home. Speaker 2: Oh, he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he was always viewed as being very bright, very outspoken, and you know, just like most other, you know, hardworking African Americans that have gotten some opportunities to, to excel. You know, Danforth, as you mentioned before, was very helpful in him moving from Monsanto chemicals [Monsanto Company] in St. Louis to his, his campaign staff or his Senate office staff and then helped propel him into the Department of Education civil rights division [Office for Civil Rights], EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], and then on to the D.C. Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course from there to the Supreme Court. Story_ID: 613805 Speaker 1: Now, when you were a senior, did you aspire to--I mean what, what, what were your aspirations? What did you want to be as a senior in high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Senior in high school? I wanted to, I wanted to, to get into the legal profession, but I also the political arena. I started seeing more and more kind of that marrying of, of politics, the law, and actually public relations. I started seeing that real strong connection between PR [public relations] and politics, being able to lay down a foundation to help bring about some change. So I learned more about how the legislatures function and then how pressure groups can influence the legislature. So as a college student, as a matter of fact, at the University of Missouri [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]--I'm jumping ahead a little bit--after my Howard years, I became very actively involved in the antiapartheid movement and started seeing how we could really influence change with the an organization, you know, very politically democratic driven--with a small D, organization. Speaker 1: Okay. This is 1976. I just want to say that and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you, you graduated in '76 [1976], the year that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] is elected president. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Democrat returns to the White House after-- Speaker 2: The bicentennial-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of the United States of America. Speaker 1: --bicentennial year, right. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm on-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --my way to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 613806 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen. Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure, Hilary Otis Shelton [HistoryMaker Hilary Shelton], H-I-L-A-R-Y, O-T-I-S, S-H-E-L-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And when is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 12th, 1958, St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I direct the NAACP's Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.], the government affairs office for the nation's oldest and largest grassroots based civil rights organization. Speaker 1: All right, and what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March the 5th, I hope, 2012. I have to check that date. I think it's the 5th. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. at the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Washington Bureau, at 1156 15th Street Northwest, Suite 915, at the corner of 15th and M [Street], to be exact. Story_ID: 613807 Speaker 1: Okay, now we're continuing an interview that we started in 2008. And we had four chapters. This would be chapter five. We were talking about your high school days and your activities with NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council], I think. Now what was your high school, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Beaumont High School in St. Louis [Missouri]. And that is a very St. Louis question to ask. Usually, if you ask anyone what high school they went to, that only told you, of course, where they spent that four years. But it also tells you what neighborhood they lived in, most likely what grade school they went to, and also kind of who their neighbors may very well have been. So, it's, for St. Louis, it's a very encompassing question to ask that. I graduated from Beaumont High School in 1976. It was the community high school right across Fairgrounds Park [sic. Fairground Park, St. Louis, Missouri] from my house I grew up in with my, my six brothers and sisters, mom [Frances McCain Shelton] and dad [C.W. Shelton]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were there, and we didn't talk about this the last time, but who were your mentors in high school? Who were, who were the people that you looked up to as teachers, students? Speaker 2: Well, of course, in addition to mom and dad, there were a number of teachers and friends, students, that I, I certainly looked to as, as those that set a great example and people I actually just liked and, and loved what they were planning on doing with their lives. If I thought about my teachers for a minute, I would think about Ms. Pamela Hendricks, was a, a good friend. Richard Overby was the, the band teacher. I, I played in the, the marching band and the, and the concert band at, at Beaumont High School. My tennis coach was Mr. Williams [ph.], whose first name I cannot remember at this point. And there were others that were just people I looked to, whether it was in the physics department, the chemistry department, whether it was in the social studies department. There was a Ms. Washington [ph.] that was also someone I really looked up to as being very thoughtful and, and informative about the African American community, how we all fit into the context of the United States of America. But these were also people that taught well, in a way that really engaged me to think about what was going on. There was a Ms. Reynolds [ph.] that taught English that was very thoughtful in the kind of, of literature she would have us read and the discussions that we would have the class about that literature. And of course, going to a high school that was predominantly African, it meant that a lot of that discussion we talked in, about social studies courses and history courses and the like, integrated a lot of what was going on and had happened in the African American community. Speaker 1: Okay. I had a--so, what instrument did you play in the band (laughter), I just wanna-- Speaker 2: I played saxophone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We all--in, in my household, my mother was a piano player in her little local country church [Pleasant Grove Baptist Church] in--just outside of Grenada, Mississippi, and so, all of us learned to play the piano as kind of a foundation in music. But each of us also learned how to play some band instrument, whether it was a violin, in my older sister's [Vanessa Shelton] case, or this trumpet, in my younger brother's case, two of my younger brothers' [Craig Shelton and Raynard Shelton] cases, and whether it was a saxophone, in my case, or a flute and clarinet, in my other sister's [Pamela Shelton Seales] case. There, all of us pretty much played some band instrument as well. I played the saxophone. Primarily, I started out playing the alto. And then I kind of graduated as the needs of the band required it to play the tenor saxophone as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now Beaumont's spelled B-E-A-U-M-O-N-T? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, you can say that with a mantra; you know, there's a beat to that (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, is it? What, what, what, what is it? What is it? Speaker 2: Oh no, you did a great job. Speaker 1: Yeah? Okay. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm teasing, I'm teasing (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, all right, okay. Speaker 2: I think about some of the, the chants at the high school football games and whatnot that always included the spelling of the high school (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, okay. And so this is the a black high school, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a predominantly African American high school. I can only remember one short period in which there were brother and sister who were white Americans that also attended the school, but I don't think they stayed an entire year, even though 1972 through 1976, of course, was well after the Civil Rights Act of '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], and, and integration in our schools, and certainly well after the Brown versus Board of Education decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. As much as the law did not mandate the segregation by race of the schools, the schools in St. Louis were very heavily segregated. It was more of a de facto segregation. And the school I went to on the, the north side of St. Louis was predominantly African American. As a matter of fact, for the most part, it was all African American, with the exception of some of the teachers. Story_ID: 613808 Speaker 1: I probably asked you this before, but what are the demographics of St. Louis [Missouri] in terms when you were growing up, I mean? Speaker 2: When I was growing up, the St. Louis overall population probably ran between 700 to, down to about 635,000 people. At the time I graduated from high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], I believe it was right around 635. At that time, it was preda- di- divided pretty heavily, black and white, north and south. About 55 percent of all the Americans that lived in St. Louis at, at the time I graduated from high school were African American. About 45 percent were white. There were very few other racial and ethnic minorities that lived in the city. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you said when you graduated in '77 [1977] they really hadn't mandated busing or anything like that, that or-- Speaker 2: Well, '76 [1976]. All-- Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 2: --all the mandated busing was pretty well over by then. As a matter of fact, when I went to grade school [Harrison School, St. Louis, Missouri], they didn't really mandate busing in St. Louis. They did voluntary busing, which meant that they actually reached out to students that were willing to participate in the program and be bused over to another school, in our case, from north St. Louis to south St. Louis [to Humboldt School; Humboldt Academy of Higher Learning]. Interestingly enough--this, this when I was in the, the fourth grade. Interestingly enough, most of the busing programs in St. Louis for the purposes of integration meant busing African Americans from the African American community over to predominantly white schools in the south side of the city. And of course, it was always almost straight across the board, same social economic standard. So you'd bus African American kids in the working-class black community, where I grew up, into south St. Louis to go to a working-class white school in a white--in a working-class white community. Story_ID: 613809 Speaker 1: So as a high school senior were you in, involved in clubs and activities? Did you hold a school office or anything like that? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I did all of that. That, that started early. At, from the, my freshman year, in addition to being in the band the entire time, the Black Student Union the entire time I was there, I also served on the student council. I was an, a delegate to the student council my first two years. My junior year, I was the first, as they told me, to become president of the student council. Usually, the student council presidency was relegated to a senior. But I served as president for the last two years of my time at Beaumont [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], so my junior and my senior year. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were active in the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council]. We were talking about that before. And I just want to make sure we highlight who the director was. I mean, who, who was your leader as, in the NAACP Youth? Speaker 2: The, the, the leader of our youth council was a woman named Mrs. Lee [ph.]. She was also the same woman that signed me up for my first NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] membership at the Antioch Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri]. She engaged all the young people around about the time we were ten to twelve years old in the work of the NAACP. Interestingly enough, she also did the same thing with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the SCLC. But because we had a very robust NAACP branch right in inner city St. Louis [Missouri], and they had a very active youth works committee, we were plugged directly into the local St. Louis branch of the NAACP and probably did more interactions along those lines, receiving The Crisis magazine, getting updates on what the NAACP was doing in other terms, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's interesting that she, you know, in St. Louis, you know, was active in both NAACP and SCLC, 'cause over the years, I've heard people who on one side or another, you know, claim, you know, civil rights victory by either legislation of marching, you know. And it seems to be a dichotomy, though I think it's a false one that people make. Did you have any sense--did, did she ever talk about that-- Speaker 2: Not at all (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the two sides coming together? Speaker 2: No. It's, it's interesting that I, I always assumed that it was because most of the African Americans in my parents' generation at Antioch Baptist Church were from right around Mississippi. There was a big migration that brought an awful lot of African Americans up kind of the Mississippi River corridor in Memphis [Tennessee], St. Louis, Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], and Gary, Indiana, as, again, as an offset of Chicago. That being said, many of the, many people there believed that they should always maintain those southern roots, and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference was one way of doing that. But also, the NAACP was extremely active in the St. Louis area. So being involved along those lines was important to us as well, certainly important to the church, so we did both. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And they there didn't seem to be any, any problem with that, any problem at all, as a matter of fact. They was--the church paid to send me to my first NAACP conventions, and the church paid to send me to my first Southern Christian Leadership Conference, SCLC conventions. Speaker 1: And who was your pastor at Antioch? Speaker 2: It was William Collins [William Collins, Jr.] at the time. As a matter of fact, he, he just retired, I think my parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] were telling me, about ten years ago. I even went to Sunday school with his daughter. Story_ID: 613810 Speaker 1: In high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri] were you familiar--did you ever interact with [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson or [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman or some of the other civil rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know who they were until my college years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I remembered coming back-- certainly, hearing about Margaret Bush Wilson during some of the involvement in attending some of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings. But Frankie Freeman was someone that was well respected in our communities as well, actually sat on the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. So, my sophomore year at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was the first time I actually just met her face to face and sat down to talk to her. I was looking for a summer job. And I'd decided that year I want to do something more in the area of what I saw my career going. And so I, I called the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights office listed in St. Louis [Missouri], asked for a meeting with, with Frankie Freeman, and I'll never for- forget going by and sitting down with her to talk about the possibilities of doing an internship with her that summer. I ended up interning at the le- at the, at legal aid in St. Louis, the Eastern Missouri legal aid society [Legal Services of Eastern Missouri], as a matter of fact, very specifically. But I ended up in, interning there that year. But I still remember so warmly, Frankie Freeman invited me to come by, sitting down, really giving me great advice about my career, work in the civil rights arena, the kind of things the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights did, and just things along those lines. I guess I'm, I, I'm just very grateful to have had an opportunity to sit down with her, especially more recently. You may have heard that the NAACP actually gave Frankie Freeman the NAACP's highest achievement in civil rights award, the Spingarn award [Spingarn Medal], as a matter of fact, at our Los Angeles [California] convention last summer, so things coming full circle. It was great to see someone who was so receptive and helpful in my career by just giving the kind of advice and thoughtfulness that she provided during that time. And I've talked to her a number of times after that but, again, much later in my career and in hers. But just the kind of person that she was, the kind of commitment that she showed, and really, kind of the philosophy she brought to the whole civil rights struggle and movement was something that, that stays with me now. Story_ID: 613811 Speaker 1: Back to high school grad- graduation [from Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Now, did you graduate with honors? Speaker 2: They tell--well, I don't know if I'd call it honors, I was not, I was not the valedictorian of the class. They tell me I graduated in the top 5 percent of my class, what, whatever that means. But I had a, a rich experience in high school along those lines, you know, with everything I'd mentioned before, from playing in the marching band and being active in the black student government, which is where more of the political issues were discussed and debated for me during those years. But then running the student conference or student council at our school was much more kind of the day to day, you know, how the cafeteria was gonna function, what kind of special events we would do for the students. You know, those kind of things are, are more of what we did along those--how can we do a better job busing our trays to make sure that all students get engaged in doing that kind of thing or playing music during the, the lunchroom cycle and so forth. So it was, it was more of the--the, the way I compare it now, the, the, the black student government was more of the, the political pontiff in me. The student government was--activities where more of the governance issues. And, and there's a difference in how you govern something, how you make something work, how you do programs, plan ahead, do things along those lines, or how you just kind of debate the issues of your day, you know, who's the best presidential candidate? What does this mean to black folks and whatnot, and how to make the African American community a more, solid, in so many ways. Speaker 1: So those, those are some of the issues. I was gonna ask you what, what were the issues you all discussed in the Black Student Union in those days, and those were the kind of issues that-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We would, we, we studied a lot of the heroes in the Civil Rights Movement, from the Dr. Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to the [HistoryMaker] Angela Davises, during that era. We, we looked at the work that was being done by the Black Panther Party and the, and, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and so many other groups across the country and got a chance to understand more of who these heroes were, the [HistoryMaker] Andrew Youngs of the world that had, had grown to become the first African American elected to the U.S. Congress from the South since Reconstruction and going on to be the first African American to sit on the, in the UN as the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations. You know, all that was happening around that same time period. You know, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was elected in 1976, the year that I'd graduated, and so we were hearing about these people. And as we kind of watched Young's career, you know, transform and other things happen along those lines, it was, it was very in- informative. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Who, who is it--was there a faculty advisor-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --for the Black Student Union that-- Speaker 2: Sure. That was Ms. Washington [ph.]. Ms. Washington was one that was very much into the, the, the African American movement in the country. She was a very sensitive to the black consciousness movement and shared that kind of information with us as well. She was someone that would talk about and debate the cultural issues of our day. As a matter of fact, from my--I remember, she taught English and social studies at the ca- at the, at the coll- at the high school and was just very, very actively involved with the students along those lines, very sharp young woman. Story_ID: 613812 Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], the year you graduate [from Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. You said Carter is the president. Speaker 2: Carter becomes president in 1976. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's the bicentennial-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of course the hundredth anniversary of the country. Sorry, the two, the two hundredth anniversary of the country, excuse me. And, and now I'm off to college. Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and I came to Washington, D.C., the same year. Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose Howard? Who, what, what influenced you? Speaker 2: A number of things. I looked at a number of schools, some of the smaller colleges in and around the Midwest, you know, those colleges right home, the St. Louis [Missouri] universities, and the University of Missouris [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], and the Washington Universities [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], and the Fontbonnes [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri] and so forth. But then I looked at schools a little bit further away. My sister [Vanessa Shelton] went to Coe College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, and had a great experience, so I kind of looked at Coe College as an example as well. But I wanted to look at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], Dillard, Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and a couple of others. And as I narrowed it down and thought about my interests, I, I narrowed it down to two schools. New Orleans [Louisiana] was a fascinating city to consider going to. And so Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] was the school I came very close to attending there. But at the same time I was accepted to Dillard, I was also accepted to Howard University. And of course, Howard had a longer richer tradition of civil rights activism. But more importantly, political science and communications were the two issue areas that were very important to me, as I was thinking about, you know, career moves. Speaker 1: Now were you, were you aware of Thurgood Marshall and, and the--I mean the reputation of the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and that sort of thing when you were-- Speaker 2: Yes. As a matter of fact, we did become very aware that it was that Howard law school. Those are the things I learned as a I moved ahead, just as I was graduating and hearing about Howard. I don't remember if Howard promoted that side of it or if some of my friends that attended Howard that came back to talk to us about what a great opportunity it would be to go to Howard University came back and talked to us. But we were very aware of that very rich tradition of Howard and the Civil Rights Movement and particularly the law school. You know, as you talk about, you know, people like Sam Houston [sic.], who was the dean of the law school but also many people looked to as the architect of the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] as well as in many ways the architect of Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and those kind of issues were, were kind of coming to, to light as I was looking at Howard University. Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Hamilton Houston, yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: What, did you--were your career aspirations to become a lawyer when you graduated? Speaker 2: At one time they were. Speaker 1: I mean when you were graduating from high school, were you thinking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a matter--yeah, that, that was, that, yes, indeed. That's what I exposed to. I mean, I was a, a 'Perry Mason' fanatic-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --watching that old TV show all the time and seeing what a lawyer could do in a courtroom. But then as I, I got older, I also started seeing the kind of contributions you could make through the law and to actually really changing the society, changing the law itself. I mean, lawyers' primary responsibilities are to help advocate on behalf of a client, and interpreting the existing law, and applying the existing law in a way that is fair and judicious for their clients. But I started seeing myself looking more to what's the ways to actually change the law to make it more responsive and receptive to the issues and concerns of the communities I came from. I believe that we needed someone to advocate for the challenges in the African American community. We were seeing what was going on throughout the country. I was conscious of what was going on in the, the late '60s [1960s] with a lot of the movements but also the, the problems with some of the riots that went on in our country as well as a rebellion to many of the unfair laws and certainly unfair implementation of those laws and interpretations of those laws. So I found it to be very helpful. Story_ID: 613813 Speaker 1: So Howard University [Washington, D.C.], fall of '76 [1976], tell us about what your impression of Howard was. Speaker 2: I was impressed with Howard from the, from the very start. Yeah, I had to adjust to things. Like, I came from the Midwest in a community that I found later to be so heavily southern. Yeah, as I mentioned, mostly African Americans in St. Louis [Missouri] were the descendants of southerners. My, both my parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] were from Mississippi. As I looked around me, most of my friends' parents, as it turned out later I was paying attention to these things, were also from a southern state, mostly Mississippi; some were from Alabama and a few other places. But that helped me see, coming out of St. Louis and, and looking at Howard University, kind of many of the struggles that our country have been going through and the, the lack of fairness as African Americans were being addressed and how we were being treated as--in our society. But I also learned through those days--as a matter of fact, I think the first civil rights march I participated in as a Howard student was actually a, a march for Native American rights. So we were coming out of an era in which Wounded Knee had just happened, when Native Americans took possession of the FBI headquarters [Wounded Knee, South Dakota]. I attended a church during that time. The Antioch Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri], like many other African American churches, actually sent food supplies into those Native Americans that were being held up inside that facility. So that form of activism and standing up for what you believed in and actually fighting for what you thought was right and just was something that came straight out of our, not just my, my--the support I got at my high school [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri] as I went to Howard University, but also my church. My church was very, always very actively involved in those issues. So coming to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], it, it made sense that as we saw marches going on as a young person just exposed as I had been during my years in St. Louis, wanted to do more to help along those lines while, of course, being pressured by my parents to make sure I got through college. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now this, this march concerning Native American rights, was it ren- was that around the Leonard Peltier case? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: And, and who organized the Howard students around that, or, or how did you-- Speaker 2: It was AIM. The-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --American Indian Movement, as a matter of fact, was very active here in the D.C. area among other places, and it was AIM that organize that march as well. So a, a number of us Howard students hopped on the bus and headed downtown to participate in the march that went right in front of the FBI headquarters [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were a political science major, I take it. Speaker 2: And political, political science and communications. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was kind of a dual major. Story_ID: 613814 Speaker 1: Well who were some of your, your teachers and advisors at Howard? Speaker 2: Well, Lorton, Mr.--Dr. Lorton [ph.] was one of the more well known professors at, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at the time, then was very, very helpful as I was looking at those issues. I would also say on the communications side, Dr. Banyo [ph.], Nigerian, was also very influential in mass communications in that form of interpretation. It is kind of dissecting language, how language is, well used to, to convince people to do things, to persuade. What is effective communications was something that they very well taught, that I thought was very helpful on the communications side. Political science side was kind of straight communications in many ways. At the time I looked at going to Howard, I only thought about majoring in political science because I was told that was the field you went through if you wanted to be actively involved in the law one way or another. But as I got there, I realized that my interest was as much political as it was legal. And as we talked about, again, changing the law in the context of a democracy, it meant that you had to be influential in convincing the people, as in of the people, by the people, for the people, the people, to change their minds and hearts about how things are being done, and what should be done, and quite frankly, what our vision for an America when we do it right, when all people are treated fairly and equally and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. See, so, communications and political science, that's an interesting combination. I don't, I don't hear that a lot from people do it, but that's-- Speaker 2: It's, it's--those who are interested in going into politics for one reason or another, whether you want to work on campaigns, work for administrations, those kind of positions, along those, getting people elected, those who go into the communications field, they find themselves working for perhaps a consultancy that represents candidates for office or incumbents for that matter. It's a good, strong background. The communications component of it is, quite frankly, more of the, the tool of engagement. The political science side of it an analysis and an understanding of how things work, you know, who's going in a certain direction. It is political science in which we do polling to understand what the attitudes are and how people are leaning towards different issues and concerns. But it's the communications side of it that actually helps us advocate. And advocacy for change has always been kind of a mantra in my life. So certainly working at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we are an advocacy organization. Our primary goal is to advocate the changes in our society to make our society live up to, our government to live up to, and our communities live up all of the promises of an America that is equal, fair, and equitable. Speaker 1: And one of the features that I remember just about Howard from those days was African Liberation Day. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Was that still going on when you came to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it, it was going on then. As a matter of fact, I remember Kwame Ture coming to Howard to visit. Stokely Carmichael was his name as he was a member of the Black Panther Party--but Kwame Ture coming and talking about African Liberation Day and talking about this kind of worldwide Pan-African movement for justice and equality for all. Speaker 1: Okay. Also, in communications, WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] had very unique programming, and WHUT [WHUT-TV, Washington, D.C.], the TV station. Were you involved in, in programming any of those programs? Speaker 2: As, as a student and student intern, we had to do actually volunteer hours at the radio station as part of the, as, as part of the degree program. But I can't say I was actually involved in actually creating the, the format in any way or--was certainly contributing by making recommendations for discussions and so forth like the other students would be. But I, I never actually had a show on the air at, at Howard. I, I sat through a couple of interviews and whatnot and participated in those, but I never really did some, anything consistent along those lines with either the TV station or the radio station. But you're right: they were powerful then and quite frankly, that legacy lives on at WHUR and the radio station as well, both--pretty much WHUR. You still have those great debates and discussions on the radio in very much a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] kind of format or public radio kind of format. And you still have, of course--their television station is the public television, or one of the public television for the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area. So you, you still get a lot of that kind of discussion going on, a lot of cutting edge but very thoughtful discussion about the, the issues and challenges of our day. So they're doing, still doing a great job at Howard. Speaker 1: I know, Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette], the journalist, was here and headed up journal- did you take, take any courses from him or-- Speaker 2: No, I can't say that I did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --no, no. Speaker 1: All right. I just--you know. But, so, your communications involvement was primarily in like presentation and that sort of thing or-- Speaker 2: It, it was, it was more the, the-- Speaker 1: Speeches. Speaker 2: --the amicable speech communications. That's exactly right. Forensics was one of the terms utilized to describe that form of speech as well. Again, I involved myself in some of the debate format issues, you know, whether it's Lincoln-Douglas team debates, public speaking, dinner speaking. All of that was part of, of the communications program at Howard. So it was more, more of that on that side than the actual broadcast side of it, more of the communications analysis and so forth that went along, as I said, side by side very well with political science. Story_ID: 613815 Speaker 1: Howard University [Washington, D.C.], you, your--what were the high- highlights of those four years would you say in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well the, we always had great speakers at Howard University. I mentioned Stokely Carmichael, Kwame Ture. I remember Arthur Ashe coming to Howard to talk about the importance of, of young people, in particular those on the business track, the finding a way to spend some time working for a big corporation, learning all they could but then bringing those tools, those experiences back to the communities that we love and want to see grow and expand. I remember Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] coming and, and during the time he was in the UN and talking about the issues that were going on then and whatnot at the UN, the struggle between the Palestinians and the Israelis-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that ended up creating problems for him, of course. Speaker 1: What did you think about that? That, that was really a dramatic time for Andy Young and the Carter administration. They were really being pilloried by the, the Republicans around Andy Young's-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: --handling of the Israeli--I think he, he talked to the Palestinians or something, and that was a big-- Speaker 2: Yeah, ex- exactly. Apparently, there, there was some problem with him talking to the Palestinians separately and secretly as he was also talking to the Israelis and whatnot. And it, it created a major uproar at the UN, many say it urged him to decide to step down, as he saw it being an obstruction to the agenda of the Carter administration. But he talked a little bit about that. He talked about his experiences in the Civil Rights Movement. You know, he'd been a U.S. congressman prior to going to the United Nations and of course, a big supporter of Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] when he ran for president, which, of course, led to I think the appointment to the United Nations--but just the thoughtfulness. I mean, as you know, Young is, is both a, a politician and, and an advocate, as well as clergy. You know, he's a United Church of Christ ordained minister. So, that kind of perspective, reflective respective of, of human rights through that lens, I, I found to be just absolutely fascinating. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, who else? Are there any other people you-- Speaker 2: Well, I remember [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis coming and speaking at Howard University, but also the poets, the [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelous, the, the, the, the, Gwen Joneses [ph.], the--and, and many others came through Howard and had exposed us to really the African American culture in a, in a deeper way. I mean, certainly growing up in the African American community you're part of that culture. But the artistic side of that culture is something that you may get on television, but there was a whole level of culture that we weren't getting. And so getting, having that exposure at Howard, it was so deliberate about make--letting us see who these great people were, hearing what they were thinking about, in some cases, even sitting down and having conversation with them about what was going on in our world, their perspectives and their responses to what we were saying. So it was just absolutely fascinating. It was a great place to be. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now were you involved in fraternities or clubs on campus or-- Speaker 2: No, no, not, not directly, not directly. I, I played on the tennis team for a while. I played in the band for a while. I realized just how demanding those areas were and how much time I needed to give to my studies and just had to decide to just really focus on finishing. And that's kind of where my, all my energies went. Story_ID: 613816 Speaker 1: So after, after four years at Howard, you were--were you clear about going to law school or-- Speaker 2: No. Then I wasn't sure. I, I finished and I decided to go and, and do a program at Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts], which was a legal studies program. That was fascinating. Northeastern University has one of the premier externship programs, that is in their law school, I did something that was separate of the law school but a, a focus on legal studies just the same. But the emphasis was always on giving us experience by placing us in employers' offices, whether it was a law firm or whatever the case might very well be, and getting that experience but also the experience in the classroom. So, again, my emphasis there was, was always on not for profit legal advocacy, spent time while I was there working for Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts] in their Juvenile Law Reform Project and had a great experience there too. That was also an interesting time in the City of Boston [Massachusetts]. So here you had this midwestern boy that went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to go to school, came back to St. Louis [Missouri] for a minute, and then went to Northeastern University to do this program. And at a time-- Speaker 1: Is this a--I'm sorry. Did you find out about that from somebody in the political science department or, or what? How, how, how did you-- Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't as much political--well, I guess it was in some ways. It was some friends that were part of the political science department that I talked to in St. Louis that actually told me about this great Northeastern University program. And as such, I applied and was able to go. What I didn't know at the time is that I'd be plugged into something called the Greater Boston Legal Services. And Greater Boston Legal Services is the legal aid society arm, resources coming from, from legal services here in Washington [D.C.], Legal Services Corporation. But also he you had grants from a few other places. Our focus there and the focus of the program I worked for wasn't as much direct service to clients as it was an advocacy service. We actually spent our time doing a large volume impact litigation and my serving as something like a paralegal in that area, but also advocating our issues to the state legislature [General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts]. You know, right there in Boston, of course, is where the state capitol [Massachusetts State House] is. So as we moved to changed laws as they impacted young people, and of course, disproportionately African Americans and other racial and ethnic minorities, it gave me a new exposure to how we were treating errants, you know, those who have committed crimes, made mistakes along those lines, a chance--children in need of supervision, those here that are, that were in trouble for status offenses, you know, offenses that are only illegal because you're a youth, skipping school, being out after hours if there's a curfew. Those kind of status offenses were very much a part of the issues that we lobbied on and worked on in the state legislature. Speaker 1: Okay. So was this de- was this like a, like a student rights type-- Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't as much student rights as it was--well, it's, it in, it's inclusive of student rights, but it was actually more a youth rights, young people, juveniles. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Matter of fact, the projects I worked on was the, the, the Greater Boston Legal Services Juvenile Law Reform Project. Speaker 1: Okay, Juvenile Law Reform Project, okay. Now this is 1980, I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: 'Cause Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is president then. Now-- Speaker 2: And everything started getting cut, as a matter of fact. Reagan had a reputation as governor of California at cutting social programs including the California legal services [California Rural Legal Assistance] budget by over a third. When it came to the White House, he had in many ways that same agenda, to cut programs like this. They attacked us because, among other advocacy tools, we actually sued the state and local as well as the federal government to change their interpretation of many of its juvenile laws. And as such, of course, the, with the Reagan administration coming in, they argued that it made no sense for the federal government to give money to organizations to sue the federal government. But as such, we knew something very different. The, there needed to be tools in an operation like this if, if we're talking about government agencies. Somehow or another, if government agencies aren't complying with what Americans see as the intent of the law, then utilize the courts to actually impress upon those agencies what they need to do. So from our perspective, utilizing the courts as a tool to advocate for better youth services was something that we thought was just a great use of the, the courts. Of course, Mr. Reagan disagreed. Story_ID: 613817 Speaker 1: Is there a particular case that you remember from that period of time that really stands out, I guess (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't, nothing stands out in particular. I mean, most of my focus was on the, the state legislature [General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean was there, was--what was a issue among--before state legislature-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --that you all were-- Speaker 2: --well, some of the issues were, were smaller youth facilities, kind of moving away from kind of government warehousing to community based youth programs, youth halfway house type entities, and just youth CHINS [child in need of services] and PINS [persons in need of supervision] programs that allowed young people that got in trouble to continue to live in a community, in a more structured environment. Usually, townhouses were converted to provide assistance to these young people. And most of the young people I'm talking about are those that were in trouble and incarcerated for nonviolent offense; again, trying to keep them in a neighborhood, create some semblance of normality in a positive way, but move them out of that, that institutional format, you know, the, the big warehouse styled juvenile facilities. So, in many ways, it was a, oftentimes referred to as a deinstitutionalization of the process, moving to make it better, a more effective tool to be able to help children that are crying out for help in a manner that's gotten them in trouble, get on the straight and narrow, and then reintegrate them back into their communities as more constructive, contributing members of their, of their communities. Speaker 1: Okay. Now as there a community organizing aspect to this? Speaker 2: To, to a certain extent but not directly done by a legal services, or Greater Boston Legal Service [Greater Boston Legal Services, Boston, Massachusetts], or the Juvenile Law Reform Project. But there were oftentimes, religious based programs that interacted with these juvenile based programs to help with, the young people get a, a clearer understanding of, of, of the moral implications, and in some cases, they provided good examples to the kids of, of kind of mentoring type programs. They would assign someone from a congregation to become like a big brother or big sister to some of the children, the young people that were involved in these community based facilities. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So how long were you-- Speaker 2: It was just two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two year program. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Then I came back to, to St. Louis [Missouri] and, and did a program at the University of Missouri - St. Louis, and so I made my way back to, to my hometown. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1982 then. Speaker 2: Well, actually it's '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay, '83 [1983], University of Missouri - St. Louis. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: All right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and then I came back and did a graduate program, again, focusing on communications, basically oratory communications, again, the, the study of communications formatting and, and effect. Story_ID: 613818 Speaker 1: Now did you, were you thinking in those days of becoming a politician? Speaker 2: Well, I, I hadn't thought as much about running for office as I thought about impacting those in office. It is at that point that through my years at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], at Northeastern [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], I was also exposed to student advocacy groups, the United States Student Association, as a matter of fact, another organization that is still operating right here in Washington [D.C.] and has units all over the country. The U.S. Student Association became fascinating to me, because here we now had a student organization that was made up of student governments from hundreds of schools and universities throughout the country. This primary job was to focus in on how we make our schools stronger in a way that can facilitate more young people being able to go to colleges and universities and being effective, but also recognizing that part of that meant an interaction engagement with the federal government. The U.S. Student Association was the first organization that I worked for, that I worked with I should say as I sat on the national board of directors, that actually moved to first set an agenda, allowing all those delegates, thousands from across the country, to come together, usually at some college campus someplace in the country, to decide what the agenda is in kind of a, a political action format, kind of like a, a political party. Delegates were elected; we'd come together, talk about the issues that affected young people in our country. Out of that, debate, discuss and actually pass an agenda that's reflective of that. You know, we want more money for Pell Grants, you know, lower origination fees and interest rates on student loans; we wanted grants to cover more of the tuition; we wanted to change--wanted to end apartheid in South Africa. We took on a lot of the social issues of our day, but also kind of the nuts and bolts issues of being able to be successful and matriculating through colleges and universities. So that was my first experience actually with the kind of engagement on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] that in many ways I still do today. Story_ID: 613819 Speaker 1: University of Missouri - St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri]. Now you were work- working on master's degree in communications, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Exactly. At the same time, I was very active in student politics, student government. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in that capacity that I served as the, as the vice president of the Student Government Association at the University of Missouri - St. Louis campus, while at the same time, I was elected to serve on the board of directors for the United States Student Association. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay-- Speaker 2: So it's kind of how that combined experience and exposure I have. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so, now what was your--who were the, I guess, teachers and mentors at University of Missouri - St. Louis? Speaker 2: I, I think about people like Tom Snyder [ph.]. Tom was the communicat- the for- oratory communications forensics professor. So in addition to studying oratory forensics and, and we were also studying--we were also involved in the, the, the oratory forensics team. We called it that at the University of Missouri, but this is just the debate and public speaking team that competed with other colleges and universities. But it was Tom that really exposed me in many ways and got me excited about how effective and important it was to have that tool of being able to disaggregate and actually--what's the word I'm looking for--dissect communications. Tom just had this way about him. He was a, a North Carolinian. If you looked at him, he looked liked your, your average white guy. But once he opened his mouth, once you got passed that deep southern accent, what you got to was somebody who was a very progressive thinker and really helped me get a hands on understanding of, of how communi- important communications is and these tools. It was Tom that had me write one of my first papers dissecting one of Ronald Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] speeches. It was Tom that took us on a road to participate in Lincoln-Douglas style debates. I was always involved in after dinner speaking, television, commentating, that kind of stuff. We're, we're part, was all part of the competition in oratory forensics and so forth. So it was, it was a fascinating time for me and very eye opening in a lot of ways being at the University of Missouri during those days. Speaker 1: And you had--and, and your teacher has the name of the most, I guess, recognized talk show host in those days, Tom, Tom Snyder. Speaker 2: Oh (laughter), not the same person. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's not. Yeah, I'm clear, not, not the same one, but he had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --the same name as this-- Speaker 2: Ab- exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I, I didn't realize that at the time, of course. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't know the other Tom Snyder. Speaker 1: I just thought--when you said Tom Snyder, I thought back to the, the, the late night talk show host with the cigarette and who interviewed everybody like Charlie Rose does now pretty much, but yeah. Speaker 2: No, this guy was more in the, in, as, as close as you get to the science of speech communications and not at, in the process of being able to speak clearly, but, but in the, in being able to convey ideas, persuasive ideas, understanding what works, what doesn't work. I mean, I still remember so clearly sitting down with him and talking about why a Ronald Reagan speech to arm the Contras in Nicaragua was so effective. But it was Tom's analysis and his engagement with us, and, and me in particular, that really helped me understand well, why first, Ronald Reagan was considered such a, an effective communicator, but also, why it was so important to hone those skills if you were going to try to move to change the minds and hearts of the American people, to move more towards the just agenda that's always been in my heart, with my experiences and upbringing. Story_ID: 613820 Speaker 1: You're a young man during the Reagan administration years and stuff. Well, what, what did you--what was your impression of Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in those days? Was it as a laboratory experi- (laughter), you know, specimen to examine or what? What did you think of him? Speaker 2: Well, there, there were two sides to it. I mean, growing up in the African American community, living in the African American community at that time, and looking at the policies of Ronald Reagan and versus looking at the demeanor and the person, the communicator that, of that president of the United States as he speaks to the American people on television, kind of like those two sides to it. So as we look at him as a person, his ability to communicate, you know, who he was as a person, the President Ronald Reagan, and of course, that image that carries forth all of us through the, the, the media and, and the like, what I got more was someone who came in at a time when American felt that it needed more, the appearance of more stability. You know, Ronald Reagan was somebody that at least carried with him the demeanor of being self assured, comfortable in his own skin, meaning that he slow--he spoke very slowly and metholog- meth--methology (laughter)--in, in a methodo--meth (laughter)--in a myth- in a methological way, methological, I guess the word I'm looking for is minal- methological way [methodological], but at the same time, he's someone that was actually advocating an agenda that we found to be very dangerous and difficult to the African American community. On the policy side of it, we looked at things like, the first he did the first year he came in is move to cut the higher education budget, much the same way he'd done in California. But now he was moving to cut the budget, at same time appointed someone to head the [U.S.] Department of Education whose primary goal in life was to eliminate the Department of Education, as he'd said to the U.S. Congress many times before that. That was Bill Bennett [William Bennett]. It was, so it was that side of, of the Ronald Reagan experience in, in my--through the lens I was seeing the world in as a college student at the time, that I wasn't very pleased with that policy side of Ronald Reagan. It was also a time when our economy was having major challenges. Farmers were, were losing their homes at record numbers. People were losing jobs. The unemployment rate was beginning to go way up. And of course, African Americans were disproportionately represented in kind of the worst things in our society. And at a time when we were seeing the, the need for greater control over things like violence and guns and so forth, we had a president that was very supportive of the NRA [National Rifle Association] and felt that the guns should be very easily accessible. So it's kind of a difference in perspective, one hand looking at the perspective he was holding, the--his--and, and having the relationships he had with the NRA and other groups; on the other side of it, looking at the damage that was being done in the communities I lived in, the folks I knew, the neighborhood I grew up in, you know, the '70s [1970s] were a time when businesses were--businesses were folding towards the, the latter years of the '70s [1970s], moving south. It was a time of so called right to work laws, undercutting the unions, and, and allowing big corporations to do better if they move south, and eliminated the unions altogether. It was an era of the PATCO strike [Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization] and the, the big Reagan move to fire the workers that sent a chilling effect throughout the-- Speaker 1: The air traffic controllers, right. That was-- Speaker 2: That's, that's exactly right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) first big blow to unions in this country. Speaker 2: It, it certainly was; it certainly was. So it was it, it was an, an interesting time for me and looking, kind of looking, especially looking back on it now and those experiences going on. So it was different. It was different, and I, and I guess in many ways I'd grown up in, in the African American community in a very civil rights driven way. I'd--my experiences going through college, universities, internships and the like, Boston [Massachusetts], St. Louis [Missouri], whatever the case might be, and Washington, D.C., was always an exposure to a more progressive politics that would push me to, to try to change how things were working to see human beings as a primary issue of focus, but seeing others, or seeing, you know, corporate interests and those other things as important to the economic stability of our country, but should never be put ahead of the quality of life, civil rights, and human rights. Story_ID: 613821 Speaker 1: I know we, we looked back at Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and Jimmy Carter had a friendly persona, seemed to be persuasive, but something went wrong it seemed--he, he--it seemed to all fall to the ground at some point. What, do, do you have any thoughts about that for, for those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, looking back-- Speaker 1: --and study of-- Speaker 2: I think Jimmy Carter was a very thoughtful president. I think he was one that ushered a, an agenda of civil rights protection and equality. He was someone that clearly understood the, the conditions that the African American community was in and actually recommended programs and policies that helped move beyond that condition to help lift things up. It was under the Carter administration that resources were put in job creation programs and, and other programs in our society. More resources were put into our public schools, and we saw an increases in financial aid programs under the Carter administration that we saw a repealing of as we went into the Reagan administration. It was very different. But Jimmy Carter was different. I think probably one of the challenges with Carter is, Carter was, was very, very thoughtful. He was, he was very calm and laid back in many ways. And I think some interpreted that more as a weakness than as a strength, the strength of trying to understand better the diversity that is America. I saw it as a strength in trying to make sure that the issues and challenges of every community were addressed, and there was an open door along those lines. So I saw Jimmy Carter very differently. I think the, the thing that, that got Carter is, is his very humanitarian driven agenda. I mean, it was under the Carter administration that we decided not to go to the Olympics [1980 Summer Olympics, Moscow, Russia] and actually to, to boycott business and, and food issues and whatnot with Soviet Union. It was under the Carter administration that we utilized those humanitarian approaches to addressing a, a pro-human agenda, for the lack of better term. But Jimmy Carter was very much there. I think between that and of course, as we moved into the, the, the Olympic boycott, but moving from there to, of course, the Iranian hostages and the administration not moving in a very hawk type way, I mean, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] is still a place and our country unfortunately still sees everyone here in many ways, to the most part, through a lens of being hawks or doves. I think that what he had in Jimmy Carter was someone with a dove's heart and the desire to see peace through fairness, through social justice, through, through all, other forms of justice. And we had in, in Ronald Reagan more of a president that saw peace through armaments. I mean, he oftentimes talked about caring that big stick and that we could get peace through war, see, which--yeah. So at any rate, those, those were kind of the mantras during the day and whatnot. Speaker 1: Well it does, it still seems to be a topic of discussion that progressives have a harder time communicating their ideas because they're complicated ideas-- Speaker 2: True, sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) not simple, and you know, it's easier to be, to say the things that Ronald Reagan said than to say the things that Jimmy Carter was trying to communicate. Speaker 2: Oh, sure, it's always more complex when you have an agenda that moves very deliberatively to represent and recognize the concerns of the great diversity that's just this country. But then when you talk about the rest of the world, it's even more complex. I mean, certainly, the United States is still the most racially and ethnically diverse country on the face of the earth. In that context, if you're going to serve all those people, a sensitivity to the differences can be a very complex issue, a very complex approach. But we oftentimes talk about that as we look at the disparities that we still live with even today. And we need more of that consciousness, I think, that Jimmy Carter so clearly exuded, and I think we see some of that in the president we have today. If we're going to talk about the unemployment rate, at some point we've gotta talk about why is it that some communities end up having a worse unemployment rate than others regardless of where the overall unemployment rate is. And the truth to the matter is, on any given day, the unemployment rate among African Americans is twice that of white Americans. White Americans are looking at right around 8 percent, African Americans around 16 percent. It's a big difference, and it's always been that way, even during a time when the unemployment rate was considered acceptable. You know, 4, 5 percent unemployment overall, we still saw that the unemployment among African Americans was twice as high. At some point, those who represent our country should ask those questions and then move to address those problems, again, through that lens. We saw some of that in Jimmy Carter. We see some of that in Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. But we really didn't see that in, in Mr. Reagan. Story_ID: 613822 Speaker 1: Now what was your thesis about for your master's degree [at the University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]? Did you have a thesis to write? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. It, it was, it was on the communications, implications of the Reagan administration on the Iran Contra war [Iran Contra Affair]. Speaker 1: Well, what was your, what were your findings (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, my findings were that the president was very effective at communicating to the American people the need to actually put more resources and even arm the Contras, as he compared the Contras to the founding fathers of the United States. And he compared the--he compared the Sandinistas to a rebel, a rowdy group trying to overthrow a legitimate government. Speaker 1: That seems a strange way to--you know, it's, it's--I hear what you're saying, and I know, and, and that worked for Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], but-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --actually though, it would seem like the U.S. would be the rebels and you know, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: But, I agree with you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and that's what we played in many ways. But it was kind of the earlier stages, so the, the Contras were, were, seemed to be those who wanted to--keep in mind what had happened in Nicaragua, maybe that's helpful as we go back a little bit. As you know, the president of Nicaragua prior to the, the uprising, prior to the, the revolution, as they called it, was very heavily supported by the United States government. When they overtook the government and actually had their first election, bringing Daniel Ortega and others into power, the Nicaraguan and whatnot, the Contras were actually the old national guard of that previous president. But they were now organized, tried to overthrow them because the, the, the Sandinistas had a close relationship with Cuba at a time that the Soviet Union was still intact. So you had a lot going on at the same time that played well into the big Cold War that was happening and the arguments over not having another Soviet satellite in the Americas and Nicaragua. And there were many pictures of, of Fidel Castro visiting Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega visiting Cuba, and in many ways the, the social programs that Cuba was well known for were then being implemented in Nicaragua. But in much the same way, Nicaragua was a country with--that was very split economically, much like Cuba was prior to the Castro revolutions, that is, you had a very small upper-class, the wealthiest of the wealthiest. You had almost no middle class, and then you had a huge underclass, those who were poor, in some cases couldn't read, that didn't receive healthcare or, or full education in the country at the time. So it was amazing how similar they made that comparison as well. But what Ronald Reagan argued was that these Contras were moving in the spirit--and knowing what had happened prior to that point, that these Contras were moving in the spirit of the founding founders to overthrow a to- totalitarian government that they compared very much to, to that of Great Britain during those colonial days. Story_ID: 613823 Speaker 1: Now what did you do after graduate school? Speaker 2: That came to the--I came to Washington, D.C. As I was finishing my program at the University of Missouri - St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], one of the big issues for us was apartheid in South Africa. And the big movement among colleges and universities was to divest holdings in all corporations that do business in South Africa. This is a time in which, of course, Nelson Mandela was in Robben Island [South Africa]. It was a time in which apartheid was the law of the land in South Africa, and of course, the colonial power of the, the, of South Africa was one that was affecting the entire region. So it was an amazing time along those lines. We were working then as students in a progressive movement to not support those corporations or U.S. interests that would exploit people of African descent in South Africa. So, I had, I met with a guy named Damu Smith. Among other things I did as a student, I also sat on advisory board while with the U.S. Student Association [U.S. National Student Association], with the American Committee on Africa out of New York [New York], with TransAfrica [TransAfrica Forum; TransAfrica] here in Washington, D.C., and the Washington Office on Africa, which also here in Washington, D.C. These were the three premier Africa focus groups working on apartheid and South Africa issues and focusing on those nine southern states of South Af- of Southern Africa and how the Republic of South Africa was affecting even their stability. So, Damu Smith was someone I'd met in some of those meetings. I was finishing up and really wanted to come back to Washington and get involved in an advocacy type organization and position but wanted to focus on the federal government, on the [U.S.] Congress and the government agencies, of course. We were finishing up my program at the same time we were also finishing up a disinvestment of corporations doing business in South Africa that were in the university's portfolio, both their endowment portfolios as well as their pension funds. We were able to convince then Governor Ashcroft [John Ashcroft] from Missouri, that later became the attorney general of the United States and Senator Ashcroft prior to becoming attorney, as, as well as a Republican treasurer in Missouri, a guy named Wendell Bailey, that it was not in the best interest of the State of Missouri nor the University of Missouri to invest funds in corporations that do business in South Africa that many argued took over 750,000 jobs out of the United States to South Africa, where they force black people to work for less money than white folks, where the law of the land prohibited black folks from supervising over white folks, or moving to high--and corporate structure, so and where security and--well, where, where calm was created through force, the guns. And we were seeing all the videos of Soweto [South Africa], the, the videos of uprisings in other parts of South African, and, and the very harsh response from South African military forces and others, killing so many South African blacks along the way. So with all that going, we were able to convince the governor--at first the, first the treasurer of the state, who was also a Republican, that it made no sense for Missouri to invest money in corporations that are taking jobs out of Missouri anyway and actually working against the very issues of the students. Most students were going to college to prepare themselves for jobs. Doesn't make sense for us to take student money and put it into corporations that are taking those jobs our students want out of the country to have people doing it that were, they pay much less money. We shouldn't have to compete with that, especially with our money. And they got it, and indeed the governor signed a bill that was introduced and passed through the state legislature that the students were actually involved in pushing. We were able to get the board (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is--I'm sorry. This is nineteen eighty--'84 [1984]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We were able to get the, we were able to get the university to divest all of this money from holdings in corporations doing business in South Africa through its Board of Curators. It's what they called their board of regents, and they call it in some other place the Board of Curators. And I remember those fights and whatnot during my years at the University of Missouri. Speaker 1: You all were good then. You, you were really paying attention in class. Speaker 2: We, we, we worked it out. As a matter of fact, I, I think I, I had to be, be too pushy about it, but I think in some ways we, we added something to those classroom conversations with what we did outside. Some of the professors really appreciated it. As a matter of fact, because this was as much a movement in the political science arena, most of the political science apret- professors were really fascinated by the work we were doing and very supportive along those lines. But also, when you talk about disinvestment, that's actually a business term, and the University of Missouri also had a business school [University of Missouri - St. Louis College of Business Administration, St. Louis, Missouri]. And we were able to engage the business student government as well into some of the things we were doing that draw a parallel for us to even Harvard's business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. I mean, the arguments we were making were not just social justice arguments. They were business arguments. They were investment stabilities arguments. They were arguments about which divet- which investment portfolios would derive the best return for the university, for its professors as they retired, but also the running of the school, as we're talking about programs along those lines. See, it was a, it was a fascinating thing, getting those different sectors, and very eye opening for me, involved in a movement to actually impact what was going on in South Africa by involving ourselves into social corporate behavior here in the United States. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you getting paid to do any of these, these activities at that time? Speaker 2: Not really. As a matter of fact, while I was at the University of Missouri, because I held office, we got a stipend, you know, which went to pay my tuition and that kind of thing and whatnot. So it freed me up in some ways to be able to do this kind of work, but it was all voluntary. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I figured you kind of on a lean budget there. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I was poor student. Story_ID: 613824 Speaker 1: So when you came, you came, you came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know, was there a job waiting for you here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. As a matter of fact-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when we were working on the South African issue, as we, we had just closed the deal with the state government, the state government had already agreed to, and we went to the signing of the disinvestment bill of the State of Missouri pension funds of the corporations doing business in South Africa. We hadn't quite closed the deal yet on the university [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and their pension funds as well as their endowments in univer- in corporations doing business in South Africa as well. We held a big demonstration at the kind of mass school, the masthead school of the University of Missouri system. There are four college campuses. The biggest one was the University of Missouri in Columbia [Missouri], about twenty-five thousand students at that university. We were holding a big demonstration there and had invited Damu Smith, who was the president of the Washington Office on Africa, to come in and give a major address to all the students and all others participating in that movement. My job was to drive Mr. Smith from St. Louis [Missouri] to the University of Missouri, Columbia, about, about an, an hour and a half drive, maybe 125 miles from St. Louis, and so I picked him up. And so I had about two hours of uninterrupted time to talk to President Smith going and about two hours to talk to President Smith coming back. What came up in the conversation was, "I'm finishing my program here. I would love an opportunity to come back to Washington, D.C. What's going on?" And Damu said you know, "My legislative director is quite pregnant and planning a maternity leave. She's going to be out for at least four months, and I could really use somebody then to help carry things over while she's gone." And I said, "Great. I'll be very interested." I think he saw how well we were organized as we pushed in Columbia. Our conversation back was about all the works we'd done around the sidelines and the work we'd done with the state legislature, as well as the uni- university itself. And he said you know, "I'd be very interested in considering you for the position; send me your resume and so forth. We'll find an opportunity to bring you out to Washington, show you exactly what's going on, as, along with some other folks we're considering for the position, and we'll make a decision." So, great, gave him all my information and whatnot. We talked back and forth throughout the holiday season going into Thanksgiving and then into the Christmas holiday season. He flew me in the first part of January to meet with the staff and talk with the woman that was running the legislative program at the time, and invited me to come, saying, "I'll, I got four months for you; that's all I can guarantee. She's gonna take at least four months. If she takes longer, I want you to stay longer. But if she doesn't, don't worry about it." I said, "Brother, that's an awfully long way to come for a four month stay." He said, "Well," he said, "look, D.C. is one of those places that you--there's always work in the area that we're involved in," and whatnot. So I took him on his word, and that was over twenty years ago. And I should knock on wood, but there's always been work for me in Washington, D.C., in the area of civil rights and human rights expansion. Story_ID: 613825 Speaker 1: Okay, so you became the legislative coordinator for--what's the name of his project (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's, it's called a director position-- Speaker 1: Okay, director. Speaker 2: --in the Washington Office on Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, Washington Office on Africa. And you mentioned that organization along with TransAfrica [TransAfrica Forum; TransAfrica] Ran- [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson and-- Speaker 2: Robinson's group and the American Committee on Africa-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --were all, they, those were all kind of the central, national organizations working on addressing the issue of apartheid in South Africa. But also within that coalition included many other civil rights organizations, like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], labor unions, AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], AFSCME [American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees], United Mine Workers [United Mine Workers of America], were very, very actively involved in, in this movement around South Africa, women's organizations and other. So it was, it was, it was huge. It was a big coalition that deserves an awful lot of credit for being able to successfully change the laws in the United States that send a resonating signal all over the world that South African apartheid was not acceptable. And unless they stop doing business this way, our country's gonna stop doing business with South Africa, and it worked; it was an effective strategy. Speaker 1: Now, did, did you work with the Congressional Black Caucus on-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: At the time, the Congressional Black Caucus members who were very actively engaged with us, were people like Walter Fauntroy [HistoryMaker Reverend Walter Fauntroy], and Walter Fauntroy was the, the delegate for Washington, D.C. Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was on the banking committee. And many of the sanctions against South Africa included sanctions and currency, so Bill Gray was actively involved along those lines as well. Senator Lugar [Richard Lugar] from Indiana was also very actively involved in legislation on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] to change the law in how the United States did business with South Africa, but so was Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums]. Probably the most comprehensive anti-apartheid piece of legislation, arguably, that made its way through the U.S. Congress was Ron Dellums' bill [Comprehensive Anti Apartheid Act of 1986]. As a matter of fact, many argued that it was the Dellums' bill that South Africa was most afraid of, the apartheid South Africa was most afraid of, to be quite specific. Speaker 1: Okay. And his bill stipulated what now? Speaker 2: His bill was sanctions in every area, landing rights; corporations doing business there wouldn't be able to enjoy the same benefits as they, they do going into other countries and so forth, so taking some of that back; some of--they'll be trade barriers, actually an embar- a trade embargo on South Africa. As you know, South Africa produces a lot of goods and whatnot in many areas. And there are many U.S. corporations that were doing business in South Africa in the manufacturing arena that would end up being hurt by the laws and so forth. So it was a, in many ways, it was one of the most specific bills that pressured U.S. corporations and others to demand the right thing, something more consistent with the Leon Sullivan principles around corporate behavior, that if you're going to be in South Africa doing business, then the same standards for civil rights and employment protections that we apply in the United States should be applied in South Africa as well. And in many ways, that was very effective a well and effective too. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, but--we're, we're talking about, this is 1984, '85 [1985], I guess, moving towards (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, eight- eighty--yeah '83 [1983], '84 [1984], yeah, yeah, in that realm. Speaker 1: So, so this is a last, this is last stretch toward a free South Africa, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: The last five, six years towards-- Speaker 2: And as a matter of fact-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --one of the things that I am very, very excited about, very satisfied with, and maybe more so than I should, is having been someone that came to Washington to work in the Free South Africa Movement. And I was working for the Washington Office on Africa at the time and the day that Nelson Mandela was freed from prison. I still remember from my little Capitol Hill apartment, basement apartment, to be exact, on that Saturday afternoon, watching Nelson Mandela coming out of Robben Island [South Africa] and then going to speak before the South African people in a series of speeches. So it was very satisfying in a lot of ways to have actually been here, though this was in a movement that started long before I came to Washington, D.C., but to have had the good luck of being here at the time when that major ground step--that, that, that major ground movement occurred in our society, in our world for that matter. Speaker 1: Did, did it, did it take you by surprise? Now you're kind of on the inside of this. But I know I had some interaction with, with a group in Chicago [Illinois] and worked with them also, but I was so- kind of surbri- surprised when it happened. It took me kind of off-- Speaker 2: I think in some ways we all were. We all--people, we all work for that day; we all hoped that it would happen one day, and we hoped it would happen in, in our lifetime. But apartheid had been the law of the land in South Africa for a long time. And there were--a lot of the pressure was mounting and we were seeing more countries actually decide and do the same thing we were pushing the United States to do, so there was a, a movement underway. And I think I wasn't as surprised that they freed Nelson Mandela from prison at the time they did. You know, his health was up and down during much of the time he was in Robben Island. And I think many predicted that if for some reason he had passed away while being behind bars, that the kind of uprising in South Africa would have been irrepressible and would have been extremely violent and, and otherwise problematic. So there was no surprise to most of us that they would want to get him out of prison before anything like that could possibly happen. But I think the thing that was most amazing to so many of us, was having him not only walk out of prison, but actually move through the electoral process and walk into the presidency. That was the amazing thing for many of us. We dared dream of a free South Africa. But I don't think ma- and most of us, I think we have to admit to our self of selves that becoming the president was extraordinary. Story_ID: 613826 Speaker 1: Were there any other milestones in those, those I guess six or seven years-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --you were there? Speaker 2: --just during the time we, we were working in the Free South Africa Movement, we were also effective in helping other states pass the kind of anti-apartheid legislation we passed in the State of Missouri. Much of that tied to the country of Namibia that was actually a colony of South Africa during those days as well and the struggles going on during that time. You know, one of the more interesting things is, the president of Namibia, or the first African president of Namibia that wasn't under South African control, was a guy named Sam Nujoma. And Sam Nujoma used to come to the United States and come to the Washington Office on Africa every few months or so. He'd come to the office, talk about what they were doing, talk about the anti-apartheid movement and so forth, and the struggles they had in Namibia. And to have the guy that became the president just walking through your office from time to time, and it was not a, a posh office. It was a not for profit organization office that was probably the next step up from a church basement. So it was that kind of thing and whatnot. But having, having that experience, having met people that were actually in the trenches, on the ground trying to liberate their countries and end these oppressive regimes and governments was an amazing thing for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you stay active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I guess from, I guess going all the way back to the youth N--I mean were you still active all the way through Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and all that coming up to this point, point? Speaker 2: Well, through Howard kind of on and off. And--I would go to some meetings that the NAACP had and whatnot I knew was going on. I wasn't as actively engaged. We had students that were. But I wasn't quite as, as actively engaged on a day to day basis. I didn't hold an, an office at the Howard chapter of the NAACP during my years there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So I'm leading up to the, '91 [1991]. I think Nelson Mandela was, was freed in '91 [sic. 1990], was, was-- Speaker 2: It was something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 613827 Speaker 1: You play a critical role in the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1991. Speaker 2: Yes, that-- Speaker 1: So tell us about that. Speaker 2: As I transitioned from the Washington Office on Africa to National IMPACT [National IMPACT Education Fund], National IMPACT and then on to the, the United Methodist Church. National IMPACT was a coalition of trade unions, religious organizations, and others focusing in on a number of issues, including civil rights concerns, poverty and with a specific emphasis on women and children in poverty and South Africa. That was also my transition out of the Washington Office on Africa as that part of my portfolio. So we were involved in, in a number of those issues. And the--in 1990--1989 I believe, the [U.S.] Supreme Court handed down a series of decisions that actually chiseled away at some of the civil rights protections for women, children, and, and racial and ethnic minorities in our society, a series of, a, a series of court cases. We moved then after that decision--those five decisions were made--to create a piece of legislation called-- Speaker 1: Let's--what were the five decisions? You can put it in perspective for me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, boy. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not sure I remember those cases-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at this point. Speaker 1: Well, was, was Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] one of the cases? That (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is after Bakke. Speaker 1: After Bakke, okay. Speaker 2: Bakke was during the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was Virginia versus--this was the Croson decision [City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 1989]. It was, oh, god--yeah, the Croson and a few other decisions were all part of this package. Speaker 1: Well, just kind of summarize them if you--you don't have to go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure, sure. The--these were decisions that, that stripped away the effectiveness of affirmative action programs at, at a level. It didn't go directly--well, in some ways I guess it did go after affirmative action programs in the area of contracting with cities and states. It went--it chiseled away at civil rights protections in employment and a few other concerns along those lines. So these were a series of bills that actually chiseled away at the existing protections of civil rights for many Americans at, at a number of levels. Women, racial and ethnic minorities were all affected by these civil rights cases. It began to shift away from the in--the outcome of discrimination and focused more in on intent, which made it much harder for us to make cases against discrimination in our society. That, it was, it was an amazing time. What it--we end up doing is the Civil Rights Act of 1990 [Kennedy Hawkins civil rights bill], and I was very actively involved then at the--by that point, I was at the, I was at, at the, I, I was still at National IMPACT. But part of that point, I shifted from National IMPACT over to the United Methodist Church's General Board of Church and Society. The General Board of Church and Society is one of the five agencies of the international United Methodist Church, both national and international. They fo- focus on its legislative or public policy agenda, much like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], except we do it every year. Every four years the United Methodist Church meets in general conference and determines, among other things, what its social justice policy is going ahead for the next four years. Now it's where at that point I'm working for the United Methodist Church. The decision was made during the time I was still with National IMPACT and then went to the United Methodist Church. During my time with the United Methodist Church is when we actually tried to push the legislation through and had [President] George Herbert Walker Bush veto the bill. Then we came back--this is also kind of a backdrop, this is also a time period in which Thurgood Marshall was retiring from the U.S. Supreme Court. Clarence Thomas was now nominated by George Herbert Walker Bush to serve on the Supreme Court. We had these very problematic decisions that were handed down. We were, we were going back to the U.S. Congress to actually clean up these decisions by introducing a bill called the Civil Rights Act of 1990. George Bush, Herbert Walker Bush, vetoed the bill in 1990. We came back and the leadership was another person from my hometown. The, the Republican that introduced the Civil Rights of 1990 and then on through the Civil Rights Act of 1991 was--oh, god, I'm, I'm, I'm losing his name. I'll think of it in a second. His brother [William Henry Danforth] was the president [sic. chancellor] at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] at the time. Speaker 1: Oh, not Dan- Danforth? Speaker 2: Danforth. Speaker 1: Danforth, yeah Speaker 2: Thank you so much. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: John Danforth. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's exactly who it was. John Danforth was always a, a moderate and a big supporter of social justice issues. But the president was in disagreement of this one. So we had those struggles. At the same time, Clarence Thomas actually came to Washington [D.C.] with John Danforth. As a matter of fact, he came in, and Clarence Thomas had served as the, the, the civil rights person for the, the edu- [U.S.] Department of Education but also served as the chairman of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] at the time, which was some of the reasons that many of us raised concerns about him serving on the se- Supreme Court. He had a very problematic history in our opinion. But now he's serving on the D.C. Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit], which is a holding ground oftentimes for those who are being considered for the Supreme Court. That happens with both sides, Democrats and Republicans. At the same time, all of this is going on, I'm moving now to the, to the General Board of Church and Society of the United Methodist Church to focus then on was--and the first big issue I worked on in that capacity was the church's opposition to Clarence Thomas on the Supreme Court Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, following the lead of the NAACP, the, the United Methodist Church decided that it would oppose Clarence Thomas' confirmation to the Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I served as a staff person during that time period. Story_ID: 613828 Speaker 1: What was the feeling in the African American community about Clarence Thomas in those days? I mean, I, I know there was mixed feelings about-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: --what happened. Speaker 2: Probably more so then than now. Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Speaker 2: Well, what you had was is, someone that had come up the ranks as Clarence Thomas did. Grew up in Pin Point, Georgia, so the assumption is he had experience and understood the struggles of African Americans in the, in the poorest, most challenged areas like Pin Point, Georgia. But then you had a lot of information coming out about his track record on civil rights. You know, one of the things I think that probably raised an eyebrow for most African Americans was when Thurgood Marshall was retiring, [President] George Herbert Walker Bush had already decided who his nominee was going to be. And I'll never forget sitting in an interview talking to the president, who's sitting in his chair the whole time holding his cane in one hand. One of the reporters asked the, asked the Supreme Court justice, "What do you think of this guy, Clarence Thomas?" And his response was, "Who is he? I've never heard of him." In essence, there were in--there were people in the civil rights communities that were very well known for, for their work around the Supreme Court, very well known for their work in the area of civil rights, people that would have been very strongly considered for a position like this. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: But this Clarence Thomas guy, who-- Speaker 1: It'd been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) no one really knew in the established civil rights community, and certainly Thurgood Marshall didn't know who he was, I, I was thinking in many people's mind the alarm went off then. Well, who is this guy that George Herbert Walker, that didn't get very much African American support when he ran for president--at think at best he pulled about 11 percent of the African American vote. Who is he? And I think as that question began to be answered and people looked at his track record with, not as much with Danforth [John Danforth], but more so at the [U.S.] Department of Education and then on to the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. And then some of the decisions that, that he was now, that he'd, he'd now produced sitting on the, the appellate courts [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit], raised some concerns for many. And as we dug deeper, I think many decided that he was not the best choice to fill a position that was held by someone with such staunch, such a staunch record on civil rights as Thurgood Marshall. I mean Thurgood Marshall had tried more cases before the Supreme Court than all of the Supreme Court justices put together had done before they went on the court. So you had somebody with that tremendous level of experience, and now you had the guy that even Thurgood Marshall didn't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--I know people were pulling for the Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and people like [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers, other people out here that already had a-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. There-- Speaker 1: --record. Speaker 2: --there are plenty of well known, well established civil rights lawyers, and even judges in some of these cases, that many would have argued would have been much better suited to go to the Supreme Court with a kind of background that, that most of us believed we needed on that court, having lost one of the most incredible voices in the history of the U.S. Supreme Court. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so at any rate, that--so, then the, the Anita Hill aspect of the--tell us about that, 'cause that's such an important (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, all that was happening-- Speaker 1: --part of this. Speaker 2: --while I was working for the United Methodist Church [General Board of Church and Society]. See, we were looking more at his record. None of the Anita Hill scandal was included in any of that information. It was more of how he did in the agency positions that he held, how he handled civil rights issues. And we found out that he'd let over a thousand age discrimination cases actually expire during his time at EEOC. We, along with others, had to go to the U.S. Congress and ask for an extension of those deadlines so that we could get those cases in and whatnot in time and not have them dismissed. I mean, those, those kind of issues about his track record were things we'd focus in on. The Anita Hill scandal, for many of us, came out of nowhere. And certainly when you're looking at a Supreme Court justice, somebody who's gonna get a lifetime appointment to make such important decisions--I mean, the Supreme Court is the court of, of last resorts, for all Americans for that matter--it's important that we scrutinize that person's background, history, sensibilities, and other things along those lines, and judicial temperament, as we say in this arena. But when we looked at what was going on with Clarence Thomas and when this Anita Hill issue came out, I think all of us stopped for a minute. On one hand, it was an amazing thing to see such an aspersion being cast on a Supreme Court nominee. On the other side of it, it raised concerns about what kind of Supreme Court justice he would be if these things were true. So let me just say that even before any consideration of Anita Hill, I think most of us had decided that Clarence Thomas was just a bad idea and that we really needed more of the Julius Chamber type; we really needed someone who had a history in experience in these areas that could actually follow such a robust and rich tradition as Thurgood Marshall had left behind on the Supreme Court. Story_ID: 613829 Speaker 1: I'd always been convinced that, you know, changing people's minds, that people who convert to anything, whether it's a religion, a political ideology or whatever, sometimes become our most effective advocates, because they came from one position, disagreeing with you. But something that was shared with them, some experience, some knew knowledge, some new information, some new facts, actually helped changed their minds, their perspectives, and now they agree with you. I've seen too many, too many times where they become the most effective and successful advocates in those areas, because they, they then knew what all of the arguments were against the, the issue, but now they know the reasons for it. And for some reason, all that adds up to us supporting it. You know, when I was a student government president at the University of Missouri--vice president at the University of Missouri - St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], there was a guy named Dave that would come in and see me all the time. Dave was a card carrying member of the John Birch Society. As you can imagine, with, with my political philosophies and, and ideologies, that we were very different in a lot of ways. But there was something about Dave--Dave Williams [ph.] was his name, as a matter of fact--that impressed me. He was Caucasian. He was in his early twenties. He lived about sixty miles outside of St. Louis [Missouri] and drove in to go to school every day. So he drove over an hour every day to get to and from school in the, the small he lived in. So in some ways, he was kind of your traditional person, kind of isolated from a lot of diversity, but very clearly had an ideology that was spoon fed to him on a regular basis, and that, of course, was the John Birch Society. He was convinced I was a Communist. As a matter of fact, when I ran for president of the student government the year after this experience, he actually got a fri- a few of his friends together--this is before he totally changed his mind about me--and then demonstrated at the debate between myself and the other candidate running, with signs comparing me to Fidel Castro; I mean it was that kind of thing. And, and then have the--having to think through, how do I make this work for what we're doing? So part of it was he and I started sitting down a ca- few times a week. I had regular office hours as the student government vice president in the student government suite, and he'd come by. And we'd sit, and he would say some of the most provocative things sometimes, almost offensive. But what I sensed in him was someone that was struggling with these ideas as well. And then because he was so awkward with it, that he offended most other African Americans, most of them said he was--he had any exposure to--didn't want to talk to him because they found themselves just getting mad at him. So I decide that it was a good idea for me to do that. I mean, I had time on my hands. I was e- elected into position with the student government and so forth, so he and I would talk. So we agreed on a couple of things first that kind of laid down a foundation that I think kept us from strangling each other. And that was that the foundation of both of our beliefs were deeply rooted in our Judeo-Christian faith and that we can make arguments from that platform on just about anything and everything. And with that understanding, it meant that we also applied the rule. And the, the rule was we're gonna agree on a few things as we start having these conversations. One, we, we can, we can agree to agree; we're gonna agree that we can disagree; but we're also gonna agree that we're not gonna be disagreeable. And that is we're gonna talk about these things; we're gonna raise all the issues. I can ask you any questions that I want to ask you, and you can ask me any questions you want to ask me. But we're both gonna presume that the questions we're asking are questions that are being offered in a very earnest and truthful way, and that I really want to know the answers, and I'm not just trying to make you stumble. But I want to know what you're thinking. He started bringing in John Birch Society pamphlets, with all kind of articles that were written by, what I considered, very right wing extremist point of view, this, well known for the John Birch Society. But I started bringing to him studies and research that were done by some of the think tanks here in Washington [D.C.], Brookings [Brookings Institution] and others, laying factual information down to help break through some of the stereotypes that he clearly held that were impounded, in my opinion, or compounded by that John Birch Society teaching and so forth. And would struggle all the time, and I--and we would talk about it. But the idea was to keep very cool, to have the conversations and everything, and it was a, it was a, a very interesting relationship over the course of that year. Story_ID: 613830 Speaker 1: He graduated a year before I did. He finished his program a year before I did at the University of Missouri [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. And just as I was finishing my program and literally packing my bags to move to Washington [D.C.] to work for the Washington Office on Africa, I got a phone call from Dave [Dave Williams (ph.)]. Dave had moved to Chicago [Illinois] and started his own business. As a matter of fact, he now owned a few trucks, or had a setup for a few trucks, and asked me if I would come to work for him delivering donuts and other pastries, you know, to corner markets and whatnot through- throughout the town and so forth. And I thanked him very much. I said, "Well, Dave, you know, you and I didn't agree on much." He said, "No, we didn't." He said, "But, you know, I learned a lot from our conversations and my experiences working in Chicago and whatnot, a city that's more diverse in many ways than St. Louis [Missouri] was and certainly more congested. And from our conversations, it made it easier for me to, to see what was going on and, and understanding a lot of the facts that you were sharing with me. One of the things that came very clear to me is that in those, those times we talked over the course of that year, that we could--that you and I share a lot of the same values. We just had different information. And I came to really trust you. This is a very important project for me. I would bring you on as pretty much a vice president." I'll be driving a truck in those (unclear) and whatnot, but I had the possibilities of making a little money, and it, it, it was a, a very generous offer. I turned him down and came to D.C. to work for the Washington Office on Africa. But it demonstrated some things to me about people we disagree with, that if we take time sometimes and set aside some of the problems that we have communicating, we'd have a--we still have a lot of trouble today in the United States of America talking about race. Black folks want to talk about one aspect of it. If we're just talking about black and white, of course, it's more congested now than ever. It's not just a black/white issue anymore; it's living color, you know, black, white, brown, yellow, red, and, and many, many combinations therein. And if you're talking about religious differences and other differences and whatnot, we're a very diverse society. All that being said, having the opportunity to sit down and have really informed, thoughtful conversations about race is something that's needed mo- now more than ever, but we still don't do it. Sometimes we don't do it because of political correctness. We're fearful that what we say in the context of being open and discussed will be perceived as being discriminatory, offensive. We, maybe we don't know how to talk about the issue very well, though we have some great ideas in our minds about what's going on. But part of it we were able to do during that year I was in St. Louis with Dillard [ph.], Dave, and others is we would oftentimes sit down in the cafeteria with a deliberate, very diverse group of students, graduate students and, and undergraduate students, students from other countries, Christian students, Jewish students, Islamic students. But we would have fun talking about the issues of the day, from whatever the perspective was. And again, the agreement with all of us, and sometimes there'd be twenty of us, and college professors would join us 'cause they just found it fascinating that we're having these conversations about the issues of our day and the way that we were talking about them, just having fun having the conversation and the discussion. So all this to say that, that my experiences with Dave, my experiences at the University of Missouri, in a very diverse university setting--this is also a university, after having going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], a predominantly African American school--this was experience in a very diverse university. Twelve percent of the students were African American. Sixty percent of the students were white. And the rest of the students were other race and ethnic groups, including those coming from other countries, international students that were there to get their degrees as well. It was a fascinating experience. Speaker 2: Okay, okay-- Speaker 1: Maybe you'll find some place to edit that in. I don't know (laughter). Speaker 2: Yep. No, that's a good--that's, this, this speaks to how you approach dealing with problems and-- Speaker 1: Sure, sure. Speaker 2: --and issues. Speaker 1: In many ways. Story_ID: 613831 Speaker 1: We were discussing before the, the 1991, the, the Civil Rights Act of '91 [Civil Rights Act of 1991]. Speaker 2: So, as, as the bill moved, George W.--[President] George Herbert Walker Bush vetoed the bill, 1990. We came back at the same time that Clarence Thomas was still having troubles getting through. Well, they're still working him through the whole, whole deal. A deal was struck with John Danforth. Danforth went back to the White House and said we really need to get this bill through. The White House argued that this bill to address these civil rights issues and others and affirmative action, was somehow going to lead to reverse discrimination. This is the argument they made. There was nothing to support that, quite frankly, but that was the argument they made. The deal got cut, allowing Clarence Thomas to get through his [U.S.] Senate confirmation process with, again, John Danforth leading the way. The same time, the Bush administration agreed to sign the bill. It had one caveat at the end of it. The bill, all they added was a caveat that said nothing in this bill shall be construed to utilize quotas. Quotas, of course, was struck down by the Bakke decision in the 1970s [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978]. But nothing in this bill shall be construed to utilize quotas to solve the problem. There was nothing in the bill that did that anyway. But just expressly saying that was the-- Speaker 1: That was the compromise. Speaker 2: Exactly. And I don't know if I'd call it much a compromise, but it was the saving face piece that allowed the deal to be cut, Clarence Thomas to be confirm, even against the position of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that, at that time, at the time we started working this, my work with the United Methodist Church and on from there. So that was an interesting time, very interesting time. Speaker 1: So at that time, you actually work, you were working for National-- Speaker 2: United, United Methodist Church at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, United Methodist Church. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I still remember getting that resolution through our board of directors for the General Board of Church and Society at a time we had a, a 125 member board of directors. It was quite a feat. Speaker 1: Now I don't know if, if people are aware of the impact that the large church denominations have on social policies and stuff like-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --the United Methodist, the Lutherans, Episcopalians, different groups have, you know-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. We work very close with all of them. As a matter of fact, the position I held with National IMPACT [National IMPACT Education Fund] before going to the United Methodist Church, exposed me to working with all of those religious organizations in coalition. National IMPACT was the social justice coalition of, as you mentioned, the United Methodist Church, the ELCA, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America [Evangelical Lutheran Church in America], the Episcopalian church [Episcopal Church], the Presbyterian Church USA, the United Church of Christ, the Mennonites [Mennonite Church USA], on and on and on. I mean there was an amazing coalition working on social justice issues together. And it was an amazing thing for me to find coming to Washington [D.C.]. I'd always believed that churches should be more actively involved. That the faith community should be more actively engaged in addressing the social justice issues and our legislative issue as well. So as you can imagine, for me to come into the, the realization that it was already happening, that it was already here, they were already doing great work and, and moving forward on a really, a proactive anti-discrimination pro-human rights agenda. Story_ID: 613832 Speaker 1: How long did you work for the United Methodist? Speaker 2: About ten years. Speaker 1: Ten, okay. Speaker 2: And I left the United Methodist Church to go to work for the, for the United Negro College Fund. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, the, the name is slightly different. It's still the same organization. They just changed their name to UNCF, the college fund. So I spent some time working with Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], who at the time was the president and CEO of the United Negro College Fund or U--UNCF the college fund, working at the government affairs office here in Washington, D.C., to try to help find, really, resources, money and other resources for those--at that time, forty-one historically black colleges and universities. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the beginning of the Bush administration, right? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it, it was part of the Bush administration. But interestingly enough, when it comes to HBCUs, there's a tendency for even Republican administrations to be very helpful to HBCUs. Education seems to be one of those areas, most of the time--sometimes it gets used for political pra- in, in a politically problematic way as well, but most of the time education, particularly in support for those HBCUs, seems to rise above the partisan fray. It is something good to see. So the Bush administration, both Herbert Walker Bush, and more so than, than George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush], was very, very supportive of HBCUs and, and other programs, including the White House office on HBCUs [White House Initiative on Historically Black College and Universities], in addressing those concerns. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think George W. Bush during this period made his famous statement that a Negro is a terrible thing to waste [sic.]-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --or something, it was something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I, I, and I think that was Dan Quayle. Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: Oh, that, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: --his vice president at the time (laughter). Speaker 1: --the convoluted--yeah, during the old Bush (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they've got-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: No, no, but you're right; that was, that was [President] George Herbert Walker Bush's vice president at the time. And I remember how, how he kind of sloshed that, that slogan, but (laughter)-- Speaker 1: A mind is a terrible thing to waste, and he added convoluted-- Speaker 2: Yeah, ex- exactly, exactly (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: I think he had a little problem swallowing potato too during that time. Speaker 1: Okay, UNCF, so, so what were--well, the, the issue was always to raise money for-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. It was a different approach for me. You know, I've, I'd always been more actively involved in not for profit organizations that focus on really bringing as many people on board to support moving the agenda forward. So in essence, we leveraged our policy positions by educating as many people and then coordinating how they approached their members of [U.S.] Congress, House [U.S. House of Representatives] and [U.S.] Senate, the White House, and even, and the government agencies and the like. So, but the UNCF, the focus was less that and more focusing on engaging those historically black colleges and universities, the support of the corporate community along those lines, but also the engagement and support of the federal government to address, you know, helping to secure those black colleges, to be able to provide a good high quality education at an affordable price. So it was a little bit different than the work we'd done around the more controversial issues. As a matter of fact, you kind of, in, in that arena, you stay away from a lot of the controversial issues. You're primarily go- primary goal all the time is to raise money. And I, I remember sitting down with Bill Gray the first time. And I had in my mind the same kind of construct we use here at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that we'd use at the United Methodist Church and other groups I'd worked for, which is the construct in which you engage members, have them join a network, set up coalition partners throughout the country, and then leverage them when we're trying to pass pieces of legislation throughout the House and the Senate or trying to, to engage the president of the White House in what we're trying to do. But there was always a concern that if we went that route, that it might become too partisan in its perception and that having people engaged along those lines, writing letters to those businesses and so forth, might actually create a problem for the continuation of the fundraising. Even though we knew that everything we'd be doing would be quite legal within the construct of a 501(c)(3), there were those concerns, so we kind of changed the approach. Quite frankly, that's also why I ended up missing the civil rights community, missing that engagement for those membership units across the country, whether it's in churches or, or whether a small civic organizations or groups in local communities. I missed that engagement of people in the process and the struggle for civil rights advancement. And the, and of course, that's why I decided to leave the United Negro College Fund and, and come to work for the NAACP. Story_ID: 613833 Speaker 1: Well, this would--well, how, how did that transition take place? Speaker 2: Well, I, I knew I was, I enjoyed the idea of raising money for these HBCUs [historically black college and universities]. I'm a product of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], after all, and I just thought it was a great thing to find any way and every way we can for as many young people to go as far as their minds would take them, rather than mom and daddy's pocketbooks. UNCF does great work. As a matter of fact, during the time I was there, I believe eighty-five cents on every dollar went directly to scholarships and programs at the universities. And only 15 percent of those dollars went to administrative overhead. And I'll never forget Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] telling me at the time I came on board that before he left, and probably before I'd leave as well, that he'll be able to bring that down to over 90 percent of every dollar that we ra- they raise, would go directly to those universities for scholarships that help those children and whatnot. And that actually became the case. So, again, I was very pleased with the United Negro College Fund. But I missed that fight. I mit- miss that more public fight that you can have in a public arena, that testifying before [U.S.] Congress to raise the issues and advance a civil rights agenda, that way we could go about putting and focusing the tension on problems happening in local communities, whether it's police brutality or public education, whether it's access to healthcare or access to affordable housing, just being able to have that kind of fight is something that was so much a part of me that I really missed it. So after being at the United Negro College Fund for less than two years, someone told me about a position at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as deputy director of the Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.], the very world renowned civil rights office, or civil rights legislative office of the NAACP that was first started by the, the great Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.]. I sat down and talked with them and the person who was--uh-oh--running things at the time. Story_ID: 613834 Speaker 1: I just wanted to co- correct some dates before we move forward. So, the, the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] days were '95 [1995] to '97 [1997], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And the, you started with the NAACP's Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.] as associate director in '97 [1997], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as associate director-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for about, about nine months. The, the director, the interim director, moved on back into academia. And they, they offered me the position of director of the bureau then, so it's been about fifteen years. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I've got one--I want to backtrack a little bit. We were talking off camera about Million Man March-- Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: --and what role you played, 'cause that was such a deal for the nation and for the City of Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So, tell, tell, tell us a little bit about your involvement in the Million Man March. Speaker 2: At the time I worked for the United Methodist Church's General Board of Church and Society. And as controversial as some aspects of the march were, they decided that the theme and the issues and the coalition that was built around the march is something that we should support. And as such, as the person handled the civil rights portfolio, that also included the criminal justice portfolio for the United Methodist Church, I was engaged in some of the programmatic planning around it, that is the issue planning. So beyond the speakers outside of, of the, the demographics or the structure of how things are going to work and whatnot, we were working with those who were putting together what the agenda would be, you know, how we would do voter registration during the course of that time and things along those lines. But in my private life, it was also a time that I'd just become a daddy, had my first son, Caleb Wesley Young Shelton [Caleb Shelton]. My wife [Paula Young Shelton] had stayed home for the first four months, and now I was doing my paternity leave from home, at home half a day because my wife's a schoolteacher. She'd come home around three o'clock. Then I'd go into the office for the rest of the day to finish my work and so forth, but all, you know, working during the day and taking care of my son and so forth. So I had a chance to take my then about eight month old to the Million Man March on one of those backpack type structures, you know, the little framing with the shoulder straps and all that. And he's in the back, you know, just a little bit over my head, looking forward and so forth, and diaper bag around the other arm and whatnot, being Mr. Super Mom or so, you know. But it was, it was a great experience. We were able to leverage issues that were important to our communities, issues around civil rights protections, issues around re- revising or changing the criminal justice system. We were to push issues that were just important to us around education, healthcare, and other conson- concerns that African Americans so often get locked out of the process. But also you had over a million people there. And the issue then was, how do we make sure people have something to take back home with them? And so one of the big pushes we did during that time was also voter registration. We found voter registration as being so important for people to be able to go back to wherever they came from all over the country and be able to be prepared to be educated on the issues, vote a ballot of their own free will, and indeed have that, those votes counted. So it was an, it was an incredible time in many ways. It was an awesome experience. And then even in the midst of the controversy, I think so much good came out of that, that march on Washington. Story_ID: 613835 Speaker 1: Now a little background on NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] history, in terms of--now there's a, there's a difference between the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --the NAACP, the regular NAACP. So what, what-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --is that difference, and when did that difference take place, and then what role does the Washington office [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.] play? Speaker 2: No, very good. Back in the 1950s, just prior to the Brown versus Board of Education decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], Thurgood Marshall took a group of NAACP lawyers out to create a separate, I guess more of a, a, a law firm, a public service law firm, as a matter of fact, the first of its type, to actually focus in on utilizing the law exclusively as a tool to leverage change in our society, focusing in on large volume impact litigation, but also focusing sometimes on individual cases that they believe would have a larger ramification, a larger effect on the overall society, Legal Defense Fund. The NAACP has always been that grassroots based, membership driven, national organization with 2,200 membership units throughout the United States, but also because of our historic work in integrating the armed services military bases in Italy, Germany, Korea, and Japan. And some of that structure we still have outside the United States, but certainly, we still have that more robust structure in the United States. Of course, all this happened I think right around 1950 was when the Legal Defense Fund created the separate organization, the separate entity. Speaker 1: Okay, so, but there's clearly an association between the two, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: But not as, they're not completely like the, the, the-- Speaker 2: Well, there, there's, there's no formal relationship between the two. There are separate board of directors, separate funding and income streams, separate decision making processes and so forth, and somewhat different responsibilities or, or strategies in the society. The larger NAACP, the organization I work for, does have a legal department, and we do engage our self in litigation where it makes a difference and so forth, but not at, not exclusively. We're also the membership based organization with units in every place in the United States. We're at the local level in fact, with our local branches, with our youth works committees, with our college chapters throughout the country, but also with our prison chapters in various places throughout the country as well--more membership driven, more advocacy oriented from that perspective, engaging people at the local level in school boards, city councils, town councils, and the like, all the way through, of course, state legislatures and on to the work we do at the federal government level. Story_ID: 613836 Speaker 1: What were the issues that the Washington [D.C.] chapter faced when you came, came on board? Speaker 2: Well, the Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.] is always the federal legislative and national public policy division of the overall NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I came in at a time when the attacks on equal opportunity programs like affirmative action were in its heyday. Newt Gingrich was the speaker of the house at the time I came to the NAACP, so we had those challenges there. We were working on issues like confirming judges that were reflective of a civil rights perspective, ones that weren't coming with an agenda but ones that did have indeed a true respect and appreciation for the civil rights laws of our country were--have always been very important to us as we secured those judgeships. We were also working on issues like racial profiling. One of the biggest issues coming in in our day, at the time I came to the NAACP, was the nation was finally becoming aware that in some cases law enforcement utilized race as a tool to determine whether somebody was suspicious and whether they should be pulled over or even whether they should be taken in. Speaker 1: Now, this is almost incredible, seeing that American policing was founded on slave patrols (laughter) in the South in the first place. So, but this, but now the country, because--starts recognizing racial profiling as a-- Speaker 2: Exactly. It, it took a while to realize this is what was going on. We had to do studies, as a matter of fact, and show the patterns. We were able to get local communities to pass laws that--in which they simply collect data. We got John Conyers--it didn't take much to get John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] to do anything. John Conyers is always so far ahead of us on so many civil rights issues as being that, that beacon for civil rights and racial justice we've seen throughout his entire career. But John Conyers introduced a, a bill called the Traffic Stop Statistics Act [Traffic Stops Statistics Study Act of 1998]. This is a bill that simply did a snapshot of traffic stops and had law enforcement officials share their perspective of who they were pulling over. So it wasn't that you check the license and see who they actually were. They said tell me how many African Americans, how many white Americans, Native Americans, Hispanics, how many Asian Americans, you know, or what was the race of the person that you pulled over in looking at that data. One of the things we were able to secure during those early phases--and keep in mind, all this is before September 11th [September 11, 2001 (9/11)], was that America had a problem with racial profiling and that out of that problem, communities that were desperately in need of good, respectful policing weren't getting it, that if you're in the African American community and your perception is that these police officers are only there as more of an occupying force. And that was the term used by many of them, an occupying force. And they were practicing the process in which they would stop you because of your race with a presumption that if you are black, there was a good chance you were getting ready to commit a crime, and that's why we wanted to stop you, or you just committed one, even though there'd been no report on it; we need to see what you've been up to. Speaker 1: Now, now this is the kind of thing you hear in the barbershop-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --or in the beauty shop. Black people talk about this at the basketball court. But now here's a study that confirms it. So you're-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. As a matter of fact, it even goes back before I got here. You know, right after the Rodney King riots, the NAACP wanted to focus in on what was going on in our country. Indeed, you had the, the situation, which elevated to people turning out in big numbers because of, of a videotape that was showing an African American man being beaten down by police officers, and now the entire city is in flames. What's going on? And then you had this sub-tensions that were going on as well, Korean owned markets, African American communities, and all kind of things were going on during that, that particular time period and whatnot. So, we held hearings all over the country, Los Angeles [California], New York [New York], Detroit [Michigan], Atlanta [Georgia], Miami [Florida], St. Louis [Missouri], Houston, Texas, Seattle, Washington, and a few other places. In those hearings, we kept hearing the same thing over and over again in a different dialect, and, and, and, and saying it in a different way but saying the same thing. African Americans believed that they were being targeted, the kind of thing you were talking about in a barbershop, that they were getting stopped because they were black; there was no good reason for it, and out of that, they didn't have much trust for those police officers who had the very important responsibility of protecting their communities. Even W.E.B. Du Bois, back in the early 1900s, talked about the challenge of race and crime in the African American community and the need for good, respectful policing in our neighborhoods. Story_ID: 613837 Speaker 1: But racial profiling we knew was a problem. And John Conyers [HistoryMakers John Conyers, Jr.] introduced this legislation to collect the data [Traffic Stops Statistics Study Act of 1998]. Why then, of course, things moved on from there. We were able to get towns and hamlets, communities, even a couple of states, to pass legislation, to the very least, collect the data, in some cases, very expressly outlaw the use of racial profiling in policing, and recognizing what we did. You know, we sat down during those days--and that was under the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], when I first came to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and during those days we talked about why racial profiling and this level of police misconduct was so problematic. Janet Reno was fascinating in her response in a conversation we had with myself, her--Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] was her deputy at the time-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Kweisi Mfume was the president and CEO of the NAACP. Speaker 2: She's attorney general, Janet-- Speaker 1: She was the attorney at the time-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --yes, indeed. And one of the things she said was, she said you know, we need to support this, because clearly, this practice is undercutting the trust and integrity that law enforcement needs to be effective in our country. You can't prevent crimes if communities don't trust you. And you certainly can't solve them if people won't talk to you, if they won't believe that they can share with you very quietly what's going on, 'cause they, they live in those communities. They're worried about, you know, the bad guys coming back and you know, re- seeking revenge on them for talking to the police about you in the first place. If you have police officers that you feel you can't trust at all, then indeed nothing gets done, and the crime rate ends up being what it is. As a matter fact, some will even argue that today. Unsolved murders in the African American community is over 50 percent, and much of that is because of that lack of trust. Until we finish addressing these issues of racial profiling and--discussed back then and even today, and use of force by police officers, and address that trust factor among police officers, we're never gonna get this solved. We need an in- we need to pass the End Racial Profiling Act that's pending in the [U.S.] Congress even today. As I mentioned, these bills were introduced back in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I know that, that someone from the podium discussed that during the Million Man March. They, they discussed the disparity in sentencing-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --for black people that were using crack [crack cocaine] as opposed to white people using cocaine, or, or they--well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it's true then. You're absolutely right. Crack versus powder cocaine was a problem when that bill passed in the early '90s [1990s]. It was a problem during that time. We were discussing it then. We were just able to move in the last Congress to finally address part of that, only part of that, but we moved it a good ways forward. We were able to move that 100 to 1 sentencing range disparity between crack and powder cocaine, down now to 18 to 1. We're convinced much more still needs to be done. But we're moving to a head in which thousands of people who were arrested in mostly nonviolent cases for crack cocaine uses are gonna find that their sentence has been reduced to what is actually more just, and more of them are coming back out. And hopefully, through the Second Chance Act and work of the NAACP and others are doing a local community to help people reintegrate into those communities so they can become constructive and contributing members of that part of our society, that we won't see them going back and whatnot. But it is an injustice, and I think it adds to that litany of problems that we have with our criminal justice system from racial disparities in racial profiling as we discussed at the front end of the criminal justice process, lack of proper representation, and, and, and legal support in the middle of the process, and even punishment, whether it's those extremely long sentencing ranges that are racially disparate or even the use of the death penalty in the country, which is still the problem and is still racially disparate. Story_ID: 613838 Speaker 1: What you're doing here is you're taking what a lot of people actually think is true in their mind or in their heart and coming up with a study and a way to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We quantify it. Speaker 1: --quantify and-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Speaker 1: Yeah, and present it in a-- Speaker 2: Well, that, that's what those, those hearings help do. You know, if you're in one community and it looks this way to you, you know, it's easy for those in power to say, you know, it, that may have happened this one time, but it's extraordinary; it doesn't happen very often and whatnot, or just this one police department, you know, if, if we're able to prove those cases and utilize the pattern and practices, you know, statutes that provide some protection against the misdoings of law enforcement agencies and the like. So you kind of end up starting in, in those places, but we know it's, it's much more pervasive than that. When we're able to go to communities at every end of the country and again, sit and listen to people in those communities describe what their relationship is like with these law enforcement agencies and whatnot, that racial profiling does happen, that the mistrust is there, they do feel like they're being treated in a disparate manner because of their race, and find that that's not only being said in, you know, Jackson, Mississippi, but Los Angeles, California; it's not just said in New York, New York, but St. Louis, Missouri; not just Atlanta, Georgia, and Miami [Florida] but also in Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois]. You know, it's amazing when you're able to pull that information together, which I would argue, is kind of self serving, but I would argue that that's one of the, part of the genius of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], is that we have these tentacles that are in all these communities, that our process every year is one that people bring those concerns and challenges to a national body and work together to craft a solution, a legislative approach or a policy approach to addressing these problems. You know, as, as another sideline, I--people oftentimes say the, the African American community doesn't have an agenda; there's no agenda in the African American community. I beg to differ. Ever year 2,200 delegates are elected from all over the United States but often from Italy, Germany, Korea, and Japan from U.S. military bases, to come together to decide what the agenda of the African American community, and what the world for that matter, needs to be in the next coming year. We'll be meeting this year in Houston, Texas, in July. People will be coming from all over. We'll be training, educating, finding out what's going on. But the only thing in all that we do at the NAACP conventions that oftentimes get good TV coverage and all that kind of thing, the only thing we do at those meetings that are actually mandated by the NAACP's constitution, is decide what our policy agenda is together. And we spend a lot of time doing that. It's an amazing thing. Story_ID: 613839 Speaker 1: We last interviewed you in 2008. This is a follow up. But since that time, we've had the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] as president of the United States, first African American president. How has his election to office affected your work? Speaker 2: Well, let me first say, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is extremely excited about America moving to a point where the many trails that we move to blaze were able to lead an African American to the White House. We're nonpartisan, we don't endorse political candidates or political parties. But as I described just a minute ago, we do have a strong agenda, it's a policy agenda that we want Democrats, Republicans, that we want Green Party members, and anybody else in the [U.S.] Congress and the other legislative bodies across the country to support. It's an agenda that is generated by our members in a manner I described in which delegates are elected. Any member in good standing can submit a resolution to be considered by that national body at the national convention through a unit in good standing. And 2,200 delegates are elected from all over to come together, and much like a political party convention, to debate, to discuss, to amend, to pass or defeat resolutions that will become the policy agenda of the NAACP. So all that is very, very important to us as we move ahead. As we look at Barack Obama and that agenda, what we see is someone who has been supporting that agenda in a very robust way. When we think about issues that have been important to us over the first two years of the administration--well, let me just, let me go back a little bit. We began talking with first candidate Obama when he was running for the U.S. Senate. Our folks in Illinois, we have a state chap- a, a state, state conference of the NAACP throughout the whole State of Illinois. We have local units throughout the state as well but including areas like Chicago [Illinois] and other areas that now President Obama is from. I met President Obama when he was actually participating in an NAACP debate, a nonpartisan debate with his Republican challenger at the time. He got elected, and we sat down with him after he came through the U.S. Senate. Even as he was going through the orientation process that all new senators go through, sat down with his, his, in his office in a temporary facility in the basement of I believe it was the Dirksen Senate Office Building [Washington, D.C.]. We worked with him through the years he was in the U.S. Senate. He attended every NAACP national convention from the time he got elected to the U.S. Senate to the time he became president. So it was good to see all that involvement. But also looking back on his report card, that is the NAACP grades each of the 435 members of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and the 100 members of the Senate on how they vote on the bread and butter civil rights agenda of the NAACP, and this is a guy that has always voted with us every single time on issues we found to be important. So it wasn't surprising to us that when he was--after he got elected, we began sitting down, like many others in our country, with a transition team. Those who were helping to move the new administration in as the previous administration who was moving out, the transition team, to talk about issues that were important to us and to our membership. And seeing the kind of support and the kind of people that he had involved in that transition process was a very positive signal. But then watching as we moved through the first two years of his administration, what we saw is someone that was not only signing the bills that reflected the NAACP's agenda but actually using his bully pulpit to advocate for them. If I look at what the president has done in that first two years, and of course, things changed with this last year we're under a new administration, what we saw is some very heavy lifts that address our concerns. What we saw is the issue of racial discrimination in employment being taken on as the first bill the president signed. The Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act [Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009] was a bill that looked at racial discrimination and gender discrimination in employment pay. Do we pay white Americans more than we pay African Americans and women for the same jobs? The answer is yes. All the data came back showing that women made about, about eighty cents on the dollar. Men were--but if you're an African American man, you were making about seventy-five cents on the dollar and so forth. We made less money for doing the same jobs. First bill he signed, the first bill I went into the White House [Washington, D.C.] to watch him sign, was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. Story_ID: 613840 Speaker 1: We moved then to address the issue of healthcare. What we saw is that the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] been raising issues about the disparities in the healthcare for Americans, our members have a tendency to be disproportionately poor, and as such, we're also disproportionately unemployed. Most Americans receive their health insurance through their jobs. So if you're not working, how do you get coverage? Well, there are a couple of government programs that help out. But what we'd found then is about forty--at the time we started this fight, we had about 36 million Americans with no healthcare insurance. By the time we got to the, the Obama administration [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and the struggle to pass the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], we were up to 47 million Americans with no healthcare insurance, over 30 percent of which were African American. We're only 12 percent of the population. So again, disproportionately we were affected by those challenges. But also looking at the administration, we had an administration that was willing to take on a fight that was very difficult for the last Democratic administration. You probably remember Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] decided that healthcare reform was something that he wanted to do. And he was so serious about it to the point that he appointed his wife, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], the first lady, to actually lead the charge. Well, many of us that looked back on that fight saw that it was tough; it was rough; and we really didn't get much done because, again, the opposition to changing what we saw as being a broken system. So to have this president now being willing to take on that fight, was a very, very significant thing. We moved and passed that bill, added 32 million more people to the healthcare rolls. But prior to that, we passed something called the SCHIP Bill that was vetoed by the previous administration. SCHIP was a bill that act- actually provided healthcare insurance for children. Matter of fact, the acronym is State Children's Insurance Programs [State Children's Health Insurance Programs; Children's Health Insurance Program]. These are the state run healthcare programs to provide, again, healthcare insurance for children who are so poor they don't have it. We knew we had--we were able to add 4 million more children to the healthcare rolls, and again, those children were almost 30 percent African American as well. So we were going in the right direction. Hate crimes was still a problem in our society. We knew that we needed to pass the hate crime prevention act, or what was called the Local Law Enforcement Hate Crimes Prevention Act, that upon passage was called the Matthew Shepard James Byrd Local Law Enforcement Hate Crime Prevention Act [sic. Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act of 2009]. How about that for a mouthful. George Bush [President George Walker Bush] had vetoed that bill when it came before his desk as, as the president. We were able to move it again as well. We had the--Barack Obama suppot- supporting it. He supported it when he was in the U.S. Senate, and we got that signed to law as well. African Americans are still 70 percent of all the victims of hate crimes in our country, so that raised some major concerns. But we were able to take it on, and again, we passed it after sixteen years trying to get that bill through. We talked a little bit earlier about the racial disparities in crack cocaine versus powder cocaine. We know that if we look at the statistics offered to us by the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services, 60 percent of all crack cocaine users are white. But for some reason, 84.7 percent of all crack cocaine convictions are African American. We know the system is working the way that it shouldn't be working. For some reason, we're targeting more African Americans, but we also know that the same thing is true of powder cocaine. But for some reason, relegating African Americans--maybe some of the anecdotes I heard around this--to crack cocaine, there's a longer sentencing range by volume, is what ends up happening. We have one case, an African American drug dealer shouldn't be doing it but doing it--the law enforcement undercover people go in to buy some crack cocaine. What he says to them is, "I don't have any crack. I just got some cocaine and haven't had a chance to cook it up and turn it into crack cocaine." They knew that if they busted him for the powder cocaine, his sentencing range was gonna be shorter than if they busted him for crack cocaine. So they said, "No problem. Why don't you go upstairs and bake it up for us, and we'll stay down here and wait for you." Soon as he came downstairs and he's back into his basement, they brought the crack cocaine all cooked up and everything, and they arrested him then so they could charge him with crack instead of powder. Ninety-four percent of all crack cocaine convictions were African American and Latino, with 87.4 percent being African American. That kind of disparity was very (unclear) that kind of distrust add to that issue I raised with you a little bit earlier and whatnot as well. So we talk about the Obama administration. What we're talking about is an administration that has taken on a lot of our agenda in a way that we found to be very, very helpful. Again, we don't endorse political candidates or political parties. For us it's all about the agenda. And what we saw is an agenda that looked very much like our own and a president that was ushering that agenda through in a way we saw to be quite favorable. Story_ID: 613841 Speaker 1: Now what are the, the current, I guess, most important issues that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] faces on a national level? Speaker 2: Well, for one, the criminal justice system. We've been trying to get a bill through to actually look at the entire criminal justice system from a thirty thousand foot view. We haven't done that kind of review of our criminal justice system in over forty years. But we know if we look at what's going on with our criminal justice system, there's an awful lot of disparity every step of the way. You and I have already talked about racial profiling, and that's still a problem. If we look at the disparity in sentencing, we'll see that a lot of that begins with the prosecuting attorney's office. That's a problem as well. For some reason--and we have a bill to address this--for some reason, African Americans are still sen- sentenced for longer periods of time than white Americans for committing the same crimie. But deciding what, how, what severity of the charge to bring against someone is something happens in the prosecuting attorney's office. It's not something that happens with the judge. It's not necessarily something that happens with the jury, when there is one. But it's happens in the prosecuting attorney's office, as he or she are trying to decide what charge to bring. If someone is killed, is it first degree murder in which we seek the death penalty? Is it aggravated assault and, and in, in which death occurred? Different sentencing range in each of these cases, but for some reason, in most cases, African Americans are actually charged at the high level, end up getting sentenced at the high level as well. Taking that issue on, getting that bill through is important to us. The Justice Integrity Act [Justice Integrity Act of 2011] is the name of the bill, and we're hoping to get that through sometime soon as well. We've still gotta finish what we've started with the crack cocaine/powder cocaine disparities. We've won part of it. We've won the argument, but now it's time for us to recognize as a nation that going from a lot of discrimination and for the 100 to 1 sentencing range and, and 84.7 percent of all those being African Americans, down to an 18 to 1 sentencing was still the same racial disparity is as my friend, Congressman Bobby Scott would say, who chaired the crime subcommittee at the time we passed this bill, that's like going from a whole lot of discrimination to a little bit of discrimination, but you still have discrimination. So indeed, we know we still need to make that change and address that concern. Our education system is still a huge concern for us, whether it's our public schools, 95 percent of all African Americans are educated in public schools. That's a huge deal. We know that only 10 percent of public school funding comes from the federal government, but that could be leveraged to make sure we have good policies in place to take care of all of our children, regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or national origin, keeping classes down to a manageable size, making sure that schoolteachers are well trained and prepared to go in those classrooms, making sure we have adequate equipment and supplies in those classrooms, including new technologies, address the issue of the problems with the school structures themselves. We have schools that are almost literally falling down around the feet of our, our kids, and actually in some cases even putting them in physical danger of plaster falling off the walls and other things. We know our education system is crucial as you talk about pre-K through twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade], but doesn't stop there. We know in this day and age, the only way to really get ahead in this society is to have a college education. You have to have one. But we live in a community in which over 60 percent of our children live in households that are at or below the poverty line. How does one move through the ladder. We know the way out. We just don't have the resources to get out. So indeed, we know that climbing out of poverty means you get a good education, you'll have more opportunities in front of you. You can start your own business, get the skills you need to become a private en- or an entrepreneur. You can get good jobs, become doctors, lawyers, whatever you want to become, but access to higher education is crucial. But when we're seeing tuition increase at such a fast rate, more than doubling in four year periods in some cases and that kind of thing, for poor kids it becomes even further out of reach. We want to see, and we've seen with this administration [of HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], a support for increasing opportunities for Pell Grants, reducing origination fees and interest rates on student loans, and doing other things to help our kids able, be able to maneuver through not only that pre-K through twelve system but also move onto whether it's junior college, college, onto graduate school, or professional schools, and beyond; but again, being able to go as far as their minds will take them, not just their mom and daddy's pocketbooks. Those are the crucial issues for us, among others. Story_ID: 613842 Speaker 1: Stabilizing the healthcare program seniors for implementation. We passed it. It adds 32 million more people to the healthcare rolls, but they're still fighting to prevent it from being fully implemented, whether it's here in Washington [D.C.] where the resources that are actually trying to be appropriated to pay for the programs are being challenged every step of the way or whether it's at the state level where we have state attorney generals and governors refusing to implement it, saying they shouldn't have to do their part to make sure that every American has good, high quality healthcare. Those are still big issues for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Predatory lending is a huge concern for us. Eco- the economic welfare of our communities is extremely important. We know that African Americans lost their homes at extremely high numbers. We know that predatory lenders, mortgages--mortgage companies, brokers and others, sold many African Americans, and disproportionately African Americans, lending packages that they could not sustain. They actually redlined and targeted African Americans for lending pa- for lending packages, things like the, what we call exploding arms. You come in at the introductory rate in a, a mortgage, 4 percent, quite affordable and whatnot starting out, talking to getting more house you could afford. So if I can get you a 4 percent loan, instead that hundred and fifty thousand dollar home that your government salary of sixty thousand dollars plus would allow you to sustain, you can go ahead and get that three hundred thousand dollar dream house you've always wanted. What they didn't tell us was that going into those loans included escalating interest rates. So you went from 4 percent, in two years 6 percent, two more years 8 percent, two more years 10 percent, two more years 12 percent, dropping your escrow, then putting you into a position where now your escrow was incorporated into the lending package at fifteen hundred thousand dollars a month. At the end of that six or eight year period, you're now paying twenty-four thousand dollars a month, and you can't sustain it. So we had many people fall into that trap. As a matter of fact, I can tell you awful horror stories of some of those that we brought to Washington to testify before the banking committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs] and the House Financial Services Committee [U.S. House of Representatives Financial Services Committee]. It's a huge issue and an issue we're still taking on. Predatory lending is still with us, whether it's some of the, the programs being played out at the local level through so called payday lenders, charging a compounded--they don't call it an interest rate; they call it fee. But if you tread it--if you treat it as a, an, as an annual interest rate, as an APR [annual percentage rate], if you treat it along those lines, it would end up being, in, in some cases, 6 to 1,200 percent interest over the course of a year. That is unacceptable, but we know that our folks need those services as well. They just shouldn't have to find themselves going into total hock to be able to, to address something that they hadn't planned for, like the car breaking down so they can't get to work or the, the toilet exploding in their bathroom, and they had to bring a plumber in in the middle of the night to fix to keep their house from flooding and those kind of things. Those are all issues and many more that we're still focusing on in the country, whether it's, as I mentioned, the racial profiling to the death penalty, whether it's education, whether it's house, whether it's employment. And we mentioned the, the unemployment rate in the country and the importance of making that as our country galvanizes, as we work together to address the unemployment rate, that we don't just go back to business as usual. Don't forget, at a time when the unemployment rate was considered quite acceptable, African Americans still had twice as high an unemployment rate as white Americans in our society. As we fix this problem, we want to make sure at the NAACP that we address that problem as well, those who have been stubbornly stuck in the cracks, as most programs have moved ahead to try to lift the entire nation out of poverty and out of unemployment. Story_ID: 613843 Speaker 1: You have a full agenda of things to do, and-- Speaker 2: We have a lot of work to do. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, the, the day when the doors close because there's nothing to do is not (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I look forward to that day, you know, when, when, when we don't have to do anymore-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that, for the day when you have equality for everyone. You know, there are many argued that electing the first president meant that racism had been eliminated in the country. Speaker 1: Right, post, post-racial America. Speaker 2: Post-racial America. Can't say that. If you look at--it's wonderful that America has moved to the point of electing its first non-white male president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. That's what we did. It's not just first African American male president, the first non-white male president in its history. It's a great thing. We're moving ahead, along those lines. And it's even more impressive when you look at who voted for him, the diversity of America, as it came out to actually vote for this African American man, understanding in the context of all the tools and strategies that have been utilized throughout the history of our country, to have African Americans perceived as less than human beings, first for the purpose of being able to maintain them as chattel, as slaves, and justified that within the context of our Judeo-Christian values. But then as we've seen throughout the years and other ways as well, justifying other treatment and whatnot that we've seen. So moving ahead says great things about the nation. But listen, he was sworn in on January 20th, 2009. The day after he was sworn in, the unemployment rate among African Americans was still as high as their white counterparts. Only 40 percent of African Americans owned their own homes, and over 80 percent of white Americans own theirs. The graduation rate among African Americans out of our high schools and whatnot had actually gotten worse. Matter of fact, we'd reached parity by the, the year 2000. But 2001 it started going back down and whatnot, so we knew those problems were still with us. African Americans were still more, most likely not to have healthcare insurance, most likely to die through, by diseases like heart attacks, most likely to die of prostate cancer, most likely to die of breast cancer, most likely to die of ovarian cancer, four times, five times, twelve times higher than our white counterparts, depending on which one of these ailments we're talking about. So we knew that as much as the nation had moved ahead, and we were in--moving in a, in a good direction, that those challenges were still with us, that the disparities were still part of the landscape and the discrimination, unfortunately, was still part of the American landscape. Story_ID: 613844 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and since--but hardly of anyone who faces his challenges--as many issues as you have. But what are some of your hopes for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, our hopes are that we can gain real opportunity, recognizing that as much as we're all Americans, we're all a little bit different. That's one of the things that makes it wonderful, if you want to look at it very positively, that we come out of different cultures; we come out of different experiences and whatnot. But we all have that same vision of being Americans. We all want to have economic independence. We all want our children to have real opportunities. We all want to live in a safe, secure place. We all want to make sure that there's good education system, good healthcare system, and a good economic systems are in place to support all those things that we envision as being a, a good full, first class citizen in this great country of ours. Our hope is that the real tools can be put in place to achieve those goals, that we'll have a, a, a country, a government that actually truly protects its people and doesn't find itself actually slacking off on one side or the other so that narrow political interest can make its way through. When I think about new obstacles like voter IDs and eliminating early voting and making it more difficult for third party organizations like the N- NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the League of Women Voters to register voters, think about those new obstacles that are in our way, I hope it's that we can truly empower people and truly get to the point where there is equality, equality in the opportunity, equality in our abilities to get good jobs and start businesses, to have healthcare, and take care of our children. That's our hope for the African American community. The first director of the NAACP's Washington Bureau [NAACP Washington Bureau, Washington, D.C.] was a man by the name of Clarence Mitchell. Clarence Mitchell, Jr. [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.] was just an incredible stalwart in the fight for civil rights in this country, sat with Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and many others to move monumental civil rights legislation through the U.S. Congress. Clarence Mitchell was an incredible American hero. Clarence Mitchell was brought before Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. And this group of Harvard University students, overwhelmingly white, overwhelmingly male, asked among other questions, "What is it, Mr. Mitchell, that the Negro really wants in America? What is it that you want to achieve?" Clarence Mitchell paused for just a minute, thought about it, and looked at the guy and said eyeball to eyeball, "We don't want anything special. We just want what everybody else has, real opportunities, no discrimination, and a real possibility in our country." Story_ID: 613845 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too: when you look back over everything you've done, and you're still a young man, how--in your life so far, what would today, what, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I, I think the, the work that we've done around, around civil rights period, bring a, a clear voice and a connection between the powers that make the decisions and just everyday folks on the street, African Americans and other people that just work hard every day, played by the rules, and just looking for an opportunity to raise their families and take care of their kids. I think if, if, if there's a legacy I'd like to leave behind, it's that individually you're empowered, working together and learning more about what each other wants, finding that common denominator, those common set of, of issues and interests, no matter where you came from, no matter what you look like, no matter what kind of accent you speak with, what your home language is, that we can find a way to improve this nation, move away from some of the old entrapments and problems that led to everything from, from wars to distrust in our society, in our community, and certainly right here in our country. I think the legacy for me would, would have to be just that real empowerment of people to be actively engaged in this democratic, small D, democratic system of governance. Story_ID: 613846 Speaker 1: If you look again at your life to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: I'd probably just do more, more of a lot of the same. You know, I, I've really been blessed with an opportunity to get the kind of training and, and education that brought me to Washington [D.C.], beginning with the Washington Office on Africa [WOA]. And then, I feel like I'm one of the luckiest people on earth to be able to, to actually have a career in an area that's so deeply rooted in what I believe. So to be able to work for the Washington Office on Africa, National IMPACT [National IMPACT Education Fund], United Methodist Church, the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], and now the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that's just been a real joy. Story_ID: 613847 Speaker 1: Now as someone who grew up in a large family, what did your family think about your work now? Speaker 2: They've always been very supportive. You know, we're all, all over the place. I have a brother that lives in Guinea-Bissau, West Africa, and does work for everybody from the UN [United Nations] and so forth. And when I decided to come to Washington [D.C.], I think they were just happy I found a job (laughter). So, they're very supportive, very proud I think of the, the work that we do and the kind of things we're able to achieve. I come from a good family. Speaker 1: And your own family, you, you mentioned your son being a baby during, in, in '95 [1995]. He's, he must be in high school, getting ready to graduate. Or is he graduated? Speaker 2: He's seventeen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is his junior year in high school. We're talking about colleges and universities now, trying to help him kind of flesh out in his mind and heart what he wants to do with all of this, you know. We, we often have these conversations about, you know, moving into a career, means you're gonna spend an awful lot of time, all day, every day, working whatever it is you choose. You need to find something you're gonna enjoy doing, something that bring real satisfaction to you and whatnot. So those are the kind of conversations we're having now, small schools versus larger schools. He's got an interest in everything from herpetology, you know, the study of reptiles, to fashion design. So he's, he's, he's an interesting young man. So we're trying to find ways to just help him understand what he wants without trying to dictate it to him, you know. So it's--he's a great kid. Speaker 1: And do you have just the one, one, one son? Speaker 2: No. I have three boys. Speaker 1: You have three boys, okay. Speaker 2: He's my oldest; is seventeen. My middle son is Joshua [Aaron Shelton]; Joshua is thirteen. And my baby boy is Noah [Noah Shelton]; Noah's eight. And they all got biblical names. People say we kind of got stuck in the Old Testament, Caleb [Caleb Shelton], Joshua, and Noah. But I have to say that under these circumstances, when you read the stories behind them, they are all men that worked to help bring their people some place more positively. They actually delivered their people to real opportunity in the world. So my hope is they'll live up to those names. Speaker 1: Now, now where did you meet your wife [Paula Young Shelton]? Speaker 2: Here in Washington, D.C. During the time I worked for, at that time, National IMPACT [National IMPACT Education Fund], her sister actually worked for the United Church of Christ and sat on one of my advisory committees. One day, I guess at the beginning of the summer, her sister was a schoolteacher in Atlanta [Georgia] and decided to do things to kind of mix things up over the summertime. So, she was offered a position working that summer with the National Black Child Development Institute [NBCDI]. And her sister said she was coming by to visit her one Friday afternoon and wanted me to meet her, and so I said great. You know, I was going about doing my work and whatnot, got a phone call that she was next door, went over, met her, and been married for over twenty years now. So it's been a great thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I see that Methodist church building, by the way, as hallowed ground, not just because related to the church community, but that's where I met the love of my life. Story_ID: 613848 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last scripted question (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, we haven't talked much about my in- my family influence. I, I don't know if I, I don't remember if I talked about my grandfather in the last interview of whatnot, you know, the--both my parents [Frances McCain Shelton and C.W. Shelton] grew up in Mississippi. And every summer, at least, we would go down to visit them in a little, little community called Horse Pen [Mississippi], which apparently got its name because it was a stopover place for like the, the horse delivery services at the time. But instead of including R, I call it Horse Pen. Horse Pen is in Grena- or just outside the, the town of Grenada [Mississippi], in the Deep South. My, my mother's father [Ottis McCain] was a cotton farmer, and my father's father [Ruben Shelton] was a farmer as well that ended up owning the little country store in Winona [Mississippi], in a little community called Duck Hill [Mississippi]. How about that, Duck Hill and Horse Pen? But you know, just the stories growing up about the challenges that they experienced, even being able to see some of those challenges when we'd go to visit in the summer, but keep in mind we were just visiting. You know, in the early '70s [1970s], I remember going to visit my grandparents, and my brother [Marvin Shelton] was about five years older than I am, and he's interested in what the high school girls are doing. I just want to see a movie. They dropped me off at the movie theater in town, one of those kind of, you know, standard town square type areas, with the a little movie theater with the marquee around the top of it telling what movie was showing. And I went--as I was going in, I remember them asking me whether I wanted to sit on the floor or the balcony. And there was on the marquee, there were two different prices. It was about a quarter cheaper--I'm really dating myself now. It was about a quarter cheaper to sit in the balcony than on the floor. What they didn't tell you is that you really didn't have the option. If you were African American and you walked up to the window, they were gonna ask you to come around to the back of the ticket booth. In the back of the ticket booth was a screen door and a step up and a ledge to the back of the ticket booth where the ticket seller was. You paid your money, and there was only one place to go, up the steps to the balcony. So just that kind of experience and realizing what was still going on, having one of my uncles almost murdered by law enforcement in town after they finished tearing his car apart looking for alcohol. My mother's brothers ended up working in General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] factories in Detroit [Michigan] and in Los Angeles [California], so every year they'd come home with a new Cadillac. But in a town like that, as you can imagine, African Americans weren't supposed to drive cars like that. My grandfather often told this story, that when they'd come to visit, he would have them drop him off around the corner from the bank, 'cause he didn't want the banker to see him come in to do his banking business getting out of a brand new Cadillac. He's afraid of the, the, the problems he was gonna have along those lines, just those lessons along the way, and them all the time through all of that controversy, that challenge, and that struggle over the, the old style racism that our country is too well known for, but always telling us that we could still do well. Whatever you're interested in, just work hard and do well every step of the way. You're goning to have obstacles in front of you. Discrimination is going to try to get in your way. Racism is going to be a problem, and it's going to confront you, but that's not an excuse. You still have to thrive, and you still have to succeed, you know. It, it was an important lesson of growing up and hearing that from--being fortunate enough to hear that from my grandparents, both my mother and father's side, from my parents that learned those lessons along the way, and having experienced those things visiting Mississippi during those times, during that era, was an incredible thing for me. Story_ID: 613849 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as somebody that worked hard, that, that believed in what he was doing, and was able to convince people that we can do good and do well, that you don't have to try to just make for yourself--you can make a contribution to our society, that you can do very, very well for yourself and actually benefit many, many other people. I want to be remember, remembered as somebody that was willing to talk to anybody and everybody, that recognized that in the lessons of the day, there's nothing you can't do if you're not willing to let somebody else take credit for it. But in the overall philosophy of things, that there's nothing we can't get done if we're willing to work together...