 Story_ID: 13415 Speaker 1: My name is Monica Faith Stewart. My birth date is September 3, 1952, and today's date is August 24, 2001. Speaker 2: You have to spell your name for us. Speaker 1: M-O-N-I-C-A, F-A-I-T-H, S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 2: And if I could have where we're located. We're located at The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: We're located at The HistoryMakers' office in the studio at 1900 South Michigan in Chicago. Speaker 2: Right. And could I have your profession? Speaker 1: I am the managing, well, my title is, I'm the Managing Director. My profession is Trade Representative. I'm the Managing Director of the Illinois Africa Office located in Johannesburg, South Africa. Speaker 2: Do you consider yourself, your career as a politician or not, or civil servant? Speaker 1: I don't consider myself a politician at this point. I look at that as a previous part of my life, and I'd have to, I don't know if civil servant fits it, perhaps government official of some sort, you know, I'd accept that. Story_ID: 13416 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: Well, I'm rather fond of quite a few different foods, my favorite food, I'd say seafood mornay. Speaker 1: Mornay? Speaker 2: Uhm-huh. Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: My favorite color is, I have several, blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year. Speaker 2: Actually my favorite color is peach. Why can't I say that? My favorite color is peach. My favorite time of year is spring. Speaker 1: And your favorite place to vacation, vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination at this point in my life is Chicago. Every time I travel, I try to come back home to Chicago. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I once said, I talk so much, you know what, I can't remember half the things. I think other people can probably say that, no, I, no I don't. Story_ID: 13417 Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about your father [Rev. Clarence E. Stewart] and what you know about his background like where he was from. Is he from, was he from Chicago? Speaker 2: Both of my parents were born in Mississippi. Like, probably, two-thirds of the black community in Chicago. My mother came to Chicago fairly early. My dad came here in his late adolescence to go to college. Speaker 1: And can you tell me, talk to me about your father and what he talked about in terms of growing up? Speaker 2: I grew up in Park Manor. Speaker 1: His growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, his growing up. My father [Rev. Clarence E. Stewart], his growing up, my father grew up in, on a very large farm in Mississippi. His, he was adopted, and we called him "Little Lord Fauntleroy of Nowhere, Mississippi" because his father, his grandfather. He grew up in rather affluent circumstances for black people, particularly in that time and in Mississippi. He was adopted by a paternal, the mother, it's kind of complicated, his grandfather, he called him his grandfather, was his adopted father, guardian, and simply doted on, on my dad. He hadn't had, he didn't have any male children himself and he was my father's grandmother's husband. My father grew up very privileged and had a great deal of fun, I think, being a spoiled only child in Mississippi and basically given the run of a, of a large farm. I, his description of those times is that, are colored largely by his grandfather and his grandfather's personality. His grandfather was a very shrewd man who, because of the time around the Depression, there were a lot of white people who weren't doing very well, and so when he would come across a down-and-out white person, he would use it, he would come up with a relationship with that person to purchase land, which was not sometimes very easy for black people to do. My sense is that in that part of Mississippi one thing that always stuck with me and that I like, and I will say this from time to time, is that when, and sometimes it's difficult for us to remember that there was a time before the internet, before telephones and television where the land, especially in the rural area, seemed so vast, and so when they would hear tell of white people riding through, the men would go to the porch and get their guns and say "Halt, white folks! State your business!" And I just love that, you know. I used to work in a research lab and I would say and tell them at my door "Halt, white folks! State your business!" and they thought I was nuts, but I did it, I liked that. And so he bought, he bought land and he sold land and he always kept half the mineral rights to this land. Now for a black man who's barely literate because it was his, his wife, my paternal great grandmother, who was literate. He was barely literate, but he could manage to amass quite a large number of acres and, hence, my dad growing up as Little Lord Fauntleroy in Nowhere, Mississippi. My dad aspired to be a medical doctor and came to Chicago and, I think was, of course, lured to Chicago by the fast life and being in the city, and he wanted to go to Northwestern, and my grandfather, or my great-grandfather, told him "that was white folk stuff" and every doctor he knew had gone to Meharry, and if my father wanted to go to school, he was going to go to Meharry--Meharry, like every other doctor he ever heard. Who ever heard of a doctor going any place other than Meharry. And, but my dad had a different kind of vision for himself, but he ended up getting drafted and did not become a doctor. He did go, nor did he go to a historically black college. He had gone to high school at, in Mississippi at Alcorn [State University]and Campbell College. And then went to the University of Illinois downstate, and I remember him telling us stories about being on campus at 'Chambana' [ref. to twin cities Champagne-Urbana] they call it, they called it, and he would always say he lived in a rooming house with, there were several black guys, and two guys from New York. He'd always say "two guys from New York." So, it was only later that I, that I realized when he was talking to us that blacks nor Jews were allowed on campus at this time in the late '40s [1940s], and those were the two, those "two guys from New York". He lived in a, in a rooming house owned by a black woman in some place in 'Chambana'. Story_ID: 13418 Speaker 1: Your mother, what about your mother [Lois Greenlee Stewart]? Speaker 2: My mom's family, my mom comes from a, a very large family. They are also from Mississippi. They're from a different part of Mississippi, Kosciusko. And my mom's family was, I think, more typical of families, well, of black middle-class, very religious families who are devoted to education and uplifting of their race. I come from, I, I, I haven't heard this term used in a long time, but I come from a line of race people. We are big race people. I come from a line, on both side, where it was very important to stand up for the race, so my, my, it was expressed in my mother's family by a commitment to community. Her grandfather lost a lot during the Depression. On both sides, they were very industrious. I think my dad's side had, his grandfather had more money, you know, amassed. My grand, on my mom's side, my maternal mom's, my maternal mom's, my maternal side, they lost a lot of money during the Depression or when the banks went under, and I remember my grandfather [Kither Greenlee], when he and his younger sibs, they had cars because the banks had repossessed cars, and the banks had no money, and his sisters, who are now in their nineties, used to rip and run around with cars, and so they were, they were notorious and they were, they got a lot of, caused a lot of, got a lot of attention because of that. They, her grandfather built a school and a church. The school is now, because black people couldn't go to public schools at that time, so my mom and most of her sibs went to boarding school, one is Piney Woods, and I've forgotten the name of other schools that they went to, and then my grand, great-grandfather, my mom's grandfather, built a school for black children to go to in their community, and they also built a church in that community, and so they were very family and community, you know, oriented. New Orleans was, I think, the cultural center of their universe, (unclear), Mississippi. But my grandfather, also, felt very, was very passionate about living, about the racism in Mississippi, and hated that aspect. When you left your own tiny community, being at the whim of vicious white people, I, I, and it's odd that some of them are very, very light-skinned, but they all have a very deep sense of black identity. And a sense of, you know, those, so, and because of that, my grandfather brought his family to Chicago, just couldn't take it anymore. I remember he told me stories of seeing one of the famous Mississippi senators campaign saying "Not only will I have, not only will there be a chicken in every pot, there'll be a negro in every kitchen to cook it." And that was a campaign promise that I remember my, you know, my grandfather telling me about, as it's seen in his life, and he hated Mississippi. He grew to hate it. And he was an accomplished carpenter. He built houses. He also worked in the Tuskegee Airport, and but left all of that and came, came to Chicago to just, to seek a life that was not so much, that was not as vulnerable to the kind of racist violence that he witnessed in Mississippi. Also I remember him telling me about a situation where some drunk and rowdy white, young men had happened across a black man and killed him, and an old, an elderly, white woman observed it and told the truth about what happened. And even after he moved to Chicago, he and his friends and some relatives, some men friends would, some men friends would go back and forth to Mississippi to follow the trial. And those were the things, see, Mississippi was too blood stained for him, and he did not, I think I took on some of my same feelings about Mississippi and it took probably some generations to get over that feeling. Now I have a different feeling about Mississippi. I think about, a lot about Mississippi when I think about, in my experience in South Africa. You know, the ugliness, the racial hatred, and yet now when I go back to Mississippi, I feel, I have a, I feel a sense of roots and home. It's, to me, it's interesting when I go to my mom's home or Kosciusko, when people aren't really interested in what your name is, so you have to introduce yourself as, you know, "I am Monica, daughter of Lois, grand--", you know, "granddaughter of Kither Greenlee", and then that's who you are. Your name means nothing. So, it's, I, I, I, I think I'm comforted by that, it's, it's, and have gotten a different kind of appreciation for, for Mississippi and what it's meant for my family, to my family. Story_ID: 13419 Speaker 1: You have quite a few siblings? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now can go through just their names and the order, you know, and where you fit in the order? Speaker 2: In the birth order. I'm the oldest, and in order, they are: Angela Grace, Ruth Joy, Paul Edwards, Samuel Clarence, David Lawrence and Anthony Jonathan. I also have a deceased sister who died when she was 3 and her name was Crystal Hope. So, our middle names for the girls, Faith, Grace, Hope and Joy. Story_ID: 13420 Speaker 1: Tell me some of your earliest, you know, what your, maybe, earliest memory of growing up was. Speaker 2: I grew up, now I can tell my story. I grew up on the south side. It's at 79th, at that time it was 7317 South Park [Chicago, Illinois], and my dad was in real estate. He was involved with what was called at that time "blockbusting". At that time, the black community was bursting at the seams, and there was a fight block by block for housing in Chicago. He was, in fact, when I, at some point, Molotov cocktails bombs were thrown in our house as a reaction from white homeowner associations who felt that the black scourge was just, you know, spreading throughout the south side, and, but as long as I can remember Park Manor in Chatham [Chicago neighborhood] was a black area and my childhood was safe and comfortable. It was, I didn't know it at the time, it was very black. And we only saw, we had black every, you know, our neighbors, all of, obviously, all of, I--Chicago is a very segregated city. We only saw white people going downtown. Everyone from our pediatrician to dentist to even my dad's lawyer, you know, we had a very, very black situation and our, our (unclear). I remember, though, about politics. I remember that my parents were not involved. They were not really interested in politics. And in my family, they looked upon politics as something that was not really to be engaged in. Perhaps that was for people who needed something from the system, but for hard-working, middle-class people, there, they didn't, they did not really engage very much in politics, which as a little strange, given that I grew up loving it. I never sat, I attended Chicago Public Schools. I never-- Speaker 1: Which ones? Speaker 2: Henry O. Tanner, Park Manor and our house burned when I was in about, I think, the eighth grade, and I ended up graduating from Beale School, because when our house burned and my sister died, we moved to live with my grandparents in Englewood, and my own parents had to regroup and pull together after losing a house and a child, and I started school and finished school at Englewood High School. I never sat in a classroom with a non-black child, my entire career in the Chicago Public Schools. I remember the boycotts against 'Willis Wagons' [portable classroom buidlings] and the struggle for justice, I should say for equitable spending of schools, because I'm a boomer, baby-boomer, and at that time, the classrooms were, were, were overcrowded and to relieve overcrowding, on the south side, schools were given these mobile units. They were basically like trailer, trailer schools. And so I remember there was a boycott at some time. And I also remember how my father felt about City Hall. He would complain about, you know, City Hall and the influence of city politics on, on black commerce, on black life. I remember being very cognizant of that as a, as a kid. My dad [Clarence Stewart] would make comments like "Every, every big church that has a senior citizen housing complex and a day-care center and so and so, they're all on [CHicago mayor Richard J.] Daley's payroll." And, so those are the things I remember, I remember most. But, for me, I had, I had a, I read a lot. I liked to stay with my mom. I was not adventurous. I was not athletic. My brothers and sisters loved to play outside, not me, I'd rather sit with my mom and read. And I just remember my childhood as being very warm and also I remember, I used to read, I was an outrageous reader. I read all my parents' literature. And I remember once my, my dad had like a cocktail party or it was a barbecue out in the backyard, and he had lots of his friends over. And I used to, I was the kind of kid that would frequently get involved in grown folks' conversation. So, I remember offering my opinion that "Well, perhaps slavery wasn't so bad because those people had to be taken care of." I remember being snatched by my mother [Lois Greenlee Stewart], and she told me "Don't you ever say that. How, where could you have gotten that kind of, that opinion? Don't you ever in life say that." And I was looking, I was just repeating my sense of things, which I got out of books, on their, on their, in their library. And they were just astounded at what was coming out of my mouth. I was a regular right-wing. But I didn't have a context. I was taking in all of this information. I had no context for it because my parents also liked to avoid most direct discussions about race and civil rights. If civil rights came on TV, we had to go to bed. And, sometimes, and I never really got a chance to talk about this with my mother, but I think they wanted us to have a sense that the war, everything was possible. That we weren't limited by being black, that maybe not wanting us to know about the ugliness and the, the harshness of it, that our life was comfortable so we could, you know, grow up with certain kinds of expectations. And I also remember being very angry with my mom, saying that, you know, accusing my parents of allowing me to live a lie and being, you know, as naÃ¯ve and, ultimately, stupid in the face of not really understanding issues of race in America. And that happened when I, I think I was about 12 or 13. And then I went on to become kind of a specialist in black American history. Speaker 1: And what, how did you come to that realization, I don't want to say, what event happened that made you think that you had been moving in sort of this, you know, glass house or something, you know, protected? Was there something that happened? Because that was around, what, at that point and time, we're in the mid or late '60s? Speaker 2: '60s [1960s]. Probably just the civil rights era. You could not avoid it. There is no way, and even in Park Manor or Chatham that you could just live in a bubble. And I never thought that I lived in a segregated community. You know, I thought everything was normal. And it was, I think it was just, and reading, and my dad used to brag to his friends "Monica can read the 'Wall Street Journal'." You know, I was 3 and I could just, you know, I could, but understanding those thing, and we, of course, had "Ebony" and the "[Chicago] Defender" and, and you couldn't avoid it, so when I started reading other kinds of literature and figuring out exactly how horrible slavery was and I remember when the [16th Street Baptist] church blew up, was blown up in Birmingham, I'm sure I was a little older then, but just, I think, just the civil rights, just being alive in that time, you could not help but know what was going on and, of course, there was television, that we watched assiduously. Story_ID: 13421 Speaker 1: Were you more of a person who enjoyed solitude then? Speaker 2: With seven brothers or sisters, or six at any given time, there was not a lot of solitude, but, yes, I did like, I liked to think and reflect and read and rather than play, and I liked helping my mom. I felt, I also felt as an old, as the eldest, I felt a duty to help out with the babies and to help my mom, so that, that was my life. Speaker 1: What did you dream of, though? We all, but what did you dream that, you know, were you wanting to be anything? Speaker 2: When I was a little older, I wanted to be an astronaut. In the Chicago Public Schools, we saw audio-visual material quite a bit and I remember and also, I'm sure the decisions, the race with the U.S.S.R. at that time, on Sputnik, and, you know, so in the '60s [1960s], there was a focus on math and science and technology and the race for the moon space, I wanted to be an astronaut. And, actually, the first black astronaut had graduated from Englewood High School, the first black person just elected. He died tragically before, I think, ever going up. But that's what I, I wanted to be an astronaut. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were there things like were you a good student? You were a good student? Speaker 2: I was an excellent student. I take that back. I got excellent grades, and I, if it was a subject that I enjoyed, I read a lot, I was and still am, I think, a fast, I learn pretty fast, and take in, take in information and, and pretty quickly, so my favorite subjects were, actually, history grabbed me. I really, I got into history when I was in, in college, and in high school. At that time, in the public schools, there was tracking, and tracking has since been, has been looked upon, it's looked upon as not a good thing, as not really good for children of any ability. You know, there's more now a trend toward heterogeneous grouping, but at that time in the public schools, there was strict tracking, so that was the term used largely by standard, standardized test scores, your Iowa's[standardized test], and my classes were usually honors classes and AP classes, and I enjoyed school. Speaker 1: Now what are you, what is some of forming you as a person? You go off, it was always anticipated that you were going to go to college? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, who was forming you, I mean besides your parents? What other, are there any teachers, any other people in the community, anyone you look up to, any, you know, because--? Speaker 2: Well, as a young child, my life, my interactions were almost limited to family. And it was largely my mom's family, well, that's not fair. My dad, as an adult, did become more involved with his siblings. He did have siblings, although he grew up as an only child, adopted. And, so aside from family, the only other interaction I had largely would have been teachers. I remember a third-grade teacher I admire because she wore suits. She smoked cigarettes, and she had, and the way she wore, you know, she dressed, she had a tailored business look to her, and I remember her, whereas most teachers I did not. And instead of just smelling like perfume because she smoked, she had a different kind of odor about her, and, and I, I remember thinking "This is a different kind of woman", and I had never really saw myself as being the kind of woman, or leading the kind of life my mother did, although I was very dependent on my mom for the kind of life that, that I, that I enjoyed as a kid. But I never saw myself as, as being a maternal, as having those same kind of instincts. I think perhaps I felt that I had done my duty as being mom's assistant. Story_ID: 13422 Speaker 1: So, now, when you decide you're going, was there a decision about where you were going to go? Were you ended up going back East to school? Speaker 2: Well, actually, my mom went to Fisk [University]. And, at the time, she was in college, there, in black schools, there was a lot of color differentiation, socially, and my mother hated that. And her life at Fisk, socially, was miserable because of that. Her best friend, and then when I, we'd look through her yearbooks, and one thing that was apparent, you know, two-thirds of all the girls were very light-skinned, and the very few girls that were dark-skinned, their fathers were doctors or, you know, the whole, they were, were wealthy. For men's skin color, and that's based on those yearbooks, I would say skin color was not as important as it was for women. And, so, I, and my mom's feeling about it was that her children were too dark to go to a black school to be able to easily, if they wanted to be, in whatever sorority, and I, perhaps she didn't think about the fact that so much time had changed and that black society had changed, and we'd gone through "Black is Beautiful" by the time I was going to college, but, so, I was more or less allowed to choose the school I wanted to go to. I had counselors and people who kind of said "Oh, you could apply here or there" because I had good standardized test scores, but I knew, I'd always felt drawn East, I wanted to go, I really wanted to go far away from home and experience life that wasn't surrounded by, by little kids, and family life that was dominated more by, you know, the critical mass of kids was now down at the other end, so I wanted to experience life in the fast lane. Speaker 1: But how did Vassar [College, Poughkipsee, New York] come about? Speaker 2: TheIvy, the 'Seven Sisters', at that time, although co-education was just beginning for Ivy league schools, the Seven Sisters, at that time, was doing heavy recruiting. There was a very active Vassar Club in Chicago, who I remember members of the alumni association lived in Hyde Park, and they had events regularly. The Seven Sisters recruited together. They had events at the Art Institute that, that girls were invited to attend, and I enjoyed those luncheons. I'd go, I went to some with my mom, and that's how I decided that this is kind of the school I wanted to go to. Speaker 1: And what about the Vassar experience? This is a different experience for you really. I mean I know you wanted to get away, but had you spent much time out because I mean you had been in Chicago. Had you spent much time out, outside of the city, not really? Speaker 2: Not really. Except we would go to Michigan and Wisconsin and, occasionally, down to Mississippi, but no, I had not, I had, at that point, I had never been out East. Speaker 1: And so how did that experience change you? Speaker 2: I just remembered it as a very exciting time of my life. At that time, I would have said "I hated Vassar" and because that was a cool thing to do, nobody liked school. And it was, you know, die or be cruel. And there was so much happening in the world. This is the early '70s [1970s]. It was an exciting time. It was wonderful. I had a wonderful experience. It was a, a safe place to be to experience, to peek out at the world and get a taste, and it was still kind of like a safe place, but it was also enough distance from home and those seven sibs, six sibs, and religious family-oriented parents to, to stretch my own wings, and I, those times when I was in college, I consider myself very political but having nothing to do with electoral politics. I was very involved. That's when I got involved with what was called "The African Liberation Movement" and protest actions of various sorts. It was an exciting, great time. I developed fast friendships, even though co-education did, it was in its infancy at most of the schools then, and I enjoy the company of women and it was, even though I had been dying to go, actually, to a male school, and my mom, I later think that my mother wanted me to go to Vassar because that's where Jackie Kennedy Onassis went to school. She never said so. But I remember when Jackie Kennedy Onassis died, and I was sitting there with my mom and she said, oh, the news commentator made a comment that how she defined fashion and, so much for women of her generation, and I think my, if anything tipped the school, tipped the favor, tip the scale in favor of the school, I think that was it. Speaker 1: Now did you, so you're, what did you major in, what was it? Speaker 2: American History. Speaker 1: It was American History, okay. Story_ID: 13423 Speaker 1: So what are your thoughts, what are your thoughts about what you want to do after graduation? Speaker 2: Actually, I was so caught up in living in the now, I really didn't think very much about graduating, oh, I expected to teach and write history, frankly, I expected to have an academic career. I, I used to attend meetings or conferences of the National Association for the Study and Life of Negro History, you know, life and history. I delivered academic papers even in college and that's the kind of life I expected. Then in, instead, I ended up working in a campaign. I either wanted an academic career, or I thought I would make a pretty good news broadcaster. And Michelle Clark had been killed while I was in college. Do you remember her? And because of the politics of this situation, I remember at that time, you know, Watergate, it was an intensely political time, I thought that's a good, that would be a good career for me. I remember as, as a kid, as a very young kid in school, I remember I wanted to do other pretty things, like for the, what do you call those, schools shows, not talent shows, but because I never had a lisp or anything, I was always chosen for, to be an M.C. but never to be the star of the show, and I was also aware that the girls who got selected for other kinds of, the things that I thought I wanted to do, the stars, they were the ones who had long straight hair, which I didn't have. I had shoulder-length hair, but it was like, you know, and but I had a clear speaking voice, so I thought that that would be an interesting thing to do. And, actually, I knew, I had met a woman who had went to Wellesley [College] who became a filmmaker but, at that point, she was a reporter. And I went to spend a week with her to find out more about being a reporter, when I decided I wasn't going to graduate school, and she was making, working on a documentary about state legislators. And we used to laugh at them, you know, that "These are the people deciding your life", you know, we'd laugh at them and thought these are just buffoons, morons, idiots, you know, dimwit, you know. This was not, and I think what's out of that, but out of that experience, it demystified it for me, and it made me think certainly I could do this. And, well, not, well I just saw that it was not the people, the characters in those roles were not geniuses. And then I came back to Chicago. At that time in Chicago, Ralph Metcalfe had been dumped by late Mayor [Richard J.] Daley at that time, and that is, that's how I got involved in campaigns. Speaker 1: You got involved because of the aftermath of that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what campaign did you get involved with? Speaker 2: This was Ralph Metcalfe's campaign for the U.S. Congress. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Right. So, what did you learn? What did you like about that experience of working? Speaker 2: About what experience? Speaker 1: Working on the campaign. Speaker 2: Oh, when I worked in the, well, one, I liked people. As a child, I was, I was rather shy and, and very much a homebody and only interested in family, but as a, as a young adult, I found I was fascinated by the world. I was fascinated by people. I was not afraid. And then also being young, sometimes you don't know enough to be afraid. But I enjoyed knocking on doors and talking to people. And I can talk to people easily, and I found it fascinating and also growing up in a Christian family, in a race family, I always had a strong sense of right and wrong, and I felt that the political system in Chicago was wrong and bias against black people. And I resented that the mayor would make a decision, about who should represent, you know, a million and a half black people on the South side, and, and the issues that led to Metcalfe's fall from favor speaking out on issues of police brutality, and I thought that, that since he had taken that kind of step, that this was a campaign worth getting involved with. I also happened to see Professor Tim [Timuel] Black speak. And Tim made a comment about young people with energy should do whatever in their lifetime. I'm going to work in this campaign. I absolutely knew nothing about campaigns at that time, but I was committed and I found out, it's not exactly brain surgery, but it was something I was good at. I ended up carrying my precinct, and in the third ward, that was my very first campaign, and it was baptism by fire, but I carried, learned to carry my precinct and, also, as an independent, I also learned though to have a great deal of respect for precinct captains and for people who are in that game, because it's not easy. It does, there is, you know, there is a body of knowledge for, in terms of winning elections in Chicago. And it's almost a world into itself. It's a world that I still love. It's a world that's fascinating, you know, it's dynamic and it's, it's an incredible thing, politics, especially in Chicago. Speaker 1: So, after he, after you worked on that campaign, he won, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: He won. He went to Congress, that's right. So, after-- Speaker 2: But more importantly, or certainly, as importantly, he maintained his ward committee seat, his seat on the Cook County Democratic Central Committee, and he, that was, that, in the third ward, that really was our critical goal. Story_ID: 13424 Speaker 1: So what did you do after that point? Speaker 2: Well, at the same time, I was working for a legal publisher in public relations. I worked other campaigns. I met a lot of people, including Harold Washington in that election, and so then when Mayor [Richard J.] Daley died suddenly, there was a special election. A special election was called in 1979, and I, and there were two vacancies in the City Council. One was the 8th Ward. The other was the 18th Ward, where I lived, and I decided to run for, run for the city's council, run for alderman. So that was my first foray out on my own. Speaker 1: So, what did you-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, that was '77, 1977. Speaker 1: '77 [1977] you ran for office? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That was when you just started working for CCH, Commercial Clearance House? You said '77 [1977] to 1980. Speaker 2: I, perhaps I worked there a year, but I, because '79 [1979], I remember that was the first, that was the year that, actually Harold Washington ran for office, ran for mayor in 1979, for the first time. Speaker 1: The first time? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure it was '79 [1979]. And '77 [1977], I think Dick [Richard] Newhouse ran. There was a race for, let me see, there was a race for, there was an aldermatic, so a special election was called in 1977, and there were two aldermatic seats up and the mayoral, and it was in that election that, no, Bilandic won that election. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: And, but it was for short-term to fill the election, to fill the term of the late Mayor Daley. Speaker 1: Because that's the whole thing around Ronald Wilson Frost? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Story_ID: 13425 Speaker 1: So, now, how did you come to running for the Illinois General Assembly? Speaker 2: Oh, it's a continuation of the same thing. When I ran for alderman, I, I mentioned I had met Harold Washington at that time, and he thought "Who in the world is this kid out here?" And, but we, subsequently, became allies and friends. He ran for, he was running for the U.S. Congress. He had been a long-time member of the House and, I believe, the Senate. He had gone on to the Senate. And I decided then the next, by that time, I was hooked now, so the next election opportunity was the General Assembly, and I ran for, I decided to run for, for that House seat in my, in my neighborhood. Speaker 1: Well, you know, I wonder about that, so it was a way of getting in and becoming an elected official. Because, you know, a lot of times, you know, the people are alderman, people understand who the alderman is, the state rep. is farther away and in Springfield, sometimes people may not know the importance of that. Speaker 2: Well, in Chicago, local politics reigns, and then national politics is covered on the news, on the national news, and Springfield, or the state government tends to be or has tended to be, have a lot lower profile. I think that's less true today, but it was certainly true then, but there are some other things that happened in my life. After running for alderman, I also did some public interest lobbying. There was the Equal Rights Amendment, and for, I was, I was also very involved in the women's community, and I started going to Springfield and I remember the, actually, the Chicago Public Schools were going, were in deep, deep trouble, and I remember watching the chairperson of the public schools, was a socialite, and I remember seeing her in Springfield in the rotunda. She had a fur coat and perhaps some sort of knit dress on, and she was asked "What is the cause for the fiscal problems of the school system?" And she said "You don't know what kind of students we have." And, so, at the time, I'm standing there not too long, not too forward, you know, not too, a distance from the Chicago Public Schools, but to hear her response, that really angered me, and it was as if no one was taking responsibility for the mess at the Chicago Public Schools but attempted to blame students, and so public education had always, has, public education, as a public policy issue, became my issue, and it was an issue that was very close to a lot of people, the school system probably had the better part of 50,000 employees who had gone through a payless payday. Other checks to vendors and suppliers were bouncing, and so the school system was, it was a huge, public, huge point of interest at that time, and so that was, that also gave me some insight into Springfield. That's how I knew Springfield existed. Story_ID: 13426 Speaker 1: Who were you succeeding, though? Speaker 2: Eugene Barnes(?). At that time, we had multi--members districts, so each district in Illinois elected three members to the House, generally, it was, it's a system that allowed for minority representation in each district, so, typically, the downstate districts had two Republicans and one Democrat and, or let's say in DuPage County, they would have two Democrats, two Republicans and one Democrat and, of course, the city had two Democrats and one Republican and it usually managed to have three Democrats in that it's very difficult to be elected as a Republican in the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: That was the cumulative voting system? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's why John (unclear) got elected? Speaker 2: Yeah, because you bullet that. Speaker 1: Now, so, tell me about what you found there. What was this whole thing because this is, it's not you, you were more familiar at this point with Chicago politics, even though you know, you developed a relationship with Harold Washington, but I'm just saying when you went downstate--? Speaker 2: Well, no, I was familiar with Springfield because of the public interest lobbying that I had been engaged in, and but as a member, I just have a picture in my mind's eye of me staring at them, being horrified, and they were looking at me and now I know they were horrified, too, at the prospect. And, at the time, I had a baby face, and once I was told when I approached the door of the chamber "Pages enter over there!" because I had on a red jacket. "Pages enter over there!" And, so, being, and being a young woman at that time is, you know, for me is very important to be taken seriously. The, I was, I guess, also, kind of being not so far out of school and not so long out of school, I guess I was surprised at how many of my colleagues were not necessarily verse in public policy issues and then I figured, and then I learned that I was the idiot, that had nothing to do with what was going on. In Springfield, usually, you'll find that the staffers were more adept at dealing with both, whether it's technology or the substance of the issues. When I was on the Executive Committee, and the Executive Committee was a committee that, at that time, I don't know if it's still around, was used to, as a catch basin for hot issues. It was a very hot issue, you could send it to the Exec Committee, which could handle almost anything. And, but it gave the Rules Committee some place to send a hot issue, and it gave the ruling party an opportunity to, to determine a vote the way it wanted and so, usually, you end up with a fair amount of, let's say, party hacks, on both sides. There wasn't an awful lot of debate, necessarily. So, when it was time for me to leave the Assembly, I said to them, I said "I found, I really enjoyed working on this committee because it's given me a chance to work with some of the most outstanding minds of the 15th Century." And they all laughed because they knew what to expect from me, you know. So, I made, they basically gave, I gave as good as I got, and I guess they did, too. Story_ID: 13427 Speaker 1: The two hottest issues while I was in, in Springfield were, well, for me, or defining issues for me was one, the Equal Rights Amendment or the death of the Equal Rights Amendment, and I was very passionate about it. I felt that women should be included in the Constitution, in the U.S. Constitution, and I'd been working, even before I was a member, I did public interest lobbying on a number of issues including the Equal Rights Amendment or the ERA and Illinois, you know, we were running out of time to ratify the Amendment, and Illinois was one of the targeted states by now and a consortium of women's groups, they liked to consider themselves the old girl network. So, on that day, the House was packed, the gallery was packed, and when they called for the Equal Rights Amendment, the vote on the Equal Rights Amendment, I had, but was so steeped in this, I got up and made a very, very, fiery speech, and I closed by saying "White men of the world, it is now 3:15" because I made an analogy that, you know, the men were free to vote this up or down. It made no difference. We had no control, women had no control over what was happening in the chamber, but outside of the chamber, they still had to deal with the realities, and I, I told them that it reminded me of being in school when we'd tell someone "We'd see you at 3:15", so that's what I said "White men of the world, it is now 3:15." And the gallery exploded, and then every special interest would run up and ask me "Can you get me a special speech?" "Faith, Faith. I need you to make a speech for me. Can you speak?" And then I was just astounded because I had the, because I could, I could speak passionately about things I care about, suddenly I was asked, you know, "Can you give me a speech?" You know, for the Medical Society or, you know, just for any kind of lobbyist who had something going "Get me a speech. Get me a speech." They, but that was, that was a very, for me, poignant and defining moment now made as a poster of that speech and, and that for me was a special achievement. And the second thing was the fact that at that time, as right now, the legislature was going through the issue, the reapportionment issue, and there was no vote more partisan than a redistricting issue vote because that determines the majority of the chamber, or I should say partying majority of the chamber, and, and perhaps because I did not have a strong sense of a party person, I had gotten elected despite, you know, I was an antimachine Democratic. I didn't have this sense of party loyalty, and I also did not advocate party loyalty. I still believe that, from a black community point of view, I think we should be in both parties, frankly. We need to have influence. I would not like for any party to disregard us. But the Illinois had lost population with regards to the rest of the country. There were pop--at that time, the population was shifting, not only out of the city into the suburbs, but more from the Rust Belt to the Sun Belt and Illinois was scheduled to lose a congressional district. The Democratic party bosses had decided that that loss should come out of the black community, and Chicago had achieved a historic first by electing three black members of Congress, and so, it had been decided that Harold Washington's district would be sacrificed and that was, I thought, just patently unjust because the black community, the black population had grown. We had, we had not lost black population, so why should we lose a black CD [congressional district]? And the general approach or technique in redistricting was to use enough black population, to have enough black voters in a district so that it would be Democratic but never to have, allow critical mass where there is ever a real possibility of electing a black member, and so, I worked with a black advocacy group, or a lobbying group, that had actually put the resources and brain power together, I should say computer power, because that was the days when computers were still huge, to draw a map that showed, using census data, that you could draw a map that would save, that would still maintain the integrity of three black districts or their, and when the Democratic party rebuffed the map and refused to consider saving, keeping three black districts, Art Turner and I took the map over to the Republican side because the Republicans don't care about the city. The city's all lost, the city's lost to them. They care about downstate, and so what we did was to negotiate, you know, having, melding the two maps. We had a city for the city, a map for the city. They had a map for downstate, and we put those two together. At that time, the speaker of the House was George Ryan. And I remember he looked at me because it was, it was such a heavy weighted and potentially disastrous, it was such a political vote. I remember he looked at me and said "Are you going to hold?" I said "I'm holding." "Are you holding?" And so with the Republican map, the Republican party introduced the map that had three black CDs. The Democratic party's hold on black members resulted in very, very few black votes for that map, but we did manage to get the number of votes needed to pass out of the House. So, even though we could not carry in the Senate, which I believe at that time was controlled by the Democrats, but we could prove we could demonstrate legislative intent, that the legislature did, in fact, intend to maintain three black districts and we did save those three black districts and because of that work, all of it ended up being decided in court. But we did (unclear) Packey(?), the organization that I worked with, also wrote, drew maps for legislative districts that included the first Hispanic district. At the, at that time, we had no Hispanic in, in the state, and had a much larger number of, of, if you will, districts that were dominated by African American voters. So, in some measure, it was, I thought it was important. It was probably the most important thing. It certainly did not endear me to the Democratic party, but I did not, and, and also I did not think of myself as a career politician but more as an advocate or as a fighter for certain positions and certain values and certain ideals and that also, and things got very ugly for me in, in, in Springfield after that vote. I was despised. I was a, you know, pariah in my party. I remember there was a Democratic caucus once and speaker after speaker got up to, basically, castigate me, and I remember one guy got up and said "After all we'd done for the coloreds. After all we'd done for the coloreds." And just listening to this nonsense infuriated me, but it was still not a comfortable place to be. Even though, probably, intellectually, I would have, I did not recognize it. I, I decided to run for, I made the decision to run for the Congress instead of running for re-election, and my seat, my House seat was, would have been a fairly easy seat to keep for me. But I ran for Congress and lost that race, and so that ended up my short career in politics and elections. No, not then, then I went on to head the Harold Washington, the field operation for Harold Washington's election. Story_ID: 13428 Speaker 1: What role did the [Illinois state] Black Caucus, you know, you talk about the Democratic sort of machine people, but what role did the black caucus play or you played vis-a-vis the Caucus. Were you active or sort of on the side? Were you--? Speaker 2: Oh, I was an active member of the Caucus, but the Caucus, the members, the individual members of the caucus, are active members of the regular Democratic organization. So for one thing that the Democratic party required, I felt, of party loyalists, was that they did place a loyalty to the party and not the constituents, not to the people who elected them. And that was something that I had no patience for and no respect for. I think that most members of the Caucus thought that I was too rash and probably too young to understand what I was doing oddly enough, the real hacks, I mean people like James Taylor and Pounzy (ph.)Taylor, who were stalwarts of the machine, took secret pleasure in the defiance by Art Turner and myself. Now back in those days, if you voted a switch, probably it's the same today, the party leader will walk by and change your vote. So, I used to vote in and lock it and stand like this, you know, and wait for one of them to come by. And, so, usually the black caucus would make these symbolic stands, a symbolic stand, right. So if the party wanted a yea vote, but a nay vote was in your constituent's, in the black communities' interests, you know, I think we have 14 members, so you could get 14 no's up there in a hurry. The party leader would come down the aisle and say "I don't even know why you put me through this", you know, and changed their votes. And, so the party leader was coming by changing the votes and Taylor and Pounzy and Pounzy said "You know what?" because we were in catfish row, "You know what? Let me tell you something, boss. We got a whole different breed of catfish down there. It's a whole different breed of catfish. Ain't that right, sweet pea?" because they called me 'Sweet Pea', don't ask me why. I have no idea. And, and one little story is when I first got elected, you know, I had my shiny position, I came down to Springfield, I was, you know, ready. And when it came to seat assignments, I could not believe I got assigned to 'Catfish Row'. I wanted to cry. I mean, I, I was so disappointed and disgusted to be, you know, back in the middle of everything that I fought against, here I am on 'Catfish Row'. And, so, Art Turner and I became fast friends and we were two freshman thrown on Catfish Row but as I used, as I, in the words of James Taylor, "You got a new kind of catfish down here." And I also, and it was really by working around them that I gained a different kind of understanding. For people who, like James Taylor would tell me, he and Pounzy or one or both of them, came up from Mississippi on the back of a watermelon truck, did not finish, did not have an awful lot of formal education, and politics, you know, represented a way, and, I should say, the regular Democratic organization represented a vehicle for upward mobility and for community leadership and participation. And I also started to gain some, a lot of respect for the science of it, maybe it's an art, too. It's an art and science of politics that these characters mastered. Speaker 1: So, you weren't embarrassed by Catfish Row, though? Speaker 2: No, not at all. In fact, just as they took perverse pleasure and secret pleasure in our defiance, I took secret pleasure in them being the kind of characters they were, you know. And, in fact, at the end of the session, they would have certain community women march in there and serve catfish, you know, and, so, they, it was, those were very, very interesting and exciting times. Story_ID: 13429 Speaker 1: Now you, so you clearly consider yourself an independent person. What do you think the importance of independent politics, you know, that whole movement did within that environment. I mean what was the importance of that movement? Speaker 2: Well, I think it was part of the maturation of the black community. It was important for, I think for black voters, to demand respect and to demand that the Democratic party not take our vote for granted and to use black votes to facilitate careers and policy for other people, just that didn't make sense. And it was an important part of the black communities coming of age and coming, demanding respect, so that's, that's how I look at black independent politics in that era. Certainly the disenchantment of the black community with the machine had been building up for some time and it was, the heart of the black community's independence was in the area that I represented, the 6th Ward, the 8th Ward, the 21st Ward and, at that time, this was the center of the, the black middle class. I'm not talking about those who had moved out to the suburbs, but those who were still in the city, this was the '80s, late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s]. And these, these communities, I think, demanded, these were homeowners, they were taxpayers, and were communities that were aware of what was going on, especially things like the issues with the schools and the school board. Many teachers live in that area. And, also, it was part of the chain of events and the developments that led to the election of Harold Washington, which I, which for me was a political experience that was unmatched until I saw Nelson Mandela win the presidency in South Africa. Story_ID: 13430 Speaker 1: Did you find, what about your role as a female down there, you know, the role of women, vis-Ã -vis, you know, just even black politics or vis-Ã -vis the whole Springfield experience because you came in at really the heart of the women's movement there, I mean not the heart, but you know, but there was a lot of activity. So, were you a female, I mean were you ever, was it a black thing or was it a female thing or was it an independent thing or was it all those things. Speaker 2: I think in terms of basic politics that was shaped more by being an independent. And, you know, my own view of things or, was shaped by also being, you know, by being black, being a black Chicagoan and, you know, growing up in the, against, going, I should say going up against the machine. In Springfield, I believe, probably in retrospect I would say what was even more difficult than being any one of those things singularly was being very young and being all of those things. And I had a tendency to take life very seriously. I once had a Spousal Rape Bill, and I remember presenting my Rape Bill before the, a committee and the reaction of the men, even the ones who were my, the more liberal ones, we had a Rape Study Commission, and even some of my colleagues from the Rape Study Commission were just so clearly opposed to this bill and opposed to the notion that "If you're married, there's no such thing as rape", you know, and I remember "What kind of--" and I remember being disillusioned, sitting there looking at these monsters. One time I, during the ERA, the height of the ERA, there were lots of protestors, and so there were women who would come and chain themselves to the, in the rotunda, and so the marshals came out, and the state marshals had drug these women, they were dragging these women into the jails, there was actually a jail cell down in the basement. And I thought, you know, their heads are hitting the railing, and I thought, so I told them, I said "You're gonna hurt these women. Don't do that." Next thing I know, they were dragging me off, and I told them I was a member. They did not believe it. And, so, I'm sitting cooling my heels in jail downstairs with these other protestors, and thank God for other black women. Ethel Skyles(?) Alexander and Carol Mosely Braun said "It's mighty quiet from the back." And, so, finally Ethyl told Carol "Monica wouldn't miss all these votes. We haven't heard her mouth", and so they came to look for me. Now, I don't know how in the world, they would, why they would look for me in the jail. I don't remember how they got down there, but I was just sitting around, and I remember hearing Ethel say "That one right over there. Baby, let her out right now. She is a member." And she blasted them. The next thing I knew, keys were rattling and I was yanked out of the holding cell, and dusted off and I was back in my seat, and Jim Edgar was the Secretary of State, and he came by and apologized profusely, but I never made a big deal out of it, but I just, you know, so I felt life is so precarious, you know, one minute I'm sitting in the chamber, and the next minute, I'm in the jail. Because they weren't used to very many people looking like me being in that, in the chamber. Story_ID: 13431 Speaker 1: I knew Corneal [Davis] very well. I respected and admired him. He used to tell me stories. He was a grandfather of a very good friend of mine, and he used to tell me stories about the old days, back in the '30s [1930s], I think, when he was first elected. He was the Dean of the House. And, he, although, he actually retired before I became a member, I attended his retirement party in Springfield, but I remember the stories he told me of when they first went to Springfield, the black members could not find public accommodations, how they asked the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund for assistance and Thurgood Marshall came in and went to Springfield to do legal battle, I think over the issue of public accommodations. I also heard, he told me the stories back in the day when the transit, I think it's the St. Nicholas Hotel, and the morning of a heated vote, there would be a special delivery made of, you know, packets of cash that would be thrown over the transits, so I heard lots of stories and I also took like a perverse pleasure in just being part of that. I knew that it had its own twisted and perhaps, you know, a, a seedy underside, underseam, but I loved it. Story_ID: 13432 Speaker 1: Why do you think the Illinois General Assembly is so important? Why do you think that as a body? Speaker 2: Well, I think that state legislatures are important because they're just part of our democracy. We have state local and federal government, and I think, I happen to think that government is important at each level. I don't think that state government is more important than city government or the national government, but, particularly, under, after [President] Ronald Reagan, when many responsibilities of government devolved down to the state level. I think the state, state government became increasingly important and state government does govern, have a huge amount of impact on the lives of citizens and, for that reason, I think it's important to know what's going on and to have some influence and say-so over your life and to participate fully. Story_ID: 13433 Speaker 1: Now the name, the title of this project is "Pioneers in the Struggle". What does that mean to you as it relates to the black, the story of blacks who served in this, you know, this body? Speaker 2: I tell you, when I first heard that as a title, I didn't think it was particularly appropriate, frankly. I don't think there have been many pioneers or many people who were committed to the struggle, frankly. And I would ask, "Struggle for what?", you know. What comes to my mind in terms of Pioneers in the Struggle, I would think of, of people who are the first, who are on the cutting edge, and who are, who are engaged in deliberate conflict and contest against evil or injustice and for a cause. I don't think that, and people argued with me and perhaps I have come to feel that they're right. Perhaps there isn't, perhaps the state legislature is not the venue for that kind of, of contest, you know. Maybe I, some people have told me that I saw things too starkly and I tried, and I presented things too starkly, I saw them in, you know, in such dark contrast, good versus evil, black and white, and it made most people very uncomfortable and the kind of passion and zeal that I had is not, I don't think it won me a lot of friends, and it wasn't understood and I think that those are things that pioneers, you know, live with. I think that, it's very difficult to be on the cutting edge and not get cut and bleed to death. And that's also lonely. It's not, it's not easy, and I am not sure that most members go through that kind of, of challenge, you know. So, I did not find the title particularly appropriate. Story_ID: 13434 Speaker 1: With Art Turner, just one other question. He seemed, I mean you both did the same thing. Did you take more the heat than he did or what was the deal? Was he also ostracized? Speaker 2: At that time, yes. Now there, I think, aside from a difference in style, I think Art and I had the same values and beliefs, but I also felt more isolated from my colleagues. One thing I observed is that Art, even if a colleague walked up to Art, they had lots of things to talk about. They had a wife. They would have sports. And between talking about your wife and sports, that can take you through quite a bit. You know, I didn't have a wife. I wanted one. I wish I had had one, you know, every, you know, one thing women in politics don't have is a wife. But, also, I, it was a very male setting, and I'm a complete idiot, I'm a, you know, I'm a sports idiot, and, so I used to say that, yeah, sometimes I would have difficulty making conversation, dinner conversation, that there weren't, there weren't very many points of common interest and the other, but on the other hand, in Springfield, or in my experience in the General Assembly, for me, I also learned to respect difference. I learned that, that there can be honest disagreement, and for me, perhaps, it was the most stark with finding commorodity on, and I should say it was most starkly revealed in examples of finding commorodity on catfish row and also on the other side of the aisle with Republicans. You know, we were, were we still in Ronald Reagan era or, you know, about that, so there was that, that right wing that I had no patience with, but I learned to talk to and respect people who had different kinds of political values, and to distinguish between, to find, you know, to distinguish between right wingers, for instance, and to understand that someone might be conservative because they have a conservative point of view about the Constitution. They perhaps would not support the ERA because they felt the Constitution should not be abridged in any form. But, on the other hand, sometimes they would help because they believed in the Constitution, so there were other Constitutional issues that where they would, where we could be allies and, so for me, that was, that was an, you know, an important lesson and even today I have seen people that I haven't seen for twenty years who, you know, who I can look at and remember with respect that we had these kind of honest exchanges and still have a decent relationship today because of it. Story_ID: 13435 Speaker 1: When you left, you said you got involved, I mean not immediately, but you got involved with Harold Washington's campaign. Speaker 2: No, I got involved immediately. Speaker 1: Immediately with Harold Washington. In the first, no, the second, the one in '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. Speaker 2: He ran, that would have been '83 [1983], the '83 [1983] election. Speaker 1: What was most surprising about that election to you? Speaker 2: I think the most surprising thing to me was that there were people who did not think Harold could win. You know, someone, I think it was Ray Yule who said "Only fools and babies could believe Harold Washington could win, and Monica was a bit of both." You know, I was a zealot out for the cause again and that was, that's a tremendous campaign. It was a tremendous experience. I think it was in that, during that campaign that I really experienced being a political professional, being able to go out and every time give a speech. That was what wowed them. At one point, because usually it was my job to warm up, especially for four rays out into a field. It was my job to warm up a cold, perhaps a hostile audience. Harold Washington wasn't well known on the west side. I could not assume that people had some identity or positive identity in their minds about Harold and, but I learned to go out and say "West Side, Best Side", you know, and, and just be able to deliver each and every time because to win an election like that in Chicago, you have to do that. You don't get second chances. You have to, each and every time, win. And, also, to win a Chicago election, you have to win by a large enough margin that, that can't be stolen. So, it's not just, you've gotta get that plurality because if they can steal it, you haven't won. And it was a great, it was a great campaign. Perhaps it was more a crusade. What surprised me? I didn't, but the surprise came much later. The surprise came much, much later. Nothing surprised me about the Harold Washington, you know, campaign. I was a bit dismayed when I had to explain to black people, I said "Listen. Sears Tower is not gonna move. John Hancock is gonna be here. The Exchange is, the Merc, is going nowhere. If we have a black mayor, believe me, it's gonna be down there. Not to worry. We can do this." You know, one thing, and also coming out of the reapportionment experience is that I knew where black people were. The Washington campaign came on the heels of my experience with reapportionment and dealing with the census tracks, so I knew where black people were, and I did not, I felt we could win. Our winning strategy had to be to find, to identify each and every black voter. So, I didn't care where a black voter lived. I didn't care if that black voter was in the 1st Ward, I claimed that voter as mine. And I also, whether you lived in the 1st Ward or in the Lakefront, there are lots of people on the, black people on the Lakefront, and so, when you got out of our strongholds, like I knew we were going to roll out a 6, 8 and 21, you know, almost 90 percent turnout, and 100 percent plurality, you know, just like I was gonna roll out a 6, 8 and 21 like that, I had the 19th Ward, with [Chicago alderman Eddie]Vrydolyak, the 10th Ward, but see, in 10 and in 19, everywhere there was a black voter, I was claiming them. Now, there were lots of all-white wards and they were gonna, the 13th Ward, can come in with some hell of accounts, you know, I mean, and those, and those wards were traditionally the big vote producing wards, so I knew that our central south side wards were going to have to deliver. They were going to have to stand up and match. You know, I had 19, they had to stand at 19 and I also had, I felt everywhere you had a ward like 19, where, and 10, where it's not an all-white situation, you know, there are some black voters there, I felt that they were my, that's my ace in the hole over there, but I knew that I had to count on those central wards matching the big turnouts that's coming out of those high producing wards, and then if we, if, that would keep everything even, and then I had to go and find every black voter on the Lakefront over now, which is not to say we ignored the west side, the west side was critical. But, there, again, those wards had to produce, and we managed to do that. We managed to do that and do it handsomely, and then you'll have to protect your vote. The election night, I remember, I was down at the Board of Election Commission and, at the hotel, there are all sorts of people that no one had ever seen before actually work. That's how it always happens in elections, you know, at the end of a campaign. But I remember when they finally, because they, the ward bosses always hold out, you know, the 10th Ward will hold out, these big voting, you know, they will hold out because if they needed only a thousand votes, you can make up a thousand votes easily. And so, finally, finally, when they had counted enough of the votes, and we had enough votes accounted, enough wards accounted for, enough precincts accounted for, that they couldn't steal it. It's like "You can steal all you want, and you still can't win because we have the plurality." I remember the Chairman of the Election Commission whipped off his glasses and looked at me and said "Faith, you beat us. You did it." And, for me, that was the biggest moment of the campaign, you know what I mean. Because I, and I also remember I got trashed by [WBBM-TV anchor] Walter Jacobsen and did one of these critiques of the Washington campaign. You know, "As a sign of how out of it, incompetent and generally ridiculous the Washington campaign is, they have a Vassar girl running their field operation. What does a Vassar girl know about the streets and alleys of Chicago?" Of course, I didn't watch that. I'm at the campaign office, and then people started calling "Faith?" I said "Yeah." "This is so and so from the whatever ward, whatever precinct." I'm like "Yeah." "I thought you was in charge of the precincts?" I said "Yes, I am." " There's a white girl in charge." I said "What are you talking about? There's no white girl down here. It's me." And then I kept getting all these calls about "There's a white girl in charge." And I thought what is, because they said Vassar girl and what that means in the heads of people, you know, I guess my face didn't pop up as the icon for Vassar girl, and so the day after we won, I called Skippy. I said "I'll tell you what this Vassar girl knows about the streets and alleys of Chicago." But that was the best feel, you know, because I thought all of these people, you know, they're celebrating, and if we don't deliver, you can't protect the vote. Getting the vote out is one thing, if you cannot protect it, now this, I know that is the old Chicago, and I'm sure things are not like that now, but that's how the, and the politics in the, in that era, that's how it was, and to win was just the greatest thing. I couldn't believe it myself. I shouldn't say I couldn't believe it. It was almost unbelievable. But I guess it was matched by a disappointment. There were, what was surprising is that, I think with Harold Washington, he felt that if you have that kind of independent spirit, if you can go up against the Chicago machine, the Chicago police, the Chicago whatever, then you can possibly go up against me and I'm not having it. And that's what surprised me. He was my mentor. He was, had been such an important part of my own political development. I was taken aback by that and I'm really crushed by that at the time, because certainly I was a pariah of the Democratic party. I had threats on my life and all of that, and I then had no ally. And so I figured the best thing I could do is to leave town, and so I escaped to Cambridge where they look upon Chicago as some quaint outpost out West, and just did a different turn. I did an MPA. I went to the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard and then became a social science researcher. After then, I dropped the "Faith", I became Monica Stewart and traveled incognito, as I call it, and doing educational research. However, there came a time when I had to go to the Chicago Public Schools. I remember we were, I was with these researchers, and we were sitting around and all the people at the board kept, they would listen and they would look, and then one of them said "Faith! That's Monica Faith Stewart!" And I said "Oh, blasted me out cold." You know, so then all my white colleagues "Monica, what are they talking about? What are they talking about?" I said "Don't worry." I said "That's another life." So, that's how I feel about the "Faith". Story_ID: 13436 Speaker 1: Now tell me, what happened, you said, who was disappointed? What happened after the election? What happened? Speaker 2: Well, it was a year or so later, Harold Washington and I parted ways, and I think what happened is that he, for all of being part of the new independent politics, Harold came from the machine, Harold still subscribed to the same, fundamentally, the same notions, and I feel he couldn't really understand someone who would take that kind of vote on reapportionment, even though he benefited from it. I think that it was alien, you know, at, at, at, in the final analysis, he felt that, not felt, I mean he told me outright. I wanted to be the Commissioner for Women, of the Women's Commission, so he asked me, you said "Do you know there are 5,000 postcards with your name on it, and why is that?" And, you know, I thought, I was beaming, still a little naÃ¯ve thinking "I couldn't believe all these women, these girls, they sent me that postcard. I can't believe 5,000." And then he said "You know, that makes you dangerous." I could not hear what he was saying because how could, what was he talking about? I didn't have, I did not have a peg to hang this new bit of information. It kind of went, you know, he said "That makes you dangerous." I thought he was kind of teasing, and, but he was very serious, and then there were some other choices that he made that I disagreed with him, on the issue of the superintendency of the schools, and so I said "I was thrown out of the political kingdom, and I ran like hell for Cambridge." Speaker 1: Did you also, you became really disillusioned with politics at that time then or Chicago politics? Speaker 2: I guess not, not formally, you know, not really disillusioned. I guess Harold broke my political heart. I could not, I could not believe it. We'd been friends and colleagues and this was my mentor, and betrayal by a mentor was, I, you could say it was disillusioning, but it wasn't so much the process. It wasn't the machine. It was not corruption. It was, you know, it was having a mentor turn around and, and really blaming me for the strength that I had, for that, that kind of notion just left me cold. And I didn't really sort it out, all out, either intellectually or emotionally. I just thought it would be "This is something I know how to do. If I don't know how to do anything else, I know how to go to school. I know how to write. I know how to read." You know, and I had had a chance to be a fellow at the Institute of Politics after Harold won, and I had a wonderful time. I told my mother "I can't believe it. I can't remember when I was around people not only who read books but wrote them as well." It was such a, you know, it was such a relief. It was such a change from what I'd been involved in before, and I realized that the academic audiences were just enthralled when I talked about Chicago politics and the foreign press like the "Boston Globe" and the "Washington Post". They would fall out laughing. I really enjoyed it. And then I thought "I think I should, I'll go back to school." Speaker 1: So, then you were doing this educational consulting thing, right? Speaker 2: Afterwards, I worked for a research lab. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was the policy, the Director for Policy and Development. And then my passion became things like urban education and, really urban education was my passion at that time. Story_ID: 13437 Speaker 1: So now, this, what, your appointment came in 2000? Speaker 2: [Nods]. Speaker 1: So why did you jump at that opportunity? Speaker 2: Well, I already, first of all, I was doing the political, the education research and I had gotten involved with things, with organizations, with change, the change theory and systems theory and that kind of thing, and how you apply the systems theory and chaos theory to organizational behavior and, but and even though I wasn't, I kind of, I guess, found my little academic life, I wasn't at any university setting, but we still had to publish, and I used to get tired of, you know, facing these deadlines, of publishing these articles that, all of maybe, 200 people are going to read, if that. And, so it was nearing '94, and I, and things were happening in South Africa. The election was coming up, and I am unsure, oh, I had done work with Lawyers for Civil Rights Under Law. They had a training project to train legislators or ground reapportionment issues, and they also had a Southern Africa law project-- Story_ID: 13438 Speaker 1: So, I guess I had done a wonderful project. It was very interesting with the Chicago Board of Education. That was more my passion, but South Africa, I had always had an interest in. From my college student days [at Vassar College], you know, "None of us is free til South Africa is free." I also, I could have minored in black studies, if I had written a--or had a double major, I should say, if I'd written a thesis. So I was very aware of South Africa, and had done some, you know, some protests, and, and when I was in graduate school, we had like Allan [A.] Boesak come to speak and had done some anti-aparteid, some other kind of protests, so when the Lawyers for Civil Rights Under Law was organizing delegations, and I received literature about it, I thought "Yes. I'm gonna do this." And, as it turns out, my best friend, my old college roommate said, "I'm jealous." So, she came along. And we were partners, because observers were paired in two as partners, and it was an incredible experience. After watching, I should say after working so hard for so much of my adult life, in terms of pulling people out to vote, to stand there and look at thousands of people, you know, as far as the eye could see, people are standing in line, snaking down hills and it was just incredible. It was incredible. And I remember at the election, on election day, standing in the, the ballroom of the Hill, the Carlton Hotel in Johannesburg, and Nelson Mandela stood there and said "I always believed this day would happen when I would stand up and say 'Free at last, free at last. Thank God, almighty, I'm free at last." And I just cried. It was such a dramatic thing, and to me, it pulled together the African American struggle at once, and, and I, I had a feeling of our struggles have really given voice and put a face on racism and hate and that determination, and, so, South Africa just, it captured me. And, also, because I thought a lot about Mississippi being there and wondering how, how do people, what do you do after this kind of ugly, ugliness, how do you go on? And, also, I had an epiphany. It's one thing to tear down and it's quite another to build a society, to build an economy. How in the world do you do this? And how do you do it fast enough? I was reminded of Harold Washington's experience, I should say as the first black mayor [of Chicago]. We used to talk a lot about using symbols and substance and I should say symbols versus substance. When you can't make change fast enough. I remember how people used to call me "Monica, where's my prints and where's my job?" and so those are the kind of dynamics, also, that were happening in South Africa, at a much larger and dramatic, more dramatic scale because you were talking 40 million people, you know. And, so, I was just fascinated. I also, when I was at the Kennedy School [of Government, Harvard University], one area I really studied and loved is Presidential transition, and this had to be the mother of all governmental transitions, and I had met some of the women from the Women's League at a conference in Washington, and when I went to South Africa, I connected again with the Women's League and was fascinated by Winnie Mandela and the opportunity to be with these women who had struggled so. And I had found it so interesting when they would ask me, I would ask them how does it feel you know, about, "to be imprisoned?" but then I found that they were short with sharing their stories. They wanted to ask "Monica, why do wear two, two different colors of lipstick?" "Monica, why is it, yesterday your hair was straight, and today it's--" you know, and these women really endeared themselves to me. I don't know. There was just something about their sense of now being on the world stage, and so I agreed to help, to do some work for the Women's League, and I returned back to South Africa. I took a little, a sabbatical--actually, no, not at that point, I just took more leave time and went back, and I, through happenstance, was offered a position on a research project in South Africa and, so for a year, that was with a British firm, and the Brits decided to return to London, and I stayed. That's how I made that, the transition. I did management consulting because a lot of the work that I had done, my focus was applying these, this theory to large scale public organizations, but you can apply it, you know, across the board, and I also had an opportunity to work in Parliament. And I remember I would leave there very late. I got to work early, and I would see Nelson Mandela walking. We call him the "Mechanical Man" because he walks very stiff, and I had such a feeling that, you know, I used to tell myself , "Look, this is not your country. It's, you know, democracy will work. You can go home." But it was very, it was the most exciting time I think past, since Harold Washington, for me, and then I discovered the rest of the world. There's a world outside Chicago. I love Chicago. And Chicago will always be my home, but right now, I like having a foot in these two worlds. Story_ID: 13439 Speaker 1: And, so, tell, talk us about your position there, just what you're doing. Speaker 2: I work for the state of Illinois. When Governor [George] Ryan was running, he made a campaign promise to strengthen and expand the International Trade Office that is run out of the Illinois Department of Commerce. And he also promised that the first office would be opened in Africa to address the issues of, you know, emerging markets. So, then when I read that I thought "That job has my name on it." I was already, at the time, in South Africa, and I, and because of reapportionment, had a certain relationship with Governor Ryan. But I did a dumb thing. I think I, being outside of Chicago, I would decide that I did not make contact with his office and ask for the job, which shows you I didn't have my Chicago hat on. Instead, I applied and just kind of went through, I found out who was in charge, and kind of went through the process, because I knew there was no, who could be better qualified for this job? You know, I just didn't think there was such a person, although if I had my Chicago hat on, I would know that qualifications has nothing to do with it, you know. So, I applied for the job, and then when they made the report to the governor "Oh, they've identified somebody." When the governor responded favorably, they were like "Whoa, good job!", but it's largely because of our other relationship, so, for me, this opportunity is really important, personally, and very satisfying because I'm once again in, in government. I, it meant a lot to have an opportunity to interact with Governor Ryan. He came to South Africa to do the formal opening of the office, and spoke about our relationship back in, in Springfield, so [Illinois state senator] Emil Jones even made, or Senator Jones made the comment. He said "We often wonder where Monica disappeared to." And then he said "Now we know she was cutting deals with Republicans." And, and I absolutely love the work that I do. The, the economy in South Africa has to improve. You know, I do feel passionately about Africa and the, and the poverty in Africa, the fact that in one sense, it's a rack and ruin from Cape Town to Cairo, and you just can't go into this century like that. Africa has to have a century. I fully subscribe to President Mbeki's notions of the African Renaissance and the 21st Century as the African century. And I'd like to make some contribution toward that happening. So, that's why I, I love the work that I do. I am in government that I have a passion about, but also, I have a different understanding and appreciation for business. I remember, as a legislator, that business people would often lament that "Government did not understand business." And I then went into business myself as a co-owner of a restaurant, and I call that my, the investment there is my MBA degree, my MBA tuition, but I learned to, to develop an expertise around the economy and business, and issues of business because I believe that it is very important to Democratic development and people do want choices. They do want options. I don't fundamentally believe there is such a thing as free enterprise, but I think we can use enterprise to free options for a lot of people, and, so, I, I feel that the work I'm doing has a special meaning, and for me that's also, that's been important, to have a deeper meaning in the work that I do, to have it applied to a higher set of, a higher set of values and goals beyond my having a salary and buying a car or condo or whatever. I'd like to feel that I've made a contribution to humankind and I've done something, as my grandmother says, "to brighten that corner where you are." Story_ID: 13440 Speaker 1: Do you feel any sense of being an outsider, you know, in South Africa? Speaker 2: A tremendous sense of being an outsider. I'm living in somebody else's country. That's when I'm a little disenchanted, that's why I say "living in somebody else's country". I need to go home. First of all, I left Chicago, where I won't say everybody knows me, but I know quite a few people in Chicago. And, I mean, lots of people, it's when I'm in the restaurant or downtown. It's rare. If I'm in the public in Chicago, it is rare, I will say, probably never happens. I'm some place where somebody goes "Hey, Monica", you know. And then to be somewhere where no one knows you and I found that I went through these, I won't say a crisis of identity, but I spent a lot of time thinking about identity because there are all these issues that stand out that, that could not exist here, in this, in this background where, at home where I'm known. And in South Africa, I had all these set of issues that popped up out of nowhere, and issues of identity really became very important. I thought about it. Basically, who are you? You know, short of, of, even though I used to complain about people, other people's notion of Monica Faith Stewart, they had this, you know, "She's this" or "She's that." And, you know, reactions to my personality and the fact that I had these passionate feelings, and, you know, but, I found, I think that that's preferable to people saying, not having any idea who you are, and, so, it was a learning process. I think I learned a lot about myself, going through that, that experience. Now it's different, you know, I know lots of people, I can go to, I have paid my dues in that, in that, that context now, but it wasn't very easy at the beginning. Story_ID: 13441 Speaker 1: So, what do you want to do from this point on? What do you want for the rest of your life? Speaker 2: I want to have, I want to be able to walk in an area that I feel passionate about. I, I don't know if I will ever get involved again in electoral politics. I will always miss and love electoral politics, and that's something I really have to give up, living in somebody else's country. I, I would like to write. I, at one time, I wanted to teach and write history. I have taught. I used to teach at Northeastern [University], the Political Science Department, and I love it. I would like to, I'd like to write. I'd like to write. I'm an aficionado of the murder mystery. I want to write a, I'd like to write fiction, you know, which I've never done before, creative writing, and I also want to write, I write essays and really, I would like to have a more intellectual kind of questioning atmosphere to sit down and reason together with people, that, I miss that, and that will probably be the next phase of my life after I leave South Africa, after I've returned here. Story_ID: 13442 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Probably, not probably, I would like, I'd like my legacy to be that there are some things that are worth taking risks for, that we should have passion about things that are bigger than ourselves, that we have a responsibility to, to the world, to society, and we should have some passion about that, and one person can make an impact, and one person can, can live a thoughtful life, and try to make things a bit better. Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I have to keep using that word "passion". I hate it when people say "Oh, she's so passionate about whatever." You know, I, I guess I would, I don't know, I guess that I want to be remembered for some part of the truth that has come through my life, even though it's probably not something that I feel very comfortable with or would necessarily think it's very flattering, that I can probably, it renders me articulate, you know, to think "What do I want to be remembered by?" It's hard enough coming to grips with getting older, you know. I guess, as a person, I guess I'd like to have my ability to make these speeches remembered because it comes from a real quest for, as I see it, for a passion for justice and, and for truth, and that should mean something. Story_ID: 13443 Speaker 1: Anything else you want to say? Speaker 2: I just want to say one thing about coming from a family of, of race, they used to call them "race men" or "race people". And I was thinking about that. I haven't heard that expression in so long, "He's a race man", you know, but I remember the night I was, it was the night before I was going to Springfield, and I was a little full of myself, you know, I was, and my grandmother [Estella S. Greenlee] asked me to come over for dinner, so I just knew she was going to cook a special dinner and to tell me how proud she was and all of that, which she did, but we didn't spend very much time on how proud she was. What we spent time on was her telling me that I had, that, one, she never intended to look at any "Sun-Times", "Tribune" or "Zulu News" and find me up there involved in any kind of corruption. She never expected that, that I had a job and a responsibility to uphold the race while I was down there, and whatever these other people were doing, she never expected that of me. And, also, she didn't expect me to start thinking that now I was so grand. As she told me, "In this country, we don't have kings. If anytime you think you're too big to speak to somebody who voted for you, then you give that seat back because it's not yours. This, what you have is in your hands, as a storage shed and as a trust." And she basically read me the riot act, and I can't say I was miffed or anything because I did listen. I mean, it's a hundred years later, and I can still relay much of what she said. But I think it's that notion of having, that you have a responsibility that's bigger, to something bigger than you, and I think about often when people make huge mistakes, I say "They didn't have that kind of a grandmother to read them the riot act and to tell them that there are things more important than your ego", and how important it is for, she said, you know, "Other people perhaps can mess around, but we can't afford that. We need leaders who are going to represent the very best of what we have to offer."..