 Story_ID: 13721 Speaker 1: Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Russell Sugarmon, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, and the Sugarmon with an O-N. Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: B, Bertram. Speaker 1: Bertram. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep, I'm a junior. Speaker 1: Okay, and, do you have a nickname, or anything? Speaker 2: Not anymore, I used to be called "Shug", something like that. Speaker 1: I'm sure they probably tried to do something--. Speaker 2: --(laughter) it's difficult. It has too many syllables, I think. Speaker 1: Now there's a story behind how you got the name, M-O-N. Speaker 2: M-O-N, yeah. Speaker 1: Maybe we'll save that for when we talk about your father. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: --we'll talk about that then. What is your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Memphis [Tennessee], May 11th, 1929. I tell people, I was born, then came the Depression. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I try to think there's a seismic connection. Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a--judge, I'm a lawyer by training. The most exhilarating part of my career though, was my early years as a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. This is satisfying, but, you know, that was an experience you can't buy, you have to have the luck to have born--been born at the right time and place. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: This is the what, the 27th of June--28th of June, okay. I lose track, and 2003. Story_ID: 13722 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well that's hard. I have several favorite foods. It depends on what's on the plate, at the time. But, I like ribs, barbequed ribs. I like Chinese food, the one that the Chinese workers did here, it is a contrived thing. You chop up a lot of vegetables--the available vegetables and you stir fry and chop up the available meat, and put a few sauces in, the hoisin sauce, soy sauce, something like that. I like that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Spring and fall, really. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Not really. There, there's so many places I'd love to see. I, I don't think I have one I want to go back and forth to yet. There, there are one or two, I could spend time in, but there's still much of the world that I'd still like to see up close and personal. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know whether you'd call it a favorite phrase, I, I--it's sort of a--for therapy. I, I've got a plaque I give to friends of mine. When I was growing up, my father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.] was a realtor. And, the--his--a lot of his closings he, he used a lawyer friend--in a lot of his closings, he used a lawyer, who had come from his home town of Gunnison, Mississippi, a guy named William Ling. And he had a Latin phrase hanging on his wall. And I used to ask him what it meant. He says, "Well you're too young, yet. When you get old enough, I'll let you know what it means. So, after I finished law school--this was many years later, I dropped by his office, and I said, "What does that mean?" He said, "Well, you're old enough. It's 'Illegitimi non Carborundum', it's Latin, and it means 'don't let the bastards get you down'". [chuckles] He says, "Every now and then, you'll find--take some comfort in that". So, his, his son gave it to me after I became a judge. They had packed up his father's belongings, and they've, they were putting it in the attic. So, his mother said, "I remember--." So they gave it--I have the original plaque. But I've had that language put on some bronze plaques, then--every now and then, one of my friends is in a real problem, I'll give him one, and it don't cost much. But, they seem to enjoy the refocusing, of a problem. Speaker 1: Now, now, can you say it again, slowly, for us? Speaker 2: Illegitimi non Carborundum. Carborundum's grind down, and not, not, illegitimate is you know, self-explanatory. Story_ID: 13723 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your family history? How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: I can't trace it back on either side very far. I wish I could, 'cause it sounds interesting, to me. I mean, what I know of it. My mother [Lessye Sugarmon] was born in Memphis [Tennessee], her mother was an African American--a, a cross between African American and American Indian lineage. Her name was Paralee Sarepta Roach (ph.). And, her father was a Chinese American, who owned a--a general store in Deeson, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, beyond that, she had I think two or three sisters, and several brothers. Her father took two of them back to China for an education. They came over, they came, they returned after a few years in China. And then they went back, and the war broke out and, they never got back. I've got pictures of one of the Chinese--of my Chinese uncles, and his family but we don't know the names, where they are, or anything. I just got the, the--she had it, you know. Speaker 1: The war you're talking about is World War I? Speaker 2: The Japanese invaded--the beginning of World War II. And, you know, the Japanese invaded China. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, Nanking [China], and all, all of those horror stories. Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, that's in the '30s [1930s] then. Speaker 2: Yeah, '30s [1930s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: The other brothers were in, in Shelby, Mississippi. They had a funeral home down there. And then, then my mother's father is buried in Elmwood Cemetery [Memphis, Tennessee], he and his wife, Ju Li, Ju Toi Li (ph.) or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your grandfather's name again, the Chinese grandfather? Speaker 2: Ju Toi, Ju Li Toi, and I get confused, which is the first and the last--two you put in front, you know, it's the reverse of what we do here. But--. Speaker 1: Usually they put the last name first--. Speaker 2: --last name first, yeah. Speaker 1: --and then they come here, they--sometimes they switch it--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --to match it with the--. Speaker 2: So, I'm, I'm not sure which is the first, but it's the Ju Li. Speaker 1: Ju or--. Speaker 2: And Hank is in there. It's a Hank in there. Speaker 1: All right. Now, did, did any members of your family speak Chinese, you know. Speaker 2: The two brothers who went over there did, but, the ones who stayed here, no. And so, and we don't, we don't have a vehicle to communicate. And, once in a while, in later years, we, my wife [Regina S. Sugarmon] and I were active as volunteers in a local group called, International Friendship, which was an offshoot of state department programs, where they brought people in from other countries. And, there have been a couple of Chinese detectives here, and we've given them their names, and they said--they'd try, but, you know, don't expect much (laughs) which is understandable, I think, saying they'd try was just nice, you know, that's basically what it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Any, any stories passed down, about how, how your grandfather got here from China, or what he came here for? Speaker 2: No, both sets of grandparents were dead when I was born. My father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.] would not talk about his lineage because, I think, he was an illegitimate son of a Jewish drummer, whose beat included Gunnison, Mississippi, where he was born. And, in those days, you know, that was a stigma. And, he--he, he didn't talk, and didn't want my mother to tell us anything about it. And, she knew, you know, about her father, and her mother, but she didn't know much beyond that, either. Story_ID: 13724 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: L-E-S-S-Y-E, Lessye Hank--Hank being the Chinese [Sugarmon's maternal grandfather was Chinese-American]--Sugarmon. Lessye Hank, I guess, Lessye Hank, must be her maiden name. Sarepta, again, was her middle name. Speaker 1: Okay, and when was she born, and where? Speaker 2: All right, I'll have to get you that now, 'cause I--she, she was, she was born in 1896, '97 [1897], I think it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she died on October--of November the 22nd, 1997 [sic, 1963]. I believe it was Kennedy--she died on Kennedy's--. Speaker 1: '63 [1963]--. Speaker 2: Yes sir but let me check that out, because she was--my father's birthday was October the 12th, and I'm trying to hook these up. Either she was born on his birthday, and died on Kennedy's--she was born November the 22nd, and died on my father's birthday, October the 12th, that's what it was. She was born November the 22nd. Speaker 1: Okay, and, tell us something about her. What was she like? And, you know, what was her coming up like? And you know, what, what was her personality like? And what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, she was a housewife. My father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.], when he--when he--he and she got married, they had known each other, somehow, 'cause she was from Deeson, Mississippi, and he was from Gunnison [Mississippi]. He was living with his mother's sister, who was married to a, an African American farmer named Bob Woods. I think they might have been octoroons, or something, but he was--my father was light-skinned, and he went to the colored public school, and my mother said that he had a very bad time in school. He had fights all the time, and he was, you know, picked on. So, he--wasn't that outgoing. He worked at a store, owned by a man named Burt, Jim Burt; his general store was called the 'Pig Joe.' And, this drummer [Sugarmon, Sr.'s father, a Jewish drummer, who was not married to Sugarmon, Sr.'s mother] used to supply orders for him that he--for his stock--and, Mr. Burt was aware of the relationship so, when my father got to be between seven and ten, really, you know, he hired him, he used to let him sweep the store out and as he got older, he taught him bookkeeping. And, by the time he got married and left Joe's, he was a bookkeeper for the Pig Joe. But when he got married, he said, Mr. Burt told him that he needed to move to a bigger city, like Memphis [Tennessee], cause it wasn't any future in a town as small as Gunnison, you know, for he and his wife. So, that's what he did. My sister had been born down there, but I was born up here. And, in later years, Mr. Burt's daughters--used to--I used to do things for them as a lawyer, wills and stuff. And, my father, when he came to Memphis, was looking for work--this was in just pre-Depression, beginning of the [Great] Depression and a lot of the Memphis banks had already accumulated masses of farmland through failures of farms and foreclosures. And he happened to run into a man from Gunnison, who was a friend of Mr. Burt's at the Pig Joe, and knew him--had known him when growing up, so he asked him what he was doing, so he said he was looking for work. He says, "Well, you meet me here again tomorrow." And when he met him, he had a bank application, employment application. He said, you know, "Fill out your vitals, but I'll fill, I'll fill out the rest of it, you know." So he hired him, and the bank paid him a salary. I think it was around two hundred dollars a month. He'd travel in the Mississippi, and sold farmland, and tried to dispose of the banks holdings through foreclosure. They were trying to unload as much as they could, and sell it, you know, back to the farmers. So that's what he did and, that's how he supported--he was, he became a real estate broker. And from hindsight, I don't know whether--I don't know what they had on the job application for race, 'cause he got hired and, but--because this guy, who was a vice president, handled the application outside the bank. But I suspect that the--I don't think that--they probably didn't know that he was not white. Speaker 1: Okay, then. Speaker 2: Nothing ever came of it, because they had a mailing address that said--the guy, the vice president used to mail his, his checks, and his, his commission percentages and stuff, so. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was out there on the road--. Speaker 2: So I--yeah and I've had an ambivalent--yeah, I, I've--always had to think twice before I have a knee-jerk reaction about somebody's motivation. Until you find out really, what's been communicated, you may react wrongly to, to a situation. When I--I'll tell you another story about that, later on, after I became lawyer up here that happened to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now--but--well, what, what was your--well, sir, we were talking about your mother and your father now, 'cause we--you've been talking about one and the other--. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, okay. Speaker 1: But, what was your mother's personality like? Speaker 2: She was, I thought, very quiet and she was, until my father died. (laughs). Then, it turned out that she had, she had a very strong mind, I mean, she liked to speak her piece. But they--talked about whatever they talked about, in terms of family decisions. My sister and I were just the results of the family discussion, and all. But the--she wanted to go to school. She, she got her degree from college, LeMoyne College [now LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] after my sister got her degree from a branch of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, she, you know--getting us educated was the priority, because the future was yet to be made for my sister and me. But once it got to where my sister was--had got her degree, then my mother went on back and got her degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they both--she went to Campbell College [Jackson, Mississippi] which was a sort of a prep school for African American kids in Mississippi up through, you know, the high school level. And, then she got married, and then she was a housewife until my sister finished college. And she was still a housewife, but she--LeMoyne was right across the street from where they lived, so she enrolled in LeMoyne, and eventually got her degree from LeMoyne. Speaker 1: Okay. Now your father, did he have a chance to go to--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He went to--. Speaker 2: Hard-knocks. No he--got his training through Mr. Burt's bookkeeping teaching, and--I guess, English, and stuff. But, through elementary school, and all, but, that was basically the extent of the formal education. Speaker 1: So he had a like on-the-job business training, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah--. Speaker 1: You can't knock it, I guess. Speaker 2: No. Reading and writing, he--had a better handwriting than I have. But the--and he also taught me some priorities, because he had a sign hanging over his desk at home: Deny yourself small wants today, and save yourself great needs in the future. Now that--it, it took a while for that to sink in, but I--he kept--he would always say something, he'd say, "See that, you know, that's what you got to do now." And I finally, you know, getting your values prioritized is important in life, you know. Some things you might want but you don't need, and the basics, you need the, you--need to have as the priority for a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what--so you say your father had a--what was his personality like, other than business, from the business aspect of him? Speaker 2: He was private person. He was a member of a couple of clubs, but, I used to listen to him fuss when he would have to get dressed to go somewhere like that. He would prefer to stay home and read, and listen to the radio. And when television came, that, that completed his circle, you know. He could look at the girl--the world through that screen. But he had some friends, he had some--the, the letter carrier, on our route, was a guy named Fred Hutchinson, he had total recall. I mean, he could sit there and talk about people, and give them the dates of this, that, and the other. It was fascinating to hear him talk about the neighborhood, and what was going on. Story_ID: 13725 Speaker 1: Give us an idea of what the neighborhood was like? Give us an idea of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: When I was growing up, and I was born in the house where my father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.] was living until he died. And my mother [Lessye Sugarmon] lived there, after he died, until she became old enough, where we were worried about her living alone. And she, she resisted, living alone until, one day the burglar alarm went off, at the front door and, you know, the police came, and when they investigated, the door was unlatched. And we wondered whether she forgot what to do. And they were looking around. And the bars had been pried--we had window guards around, and the--there was a sun parlor and three or four screws had been removed from one bar, and had been pried open, wide enough to, to let someone very small. So they figured that somebody let a child in, and he was supposed to open the front door. And when he opened the front door, that's when the alarm went off, and they ran. Well that, that convinced her that she probably ought not remain there. So, the house when he bought it, was a shotgun and every time he had a chance, he would add a little bit more to it. So, we had three bedrooms by the time he, you know, he had stopped adding to it. And, my sister and I had both grown up, you know, finished education, were adults. But, the neighborhood was LeMoyne Gardens [Memphis, Tennessee] was built on an area called Suzette Bottoms--there was a bayou that ran through Suzette Bottoms. The LeMoyne College [now LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] gym straddles that bayou, and when I was growing up, you could get in the bayou, and follow, follow the bayou several miles out to where Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee] is. That's, that's maybe ten or fifteen blocks away from there. And they had a row of shotgun houses facing each other and there would be, there was a, a cast-iron outdoor water pump at one end, and a row of outhouses at the other end of that street. That, that, that's when I was very small, and then, Suzette Bottoms got cemented, you know, concreted. They made a, you know, a storm drain with a cap on it, and built LeMoyne Gardens there. That's now been rebuilt, just recently but LeMoyne Gardens was a public housing project. My, my first wife [Miriam DeCosta-Willis] and I lived in a house on the back of my father's property, for several years. And, in later life, we had a precinct club in LeMoyne Gardens. And one of the tenants in LeMoyne Gardens was a--was a lady, who was white, who was named Margaret Valian (ph).. Now how she got to Memphis, I don't know but she'd been, sort of a, peripherally involved in the Round Table, the Algonquin Hotel in New York. And she would tell us about things like that, the experiences but she was, she was in that, that Shelby County Democratic Club--Precinct Club in LeMoyne Gardens, in the--in 1959. That was sort of an interesting thing. Yeah, she had started out, running a--settlement house adjacent to the Metro Tower--Metropolitan Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennesse], which was based at Walker [Ave] now, right across from LeMoyne College. And I think, when she retired, she just moved in there. She knew a lot of folk in the neighborhood, cause she had been running that settlement house, Bethlehem Center, I think it was called. Story_ID: 13726 Speaker 1: What did you like to do, when you were young, you know? Speaker 2: Sports. I liked--softball, to some extent 'cause I didn't know I was near-sighted for year, for years, and I used to miss the softball occasionally. That, that became quite an event--could never enjoy playing softball when that happened to you but, I liked softball. I liked football. I would have liked fishing, but, but you never got a chance to go--or hunting never got a chance to go. In later, in later years, I went hunting once, and, I thought what I killed looked much--was much more attractive when it was alive than when it was dead. I killed a brace of dove, and we had them dressed near the field, and took them home, and put them in the freezer. And after about six months, my wife and I looked at each other and says, "Who are we kidding?" We took them out, and gave them a decent burial. And, I haven't shot anything since then. My son [Tarik Sugarmon]'s an avid hunter. I don't think he got the genes from me, though (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did, did you--were you fond of reading, when you were--? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I loved to read. And I--that--I think that was a spin-off from the fact that LeMoyne College [now LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] was on--one, one corner of Walker [Aveune] and McDowell, Metropolitan Baptist Church [Memphis, Tennesse] was on the corner to the west, southwest of LeMoyne College, Congregational Church was across the street facing Metropolitan Baptist Church, and, and our house was the fourth corner. And, the parsonage, at the Second Congregational Church, was rented to a woman who had come down, a German woman, named E. A. Neroschmidt--Smith, she used in the--then. But, she had come down from Wisconsin, and opened up a school, in the parsonage, at Congregational Church. It was I think three rooms, seven grades, so, the teachers--there were, there were two teachers, plus Ms. Smith, and they had to teach classes in the room with--kids in a different class had to stay because they couldn't let us out, 'cause they didn't have anybody to supervise us on the outside. And so, we had a choice while the teachers were teaching, some grade other than the one we were in we could either take a nap, sit there and be quiet, or read. And she had a nice library, so, we all came out of there loving to read. Books opened up access to other times, and other places. I mean, you could visualize, and read about the world. I, I read the 'Iliad,' I read the 'Odyssey.' I read over the seven years I was there. She had a twelve volume work on the Napoleonic Wars, and it took a while, but I got through the whole thing. But she had books by a guy named Richard Halliburton, and 'The Royal Road to Romance.' He, he, he's the--Halliburtons are a Memphis family, and there's a, there is a bell tower, at the campus--it was then, Southwestern now Rhodes College [Memphis, Tennessee], the Halliburton Tower. He disappeared just before World War II, like Amelia Earhart, he was sailing a junk from San Francisco [California] I think to Hong Kong [China], and, and disappeared. But he described going across Samarkand [Uzbekistan], and a whole lot of things that made you want to go see. And so, so, I got a vision of, of global things I've never would have experienced, if I hadn't been there, reading those books--and that stayed with me. I, I still have things I want to go see, although the, the world we live in today, I don't think I could get a visa that would be--provide me--could guarantee the right--safeguards, for some of these places. But, you know, you--it opened up our minds, I will--say that, so. Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to travel much, in the [United] States when you where, when you where younger? Speaker 2: Not a lot, 'cause my father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.] took care of us, but his priorities were, you know, house his family, clothe his family, feed his family. Every once in a while, but not, not a lot but, at that point, could read. I liked carpentry--like, fooling around with tools. I used to--he was, he, he managed some real estate for the minister at the Metropolitan [Baptist Church]--owned some duplexes, and he used to, you know, manage that, take care of the rent, and everything. And I learned, I painted. I used to paint houses, paint rooms, and that sort of thing. I, I--he'd get the carpenters to let me help them, carpenters' helper, plumbers' helper. I learned how to replace washers, replace, you know, the things that came out of the wall. Now, wouldn't let me go in the wall, but, you know, taps--had to replace water taps, and that sort of stuff. And, that, that--I still like to fool around with tools, and things but, at, at that point, I learned how to do that, and I, I got paid a little bit for that, you know. I enjoyed it though. I didn't like roofing, but anything below the roof level was fine. Story_ID: 13727 Speaker 1: What was the name of the grade school you attended? Speaker 2: It was the Cooperative, Cooperative School [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: And you, you went there through all seven through--? Speaker 2: Yeah, seventh grade, yeah. Speaker 1: --seventh grade. Speaker 2: Then I went to Booker T. Washington [High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. And, I, I finished there in three years. I think I turned sixteen the May I graduated [1945]. Speaker 1: Now how were you able to do, to do that in those days--? Speaker 2: Went to summer school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--and, and, it, it--those, those were interesting--. I played football and, you avoided a lot of problems, you know, if you were a member of a team like that. And, we, we--in those days, they had no age limit for school and they had no age limit on participation in sports. And, we had a center, who--with what--fifteen letters (laughs) in two sports. And, we had a guy who was a guard who was I think twenty-two years old, in high school. We just--they came to school during sports season. Speaker 1: So you had like, kids like, four--thirteen, fourteen--? Speaker 2: Fifteen. Speaker 1: --playing guys who are twenty-two years old? Speaker 2: Twenty-two years old, yeah. There were two high schools, two public high schools, Booker T. Washington, and Manassas [High School, Memphis, Tennessee] and so, we played each other. That was a cross-town rivalry. There were, the, the football game, quite often, was followed by the fight. And, we played, let me see, we--McDonald 35 and--a Kentucky school. I'm for--I've forgotten the name of the city but, we had to go, go to other places--Corbin Junior College in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]. We played at the--a team in Nashville--Vashon [High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and Sumner [High School] St. Louis [Missouri] not--the same year, but one or the other. Those two high schools, every now and then, we played a school in Birmingham [Alabama]. We got to move around quite a bit, 'cause there, there weren't enough schools, high schools, in the city, for us to have a full schedule, you know, or for half a schedule, here really. After Hamilton [High School, Memphis, Tennessee], came on then Melrose [High School, Memphis, Tennessee], came on, then they--that sort of helped out. That, that cut out, you know, many of the trips. Arkansas--what did I say in Arkansas--there was a school in Arkansas, it was a junior college we played. Speaker 1: So, you played a junior college? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it--they were high school through, you know, a little bit grade or two past. Speaker 1: So, the black schools had to play each other? They couldn't play with white schools? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We sometimes played sandlots football with some of the kids who went to the South Side [South Side High School, Memphis, Tennesee] and Tech [East High School & Career & Tech Center, Memphis, Tennessee] I think--those kids around the same neighborhood, we, we'd sometimes play sandlot football, with them. LeMoyne [now LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] had a football field, and no fence, and we used to play there on Saturdays, and--. Speaker 1: And, what did you play, when you played football? Speaker 2: What do you mean position? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In high school, I played, I played center and linebacker. I was the, the, I was about a hundred fifty pound center; the second team center was a hundred and seventy; and the third string was a hundred and ninety. And, I don't know whether we remember the timing, or what got us ahead of the other two guys, but, I could tackle pretty good, too. Story_ID: 13728 Speaker 1: Manassas [High School, Memphis, Tennessee]/Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] football game was a big deal? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh yeah, big deal. Speaker 1: We're, we're rolling--. Speaker 2: That was up close and personal. (laughs) Luckily in those days, there, you know, there weren't--guns were, you know, not--not a problem. There weren't-- any, to speak of. And, but, there were broomsticks and coke bottles that could be tossed. So, you know, they, they tried to have enough police presence so that the teachers, and all, could keep control. But every now and then, they would get out of hand. But, the players, we, we didn't have that problem. Story_ID: 13729 Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers there [at Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Okay. I, I had the, the, the one, I guess, with the highest profile now would be, I have--my algebra course was taught by a man named Booker Taliaferro Jones. His son is Booker T. [Jones] of Booker T. and the MG's. And, we had a teacher named Lucy Campbell, Nat Williams, Nat Williams--they, they had, they were both avid teachers of black culture, black history, and what not but they couldn't--they had no courses. They could--that, that was a no-no, as far as the curriculum was concerned, as far as the city board of education, which at that time was all white. And the superintendent monitored the performance of the catchmeent--the areas of the black schools on election day. The city [Memphis, Tennessee] at that time was run by a boss named [Ed] Crump, and the schools fared poorly or well based on whether or not the--catchment area of, of that school--particular school had a good turn out for the ticket. And the teachers used to be given a ticket, take--for the kids to take home--who, who to support. And, that was--the Crump machine's power was control of the black vote, and about 20 percent of the white vote. And, it started in about 1906, and it was, it was unbeatable until Estes Kefauver. He was, he was the first elected official, statewide, to carry Shelby County [Tennessee]. And Crump had died by then [sic, Kefauver's election was in 1948, while Crump died in 1954], and the residual leadership was still there. Speaker 1: Black people have been voting here in Tennessee since Reconstruction, right? Speaker 2: Well, I'd say, they were voting since Reconstruction--after Crump came in, they were voted because there was no option. I mean, if, if you wanted to get your school what it needed, then, you know, you had to turn out and vote. And, individual people--I mean, there was one, one guy here, who was a--rumored to be allied with the machine. And he had a nice little business that--licensed business, a whiskey store. And, I guess, he, he made sure nothing got out of hand, as far as the machine's interests were concerned. That's what the rumor was. I can't--I don't have any, you know, admissible evidence, other than--. Speaker 1: Was there rumored to be political violence? Speaker 2: There was. Yeah. Occasionally. And, also, there was--there were some brothers here, the Martins, three brothers, and one was a pharmacist, and one was a medical doctor, I forgot what the other did. They all were professional. One owned the Memphis Red Sox, which was the Afro-American League--the Colored League--Black League--Negro League Baseball team. And one, the the pharmacist, they were, they had been supporters of the Crump machine, and they broke with him. Oh, I've forgotten which election. Well then, the papers announced that the police were suspicious of the pharmacist for allowing trafficking of drugs. And so they had detectives stationed outside his store for a long time. He finally moved to Chicago [Illinois] but, they never found any drugs, but everybody knew that the reason he was being watched like that was to diminish his business because he had defected from the machine ticket. He was, he, he had broken ranks, so he was--he, he went to Chicago [Illinois] and he became the Cook County Sanitary Commissioner, I think. He was in better shape there than he had been here. But, that sort of thing happened. Speaker 1: So Memphis was, was a political machine? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 13730 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], what were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: I liked science. I liked English. My English teacher, used to give us extra reading, 'Les Miserables,' I had--I read that. Let me see, her name was Miss Hubbard, she--in fact, she, she was still alive a few years ago, Edith Hubbard. I had an English teacher named Cotton, Jamella Cotton. And I think that she was supposed to be either the sister related to the Cotton that wrote 'Freight Train,' which was, I think, a great--. Speaker 1: Elizabeth Cotton. Speaker 2: Elizabeth Cotton. Speaker 1: From Texas, right? Speaker 2: Yeah--. And, I, I still love that song. I heard Taj Mahal play a version of it, in the sixties [1960s] that--great song. And, we had, we had the--a lady named Lucy Campbell, who's published a lot of gospel music. But all of them when--so that the principal couldn't be accused of allowing it, whenever he was not around, they all talked to us about history, about our history and, we had good teachers. I mean, and I think that what happened, during that period, a lot of people with talent had no options, so a lot of talented people taught. Now, you've got a whole breadth of options, so you have to be very talented. And you have to be very, very desirous of being a teacher, and probably patient, because, I, I think that the, the teachers today, sometimes, have to just try to survive in some of these classes. I think Dr. [Benjamin] Spock ruined us. People don't have a sense of limits, and we need a sense of limits to know if a civilization's to survive. Story_ID: 13731 Speaker 1: What was your social life like in high school? Speaker 2: My neighborhood, basically. I was, I was, you know, I was ahead of my age grouping, in--high school so, I went--. Speaker 1: You were young. Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was young, I, I went--I dated. You went to the senior prom and that sort of thing. But the girl--I--the girls in my class were ahead of me (laughs). I mean, in terms of age, and experience, and everything else. But it, it, you know, I, I didn't--ever, I didn't have a sense of deprivation or anything. So but it--but from perspective, I was, I was sort of a--the baby brother type relationship with some of them, you know. So of them it wasn't, but, I guess. But, it, it--I liked it. And we, and--my--where--in the neighborhood where I lived, we had--there--it was a--there were a row of single-family homes and, it was the [Great] Depression, when I was in pre-teen and teenage years. And, lunch would be a can of sardines, you know, my mother [Lessye Hank Sugarmon] would open up sardines and crackers or peanut butter sandwiches, that sort of thing but, I used to be embarrassed, 'cause my, my friends, some of my friends didn't have that. And I used to tell my mother, you know, don't--I, don't want to come in, and if we can't, you know, we can't eat--sometimes she'd have enough and she'd just fix sandwiches, and bring out a plate. But sometimes she just said, "Lunch" and I'd say, "Don't say that Mama," 'cause, I used to hate to say, "I got to go get lunch," because they didn't, you know, some of them couldn't go get lunch, and that, that, that always bugged me. And I know--I remember that men were always coming to the door. And she somehow, finally, found a way to have a sandwich or something for them. Speaker 1: Peop--people would come up and knock on the door--. Speaker 2: --knock on doors, yeah. Speaker 1: --something to eat? Speaker 2: --hungry, yeah. There was a PWA Camp--a WPA [Works Progress Administration] ki--camp outside of town. And, I--yeah, my, I, I--a lot of my early years, there were a lot of men who couldn't make livings. And, you know, sometimes they'd come along, you'd try to make up something for him to take home, you know. Story_ID: 13732 Speaker 1: What were your career aspirations in, in high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]? What did you, what did you--? Speaker 2: Well, in, in high school, we had the teachers who, who were concerned about our career aspirations but, there weren't many role models they could talk about, you know. If you, you could be a preacher, you could be an undertaker, you could be a lawyer--limited, I mean, in terms of, what you did--or a teacher. But--the--across--the breadth of options that you could aspire to with any kind of reasonable chance of, of getting the chance to get going in a career in those areas was not there. I know one of the guys in my class who was near the top of his--top of the class--I, I think I was, out of a class of about five hundred, I was eighteenth and, he was like second or third, and he wanted to be an engineer. They couldn't point to anything--he, he wound up driving a--as a streetcar operator, in Detroit [Michigan], you know, heavy drinker. But it gradually looked like, and we were aware of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. The, the last lynching in Tennessee was in Brownsville, Tennessee--NAACP organizer--and that was when I was a teenager--. Speaker 1: Was it a local person here in Tennessee? Speaker 2: No, he was a NAACP--yeah he, he was--I mean, he was assigned to Tennessee, and you know, that's, that's where he got killed. But, I think across the South, it, it--there is a dialectic. Social forces have to build up to where they finally erupt and, you know, we had a sense of a lot of things we wanted to do, but we couldn't see a road to walk. And it, gradually, became, became--the focus became, "I've got to do something. This can't go on this way." And that sense, I think, is what, what prepared a couple of generations deeper, of young African Americans, to be ready for what started, you know, in the '60s [1960s]. And it looked like, law would be--cause I was aware of the NAACP, and I knew about [Charles Hamilton] Houston, and Thurgood Marshall, and that sort of thing. So, later on, when I finally applied to law school, the application--most of them--some form of the question, "Why do you want to be a lawyer?" And, on my application to Harvard [University Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I put, "Because I do not like my hometown." And, I got in. I, I had a pretty decent score in all aptitudes, my grades at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. But, if I can digress there, when I--was--I had been deferred [from military service] all the way through college. And, I, I applied to see what would happen, and I got--I had got admitted within about two or three weeks after I sent in my application. And it surprised me--it was so fast. And--but I, I didn't really think seriously about it 'cause I figured there's no way I could afford to go there. So, the University of Tennessee's law school [University of Tennessee College of Law, Knoxville, Tennessee] had been sued, for--on a desegregation case and, I figured that well, I'll write and see what happens. So I wrote them and said, "I'm a graduate of Booker T. Washington High School, in Memphis, Tennessee," so that was code for, you know, my race. And I said, "I have finished--I just finished Rutgers University, and I have been admitted to Harvard Law School. Unfortunately, my--I don't think my resources will allow me to enroll in Harvard Law School, and since my credentials are acceptable to them, I'm sure they will be acceptable to you. So please send me an application." So, after about two weeks, I got a letter from the Commissioner of Education at Tennessee, congratulating me. And he said, "We, we are eager to be--for our young citizens to fulfill their career ambitions, and please send me the bills of the--cost of tuition," and all of that. So they paid tuition, transportation, and fees. I thought about getting into the lawsuit, but I figured if I did that, my student exemption would disappear, and I'd be on my way to Korea. So, I just wrote that, and so, they, they paid tuition, transportation, and fees for three years. But it was an interstate compact, where if one school--one southern state had a medical school for African Americans and somebody from that state wanted, they would, they--you could get a scholarship, and I think that's what they did, they sort of stretched that, and paid my way to Harvard. Speaker 1: All right, that's something that seems to be very, seems to be prevalent in the South. You know, in Arkansas--. Speaker 2: Sorry guys, go back on, we're good to go. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just commenting that, that, that many of the southern states would pay the tuition--. Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that, yeah. Speaker 2: --of a black person of color, particularly in those days, were known to attend--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --another, medical school, or law school--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --because they, rather than have them attend the state schools--. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So I had never heard of that until that happened. And--but, I--thought, "I'd better take this, 'cause if I--if the, if I go to the [U.S.] Army now, one, I might not back--get back; and two, if I got back, I might not get back an admission into Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, I'm going to go while I got the chance to go." Speaker 2: It's kind of ironic, they'd rather pay your way to Harvard, than let you go to the University of Tennessee. Speaker 1: U. T. Speaker 2: Kind of one of the bonuses of segregation. Speaker 1: [laughs] Yeah. Story_ID: 13733 Speaker 1: So, let's go back to, to college, though--. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I mean, when you graduated from Booker T. Washington [High School, Memphis, Tennessee], did you already have Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] picked out? Or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were three or four of us from Memphis, who had planned to go there, so we went--more than that really, probably about six. And, four of us, we stayed in the, in the same dorm not in the same room, same dorm. And we all made the dean's list that spring. And, before we went home, we decided that we'd celebrate. Now, we were living in Graves Hall, which had been, I think, the first building on that campus, right after the--when Morehouse was started. And, it was old and had been condemned, but because of the war [World War II], they apparently had put that on hold until after the war. And they were using it and, the bell tower at Graves Hall had been off limits for--you know, they thought it was maybe unsafe. And so, we decided we'd celebrate, and the four of us--we'd chipped our money--pooled our money, and we got a fifth of scotch, I think it was about $1.89, or something like that, $2.00 and went up in the bell tower and drank it. And, made a little racket, and were discovered, and the next morning, each of us woke up, and we had letters from Dr. [Benjamin Elijah] Mays who was the president then on our doors saying, "Come to my office and pick up your tickets home, while the Student-Faculty Disciplinary Committee decides upon an appropriate punishment for your outrageous conduct, period." So, the fact that, he said, "Pick up your tickets" was clear, what, what--where we were going. So, I--beat the letter home and I showed my father the letter expelling me from Morehouse after I showed him my degree from Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] 'cause I figured, I wouldn't survive to make that trip if he found out what had happened. I said, "Here's my degree, and there's something you ought to know--." [laughs] So--. Speaker 1: So you never told him you were--. Speaker 2: Not--I told him I had just decided to transfer. Speaker 1: Oh, so you--worked that out yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Oh, I mean, the, the only clear thing was, I didn't want to see my old man looking at me with a letter saying, after all that sacrifice, I had gotten put out of school for drinking. Speaker 1: Now, there, there's even more to the story than that. Is it that one of your classmates decided to try to get his grades forged? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well what, I think, the conduct that what--was what he--I, I was--I'll spare his name for his posterity. But, he had the--he had decided--he had gotten a B in algebra, I think. So, he decided that that wasn't the right grade so, he wanted to discuss it, the, the, dorm--school--the dorm rector was the algebra professor giving him the B, and he lived on the ground floor of that building. And so, you know, with--emboldened with this alcohol we had consumed, he decided I--he'd go down there, and he wanted to discuss it. This was about one o'clock at night and so he bangs on his door. And the banging drew a lot of other guys, who heard the racket. He says--so he--the effort made him--meal--and he, and he threw up [chuckles], and he slipped and fell in it. And, he's lying there, and the--this professor opens his door, and he grabs him by the shoulder, and he says--he pulled his shoulder up, and they said--he, he says, "What is the meaning of this, young man?" And so, [chuckles] this guy looked up at him, and said, "Let go of my suit, Daddy. That's a hundred dollar suit you grabbing." (laughs) So, we all had to ride home (laughs). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--so you were, you were smooth enough to get to Rutgers instead--? Speaker 2: I said, "I can't, you know, my father can't get that letter yet," you know. Story_ID: 13734 Speaker 1: Back at Morehouse, [College, Atlanta, Georgia] now you--Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], who wasn't a doctor then, but--. Speaker 2: He was, he was a sophomore my, my freshman year, yeah. And I, I met him, and all, but, you know, I--we weren't socially--he was--then he was serious, I mean, he, he was about his business. Nice, you know, but he conducted services in the chapel, and he studied. Speaker 1: And what about Lerone Bennett [Jr.], did you--? Speaker 2: I knew Lerone Bennett. He, he--there again, he was, he was a serious student. I was a serious student, but I just had that one blowout that [laughs] put me on a slightly different track. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, at, at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], when you got to Rutgers, who were some of the personalities at Rutgers--? Speaker 2: Okay, Rutgers, at that point, I think, my sophomore year, they had the Constitutional Convention at Rutgers. Rutgers had been getting subsidies from the state of New Jersey, but it was not a full-fledged state institution. It had been founded in what, 1766, I think, by a Colonel John Rutgers [sic, Henry Rutgers]. And, they had a statue of him on the main campus. It was basically a New Jersey college--they had dorms, but on weekends, there were only a handful of students on the campus 'cause everybody went home. And, one of my best friends was a guy from Brooklyn [New York], and I was from Tennessee, and occasionally we would go up to his home, in Brooklyn. But, there--I believe in the--believe there were probably ten or fifteen African American students on the--male--on the campus. The, the women at Rutgers went to a school called Douglass [College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. The Douglass campus was across town, in New Brunswick, New Jersey. And, we--I became a member of a, of a frat, of a fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, I believe in my junior year. And the reason, primarily the reason we decided to do that was, that they had a rule that you couldn't have a fraternity recognized on the campus unless you had twenty-one members and, we didn't have enough African Americans even to be a recognized fraternity, and there were no, there wasn't a, an African American fraternity in the state. And so, we got together--. Speaker 1: [interruption, cell phone ringing] Speaker 2: You were talking about Rutgers, and the fraternities at Rutgers. Speaker 1: So, we, we decided, well, you know, there's nothing that says we have to be an all African American, an all black, in those days, group. So, we got enough guys together, interested, to organize. We had, we had twenty-one people--twenty-two, really and, I think, seven of us were black, we had two or three Jewish guys, a couple of Japanese guys. We, we had a--an international group of Alpha [Phi Alpha] inductees, and our sponsor was Eddie [Edward W.] Brooke, the former senator from Massachusetts, he was an Alpha and he came down to our induction. Speaker 2: What was he like in those days? Speaker 1: He was, he was nice. I mean, we all were aware of him, because he was a black senator, you know, from Massachusetts, Edwin--Edward Brooke, he's a lawyer. And, he took the time, just, just to be involved, to help us get this thing off the ground. So we were the first--I, I would say, we were the first at that point, we weren't the first purely African American, we--were the first Alpha chapter, I'll put it that way [chuckles], in the state. Speaker 2: Did the other, did the other members stay involved, in A Phi A after, after the--after college? Speaker 1: I, I don't know (laughs). Eric Springer and I were, you know, we were lifelong buddies, and we all went our separate ways but, I think some of them, some of them affiliated with graduate chapters afterward, but I'm not--the Japanese guys probably went back to Japan, 'cause they weren't American citizens, they were--. I don't think there's anything in this thing about--about citizenship either. That just dawned on me, when I said that. Speaker 2: I never asked that. That's a unique story, 'cause you never hear about other nationalities in a black fraternity. Speaker 1: Right. Edward Brooke was our sponsor and, and I think that, you know, the, the national chapter who was the--? The president was Belford Lawson--I think was, was the, was the national president of Alpha, then. And over, you know, the one in Washington [DC], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] related. They, they probably thought that would be intriguing, you know, to get an Alpha chapter going like that. Speaker 2: So, so, well, at Rutgers, who were some of the teachers that you--that made an impression on you now? Speaker 1: If I can remember their names. There was a teacher in literature. There was a history professor, named George, John J. George. And, if you ask him, he told you, "The other 'J' was John," John John George. He--I had two or three courses from him. A guy, Edward Byrne, of a, a historian, he--we used one of his books, I think. There was a British lecturer and I, I can't remember his name, but, but very eloquent teacher. And a German socialist teacher, whose wife had been the secretary of the German Communist Party before [Adolf] Hitler, and they had been run out of Germany. And, they were--his view of Europe, at that time, was fascinating. I mean--to hear this man. He, he was--an inte--an old-school European intellectual, and he, he was talking about ideas, and acti--I never dreamed. He--it was a, it was looking through a different porthole of the world, with, with him. He was fascinating and I, I can't remember his name either. If I had my yearbook I might be able to get it, but --. Speaker 2: Did you ever have any contact with--I know--well, Paul Robeson attended Rutgers, but--? Speaker 1: I had--of a--yeah, I had, I had con--(laughs). He was playing Othello--in fact, he did a concert at Rutgers while I was there and, that was one of the reasons I had gotten interested in Rutgers, because of Paul Robeson. He was an All-American football player there, and a Phi Beta Kappa there and, they'd broken his hand on the football field, at one time. But, there was a black doctor, in New Brunswick, who was very active in things. He, he'd have receptions for people who came to the campus, and he had one for Paul Robeson. He came down from New York, and he had a beard he'd grown for this role, and I'm gung-ho, and this was Paul Robeson. And, I'm standing there, in the group, talking with him, and he had this little cigaree-, cig-, cig-, lil - what do you call them cigars, the little cigar. And he had pulled this out, and he was reaching in his, in his vest, I guess for a lighter, and I flashed my Zippo, and I missed the, I missed the end of the Zippo, but I ignited a bit of his beard. He had to put his beard out. So, he may, he, I, he might have remembered the guy who lit his beard, (laughs) while he was playing, he was playing Othello. Speaker 2: Wow, that's a--. Speaker 1: I did a couple of things like that. I'm sure it's the negative image in behind them two people. One of them, was a lady, named Frieda Miller. I think she had--she was the first woman who was appointed as department head, in the [U.S.] Department of Labor. And, I think, I think under, under [President Harry S.] Truman. I believe, I'm not sure but anyway, Eric Springer's mother, Maida Springer, had grown up--come from Panama, and got involved in the Garment Workers Union, became active in the union, and she had been sent to England for training, education, and so forth. And she was one of their rising stars and she didn't disappoint them. But they had a reception for this lady, in Brooklyn, one weekend and so, Eric's mother said, "You and--Eric, you and Russell ought to come up, cause there's somebody you ought to meet." And so, we were there at this cocktail party. I'm being sophisticated, we're at this table with all these hors d'ouvres, and I, I have a piece of brown rye bread, and I'm looking for something to put on it. And she said--I'm talking to her, she says, "Why don't you try this, it's very nice." And, I looked, and I thought it was small blueberries. So, I spread it on this thing, and popped it in my mouth, and immediately, and lost it all over her blouse. It was--caviar (laughs) and, caviar is nothing like blueberries (laughs). Story_ID: 13735 Speaker 1: You were talking about playing football. Speaker 2: Yeah, lightweight, they had a lightweight team and, it was just as violent, it was fast. But, as a result, I was able to get in a list of athletes, for Johnson & Johnson. They would, they were constantly doing research on various types of adhesives, and how they affected different skin types, and what types of things you could do before the adhesives, sort of, broke down, and all. And, so you'd sign up, and they--Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] didn't have scholarships, but, but, you could, you could get in these programs if you were an athlete and they paid you $25 a week, that you'd wear five strips of skin on your back, and they'd--then you put it on, on one, then they'd take it off the next one, and it. Actually they do all kind of ultra violet stuff to see whether any kind of skin reaction. And I did that all the way through Rutgers, when I played in their lightweight football which helped a lot 'cause, in those days, that was pretty decent, pretty decent money, you know. Speaker 1: Twenty-five dollars--? Speaker 2: --a week--yeah. So, the only experience--well two things, one of them was, was sort of funny. We played the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland]'s team one year, and I got hit. Can you see a vertical? I got hit--this, this was before they started putting on those full face masks, we had one little rod around the helmet. And this, this Navy linebacker hit me in the mouth, right there, and it split my lip, and it swoll up. Well, they sort of taped it together, but, it took so--forever for it to heal but when I went, I went through the training table line, the guys on the other side would break up laughing, 'cause it looked like I had a cake donut hung under my nose (laughs). My lips were swollen up round, and full, you know and, I, I'd get tickled, and I'd open the damned thing up again, you know. So, I said, "Y'all quit that, I can't--" but, but we played Navy--at Navy one time, and we were coming back on the bus, and we're going through Delaware. And the coach decided that we, we'd stop at a diner in Delaware, and eat. So, they pulled up in this diner, and I was sitting near the rear of the bus, with, with a friend of mine. And, and, the team had filed out, and the trainers, and all that. So they just filed in, and started sitting at the--seating themselves at this long row of counter seats. And, by the time we got there, they'd started serving the guys at the front end. And so, everybody was getting served around us and you know, he was also a black guy. And, we kept trying to get served so, finally--and they kept looking at us funny, so finally somebody came up and said, "If you want to eat, you have to go into the kitchen. We don't serve colored out here." So he said, "If that's what you wanted then you can forget it." So we got up and walked out. We got to the bus and said, "Damn." And then looked back, and the whole team was filing out and the last one out was the coach, and he said, "If you wanna--if you want--us to pay for this goddamned food you sue us!" And they all walked out, you know. And we got on the bus. And, they started singing Rutgers songs, so, that's a good memory. Story_ID: 13736 Speaker 1: You took a lot of history, and--sounds like--? Speaker 2: History, political science, I took some public administration courses. I wrote a, I wrote a paper on, on water quality in, in the Raritan--Rutgers [University,] New Brunswick [New Jersey] is on the Raritan River. And, there was a fine for you getting in that river, it was so polluted. I mean, you ought--you got arrested, and, you know, quarantined--all kind of stuff. And, so that caught my attention. You can't--it was a beautiful looking river, but--so, I decided to do a paper on it, and, and so the result of it was that New Brunswick was one of about eighteen or nineteen cities along the Raritan's course into the--whatever it emptied into, I done forgot--I forgot what it emptied into. It might not have been the Atlantic [Ocean], it might have been something like an offshoot of the Chesapeake Bay, I'm not sure, but, whatever it emptied into, during the [Great] Depression Era, they--the government had financed WPA [Works Public Administration] projects which built water treatment plants all along the river. And they had these holding ponds with, you know, lagoons, and all the treatment but, New Brunswick was typical, as a city had grown these, these plants had--say, pumping capacities of like, twenty million gallons a day, or whatever. And purification capacities of something like eighteen [million gallons a day], and the cities had grown, they had increased the pumping capacity, but they hadn't increased the purification capacity. So, when I was there, the New Brunswick plant was, was, was like pure--had a purification capacity of maybe ten million gallons, and it was pumping twenty-five million gallons, you know, more than half of it was raw sewage, and that was true, the whole length of the river. So, I, I put all this together, and I said, well, "My conclusion is that the Raritan Canal is full of "blank." And I was explicit to the professor. He says, "An A," he says, "But there are others--there"--he said, "There--are other words that are, not quite as graphic, that would have made a better, a better use of, use, use of an academic paper," but he gave me an 'A'. Speaker 1: What about--? Speaker 2: But, they've improved it now. I think they've caught up, the pump--cause we, you know, what's her name's book, 'The Silent Spring' [by Rachel Carson] that got everybody's focus. And, I think, all of the--I don't think that's, I don't think that's true now. I'm pretty sure it isn't true now. Speaker 1: That's horrifying. Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughs) but, if you got in that river, you got arrested. I could--we could--used to make jokes about the Rutgers crew getting stuck in midstream (laughs). Story_ID: 13737 Speaker 1: When you were finishing up at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey]--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you know where you were going to--? Well, you told the story about law school, I mean--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew I was going to law school. Speaker 1: Did, did you go to law school immediately? Or did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well I went to law school immediately, but I--knew I was going to law school but, I, I wasn't sure whether, you know, I was gonna get a student deferment, or not, at that point, for law school. And, I applied to, to Harvard [University Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], to Southern California [University of Southern California Law School, Los Angeles, California], I think, I, I appl--I applied to four schools, and I heard from Harvard first. So I just said, "Wow." And, I got my, I got my deferment. I don't think I would have gotten it if I had, you know, joined the suit, in [University of] Tennessee [School of Law, Knoxville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Now, what was Harvard Law School like? Speaker 2: It was awesome, I think, there were five African Americans, or six African Americans or what not and Chris Edley was one of them. Chris Edley, Jr. is on the faculty up there, now. And, I think, he--Chris, Sr. just died. About a--what--this last, within a month--recently. Of five or seven, [William] Bill Cousins was one, from Chicago [Illinois]. You know him? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, tell him I said, "Hi." Speaker 1: We interviewed him. Speaker 2: Okay. It was--I, I had made a pretty decent law aptitude score, when I got there, and I was feeling pretty good. But, the, the whole three years there, I never met anyone who made less there. It was, it was a forty--ninety-four point fifth percentile, nationally. I guess that's with the top 5 percent. I never made--never met anybody, in three years, who had made any less than that, so it, it was an humbling experience. And then, my first year, the guy who sat naxt--next to me, I think it was a guy, Bernard Adenoff (ph.), I'm not sure but, he had a photographic memory, and total recall. I mean, the third year he could come up to me, "Remember that footnote on page thirty-two of the property textbook, the so and so--?" And quote it, just like he was reading the book in his head, you know, he was awesome. But, it, it was, it was--I tell people now, about, about that law school, and about Cambridge. The only way I can, I can make a distinction about the kind of college, and--you know, intellectual experience it is, is if you can think of the difference between thick gravy and thin gravy. The--it's--the atmosphere is so rich, when you considered launching, you got a liberal education from somewhere. I used to look for a guy who was in his fifth year of a PhD, and a philosophy of history, and he was focused on a, a fifteen-year period in one of the eras--in one of the timeframes of the Ming Dynasty. And, he--you sit there, and he'd--he liked to just run things by. He, he--you, you, you'd get a liberal education for about, anything under the sun. We were the graduate, dine--the graduate dining hall fed all of the graduate students and so, you, you could just get exposed to all kinds of--from people who knew what they were talking about, and were enthused about it, you know. You, you sort of, incidentally learned things, you know. Speaker 1: That sounds--were there, were there any black instructors at, at Harvard, when you, when you were there? Speaker 2: I don't recall any. See this--I finished in 1953, and Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas] was '54 [1954]. And I think, they started making special reinforcements, I guess, to experience follow, following that, you know. You know, then you came in, and you, you know, you made it or you didn't. Speaker 1: Did you live on campus there? Speaker 2: I lived on campus my second two years. I lived off campus my first year, and that was a terrifying experience. I, I--'cause on campus, you could get into study groups, and I'd just, just go home, you know, go to my room, and read, and, and they, they published law exam questions from previous years that you could practice on. And I got one, I was getting ready for a test, I think in criminal law and I opened the book, and I, I understood every word on the page, but nothing came off. So I went--I read the whole criminal law textbook. I started the night of--the afternoon of the--before the exam, and I finished about four in the morning. Read the whole textbook. I passed it, I got a C but the next year, I moved on campus. I had no idea, what, you know, what kind of grind the guys were going through on campus. Speaker 1: So it was real intense, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was intense. Story_ID: 13738 Speaker 1: Who were some of your professors? Who, who are some of them? Speaker 2: My--the professor in property law was W. Barton Leach, who also did a lot of contract work for stars in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. Every now and then, he'd have a starlet sit down front and, you know, we were wondering who was going to show up to listen to him lecture. He was a real showman. Austin Wakeman Scott, I had in trust, and I think, some procedure; a guy--McCurdy, Joseph McCurdy (ph.), in tort law. Oh, the--the corporate, the guy--the attorney--the--instructor in, in--who taught corporations--and they had two or three, but the one I had, his, his brother was a commentator on social styles, and whatnot but, he had been one of the people who negotiated their original oil concession contracts, in Saudi Arabia. And he talked about, when they got through with the contracts they had this celebration, and they were--the, the--then the sheik, they had had this tent erected, and covered with, with carpets, and brought in these dishes for them to eat, to celebrate. And one of the dishes was this steaming cauldron of soup, and the piece--the key feature of that soup was sheep's eyeballs. And he was given this bowl, and everybody had their cups, waiting to sup, and he was the guest of honor, and they were waiting on him expectantly to take this. He looked at it, he thought of the millions of dollars that were riding on--(laughs) and, he said, he took a deep breath, and swallowed, and hoped it would stay down (laughs). I don't know whether I could have done that but I'm try, trying to think of his name. The--most of those--most of them had hands-on experiences, and things they could tell you about, you know, that sort of livened things up. Speaker 1: Okay, what--in, in--any outstanding experiences there, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about outstanding, but one of the guys who I had become friends with at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], was a guy named Robert Adelman. And, he was from New York. And so, he had gotten a four year ride, at Harvard to study philosophy and, we were going up the same time, so we got together in New York, and had lunch, and got on the train, and went up. And he decided he'd walk through the law school and see, he was going to see what it was like he was curious. So we go through the law library, and he decided he, he'd probably enroll in law school. So we went through the law school for three years and we were down to our last two exams, which the--the professors had said, if you get through the first ones, you know, blah, blah, blah, these--this is a matter of just showing up and qualifying, and you get your degree. We had two exams left to take, and he--we were drinking coffee in the, in the commons talking. He said, "You know, I've been thinking. I don't, I don't think I'm, I'm gonna want to practice law." He said, "I think I'm going home." So he got up, packed his bags, and left. He didn't even bother to take the last two exams to get his degree. And--but what he did was, he became a professional photographer and, have you seen that print--I've got one hanging on my wall, in my chambers of the fire hoses being sprayed on the Freedom Riders [sic, civil rights marchers] in Birmingham [Alabama]? That--it looks like a freeze, the water flowing across them. He took the picture, it won the best news photo of the year, that, that year, '68 [sic, 1963], or whatever it was and the best news photo of the decade. Well, I got a copy--he made--he sent me but he did, he did work. I'm not sure if he's still alive, 'cause I lost touch. I tried to call him last time I was through New York but, he did work for the 'New York Magazine', 'Atlantic [Monthly]', 'Harper's [Weekly]',' 'Fortune.' They sent him all over the world doing stuff and, he had a much more fascinating life, doing what he did. When, when the [President Jimmy] Carter convention--the--I, I went, I was a delegate to--I was on the Democratic National Committee, really, for the two Carter conventions. And, one of them, in New York, he introduced me to Michael Harrington, the guy who wrote, 'The Other America' that was the, that was the philosophical framework for the War on Poverty. And, the, the--he introduced me to him, and he also introduced me to a fear and loathing on the countertops and 'Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail.' I had--I, I enjoyed talking to him. He swears that--I mean, what he described as the train backed into the station, in Miami [Florida] when the candidate broke that, he was so frustrated with this guy, talking about gonzo [journalism], whatever. Matter of fact, there was a, there was a woman from Memphis [Tennessee], who worked on, on-- that--what's his name, cried--I can't think of his name now but, he introduced me to Hunter [S.] Thompson. He took me to lunch in a--in the Garment District [New York, New York], at the place where the Bonanno Family held court and I said, "Man, I don't need to be (laughs) here. I don't, I don't--." Speaker 1: --Mafia? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Mafioso guy was there but see, he had an interesting life, you know. Just--he, he lit pictures for all kinds of people, and all types of institutions. But, I've got that picture, I have that--it's a fantastic picture. Story_ID: 13739 Speaker 1: So you never had a rough moment, where you thought you weren't going to finish [law school, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: That, that first one. I mean, the first year, when I--read that--looked at the exam questions to practice on, and went blank. I said, goodness gracious, so--. Speaker 1: Tell me about graduation, what, what you did then? Speaker 2: After graduation, I, I had--there, there was, there was an African American lawyer, in Memphis [Tennessee], named James Estes. And he had been a captain, in the military and, you know, JAG [Judge, Advocate, General] commission. And, I talked with him soon as I got--and, every time he got his practice going, he got jerked back into the [U.S.] Army for six months, or three months, or whatever and he was catching the dickens getting, getting it--his practice on track. So, I called my draft board, and asked them when I was, you know, when I was due to come up. They said, "Oh maybe a year or two." I said, "I don't want to wait that long. I'm, just, you know, gonna be in limbo, so, can y'all advance me? When can you get me up?" So they said, "Well we've got--we have a"--what do they call it, a roster or something, "coming up in August." I said, "Well can you get me on that?" They said, "Well if you want to go then yeah." So I, I went on, and volunteered for the draft, and! in August--I got out of law school in May or June, of '53 [1953], and went in the army in August. And I wound up in Japan, after training , the 1st Cavalry Division Headquarters, in, in Sendai, in Northern Japan. Speaker 1: Now, what, what was the 1st Cavalry doing there, (unclear)--? Speaker 2: It pulled back from Korea. Speaker 1: --helicopter unit? Speaker 2: Naw, it----the, the--one of the combat teams was the--it, it was pentagonal and they had an over strength combat team--I think it was the 8th [Cavalry Divisoin]--that had been shot up real badly, and pulled back from the Yalu [River] and, it, it was just there. They, they--all of the units were back in Japan. They, they had--the truce was in effect, but the tank battalion was in the field all the time. They didn't have a permanent base. Sendai, the 8th Cavalry, was based in Sendai [Japan], in one camp; and we were at Camp Schimmelfennig which had been a Japanese Marine barracks, across town from them. The 7th Cavalry [Division] was outside of Tokyo [Japan] and, I think, the 5th Cavalry [Division] was down south, in Honshu [Japan] but, all of us were in different places, and we were, we were just stationed there. And, Sendai had been the hotbed of communism, up until then--I guess until then, too 'cause we--. Speaker 1: In Korea--. Speaker 2: --in Japan. Speaker 1: --in Japan? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Japan and, it--I guess, it still was then, because they would--we, we weren't allowed to go on passing, in town, in uniform. We could, we could go in civvies. And, because, in town, you--quite a few of the--you know, the, the cavalry patch, the hard bar sinister, with the horses head on top? A lot of the stores had the cavalry patch, but instead of the head, they had the other end of the horse on (laughs)--so, you know. I, I guess, they were probably right in saying, "Well, no need to inflame things." And, I mean, nobody was shooting at us or anything but, you understood the relationship. But, I loved the food, and, and the culture is fantastic. They have, they have an aesthetic that--Japan is a country about the size of California, 80 percent of it is mountainous, so 20 percent is arable. They don't waste a strip of ground, you, you could see stuff growing right up the railroad tracks, and right up to the tie. And, we used to--we had to do either mountain training or ski training, part of the training protocol. And so, I don't like heights, I took ski training and they, they got us up at--they'd get us up at three in the morning, in our camp. We'd fall out on the street, and we're in mukluks, and everything, and we're driving to the Ojojahara mountain range, which is about, I guess, thirty-five, forty miles from Sendai. And there's a stretch--you pass through, through these rice fields and, as the dawn broke, we'd be, we'd be on these trucks, with the, the soft, soft helmets, with fur line, you pull the flaps down over your ears and we got, all these padded mukluks, and things on. And as it, as the light dawn, you could look across those rice fields, and see Japanese women out there, with their skirts up to their knees, walking barefoot, in these rice paddies, breaking the ice, to work--to work the ice, the rice. And, they put soldiers on the truck--they got wimps off the truck. Just think, how in the world could--and we, we were about to freeze in this weather, and they out there working these rice fields like that. Speaker 1: So the rice fields actually freeze over? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had little films of--you know, thin film, not, not thick, but just a little film of ice on top. Said, "Goodness gracious." So no, I,--developed a lot of respect for them as people, and, and for their culture. I mean, they take, they, they can take--a--spread out stone in a, in an area, and rake it, so that, it creates light and shadow patterns, and all. I mean, you can--all we see is stones probably. Somebody explains what you're looking for, harmony, and contrasts, and stuff. I mean, they, they took things, and made art out of what we consider, you know, something you'd get out of the way. And, it, it was a whole way of looking at things that--you know, you, you never would appreciate, unless you had some insight from somebody who taught you with the--. So, I--that was a fascinating time. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how long were you in Japan? Speaker 2: I was about, almost a year, about eleven months, I think, something like that. There was a temple outside of Sendai, Matsushima, and the--there was a Buddhist shrine, and I--it was supposed to be like, twelve hundred years old, or something. And it, it was about a hundred yards down into a, a grove of pines that were real, real tall. I mean, you walked in it, the--feeling was spiritual. I mean, you know, just, just to walk in there, you know. Speaker 1: So is there any story out, out of this period that you'd like to tell us? Speaker 2: None that, none that I'd want on record (laughs). I, I got back to base once without even my belt buckled, but I won't go into that (laughs). Speaker 1: This is like--the time that you're in Japan was in the Korean War. Speaker 2: The Korean War had--well, they had just signed the truce, when I got there. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: So they, they had pulled the division back. Speaker 1: It's just, I'm wondering about the cavalry. Now, what did the cavalry really mean then? At one time, it was horses. Did it mean tanks--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was tanks, and, and we, we were sort of motorized, you know. We, we got--we, we had transport. Now, I think, it's even more motorized, you know. And then, the pentagonal division was sort of experimental. It used to be three regiments to a division, this was five, and, and each regiment had its own combat support--artillery and tank battalions. Before, the division had the combat support, but these regiments were able to fight independently of divisional support 'cause they had, they had assigned support units. And, I think that that's what they went to. I'm not sure, though. I didn't keep up with it, after I got out. Story_ID: 13740 Speaker 1: You came back to the U.S., in--? Speaker 2: '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: '53 [1953] okay, Alright. You came right back to Tennessee? Speaker 2: May. I came back to Tennessee. I got married and my wife [Miriam DeCosta-Willis]--I had met my wife my last year at, at Harvard [University Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. She was a freshman at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and, she--had--so, we got married. So I had GI Bill, so I, I went to--I enrolled in Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and I, I did enough courses to--I got enough hours to have gotten a Master's [degree] in business administration. My advisor and I could never agree on what I would do my paper on 'cause he was writing a book, and he wanted me to research--do some research in the area he was working on, and I didn't want to do it. I was gone come back to the South, and I wanted to do something that I could use here. And, you know, he was, a little bit more theoretical than I wanted to be. So, never wrote anything. I got the hours, but I didn't get the degree. But, she got her--she was a Phi Beta Kappa from Wellesley. And I was thinking about that she, she did her, she got her doctorate after we got married, from [The] Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and her dissertation was on the literary influences of--in the, in the, in the writing of Bernardo Alba, the, the--he wrote--'The House of'--what--there, what, the Spanish writer--her--advisor at Wellesley had been this guy's secretary and, during the war in Spain, the [Spanish] Civil War, he had been on the side of the anti-Fascist whatever they call them. The leftist, or the--and, so she read all of the books in his library. The secretary had the, you know, the, the catalogue of his library and, and then traced the literary, traced those books, and his writings. His, his--'The House of Bernardo Alba' is, is the thing he [Garcia Lorca] wrote. I can't think of his name now but anyway, at--after we had gotten divorced, we, we had agreed that she, she was on one track, I was on another, so, it was civil. She got her doctorate after we had been--so I figured, "Well maybe, it probably won't--this won't work long--that much longer," so she got her doctorate. And so, a few years after that, she, she called up and said, "Well I've got a book, I just got done, and I'm publishing it." So I'm thinking she's done a--some, some kind of scholarly paper and I said, "What's the title?" And she said, "'Black Erotica.'" And I said--I thought, "God, suppose I'm in it," and then I thought, "Hell, we were married twelve years, suppose I'm not in it." (laughs) So, I didn't know which way, I'd be put out. So then, after--she said, "Don't worry this was a--don't worry--" she said, "That's--it is, it is a, a--an anthology, you know, excerpts from the writings of our lives". So anyway, that, that--she's published a lot of books since then. But, that was a--I, I had a few anxious moments, 'cause I didn't know how to react to that. Speaker 1: So, when did that come out? When was that? Speaker 2: That was about--not too--about ten to twelve years ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, cause I know the one you're talk--yeah, I know, yeah--. Speaker 2: Miriam Decosta, Miriam Decosta-Willis. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think that Charles Blockson had something to do with that. Story_ID: 13741 Speaker 1: We came back here [Memphis, Tennessee] 1956 and, went into practice with A. W. [Willis] and Bennie [Benjamin L. Hooks]. We had talked about that, before--years, you know, a year before I came back. And, they had opened up an office on Mutual--on, on Vance Avenue in Mutual--in Mutual Federal Savings & Loan that building, which had been built for Mutual Federal by a realtor here named Sawyer, Drew Sawyer (ph.). And, A. W.'s father had been one of the founders of Universal Life. And, I think, the, the Willis' owned, about, thirty percent of that stock and, Sawyer was doing a lot of work, he got finance base--financed basically through Universal, and A. W. did all of their closings. And--. Speaker 2: All right now, did you, did you think that you'd be involved in civil rights long, when you came back? Speaker 1: Yeah, H. T. Lockett was a legal rejust committee chairman, and he was filing the cases. But, after--I'm trying to think of when it started. After--well, when I first got back, the, the, there was this, this boycott of the '[Memphis] Commercial [Appeal]' going on. And I--the first thing I ever did, they asked me to write a statement of why we strike. And I--wrote that, and--. Speaker 2: The 'Memphis Commercial Appeal?' Speaker 1: --'Commercial' dealing with--Memphis had two dailies--'cause a, a morning, and an evening--'[Memphis] Press Scimitar' was the afternoon. The 'Commercial' was supposed to be the more conservative, and so then, I guess, it was but, I wrote that, and then there were a couple of elections--couple of, of times when somebody ran, it was to build up our voting strength. When I came back up until, oh, the end of the '60s [1960s] I guess, the ratio of black voters to white voters, here was roughly two to one, two white for every black. And, they had a commission form of government in the city, and a commission form of government in the counties. There's a three member commission in the county, and a five member commission in the city. And, they ran at large, then, generally and the town--in the city, the top five vote receivers were the commissioners, and they decided among themselves who was what--mayor, accountant, public works, public service, and so forth. In the county, it was just three, and you ran, same way, at large. So, when we started trying--and the legislature was the same way. There were eight, eight representatives from Shelby County [Tennessee] to Nashville [Tennessee], and the top eight votes. So, S. A. Wilbon (ph.), who was a lawyer--he's deceased, his son is back here now. He ran--I ran, I managed his campaign--he ran for the legislature and we single shotted, which meant that, instead of casting the votes for eight people, we cast for one, which would--. These people would have--if there were--if he got, say, ten thousand votes, these people would have ten thousand less votes cast in there, you know, to try to magnify leverage. So, all--every time we came close, and then they went single shot, by district so you didn't get, you didn't get that kind. So, what it--that kind of game went on. So then, we had, in 1959, Henry Loeb had won the public works commission race four years earlier, he got--he was seeking black support, he said, he was a minority, he understood the problems of minorities, blah, blah, blah. So, most of the black leadership had endorsed him, and supported him. He went up and down Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee], with a lot of talk, and that. Soon as he got elected, he started running for mayor, as a conservative and, so, he was a (unclear) after that. So, we had decided that in that race, you, you--if, if--even though it's--you run--you announced the, the seat you're seeking and so, if in the public service that he wasn't gonna run. The two to one ratio, if you had two equally strong white candidates, and then one black, theoretically, you'd split that vote, a third, a third, a third so, any more than that--two--that you got leverage. So, we were watching that race, and they, they had two or three of the people active. Justin Turner, and A. W., Hooks, and all--they decided, we ought to put--out a ticket. And they asked me if I'd run as, as the candidate for public works, the public works commission. Story_ID: 13742 Speaker 1: They asked if I would, I would run for public works commission [of Memphis, Tennessee], so I agreed and, they got--Ben [Benjamin L. Hooks] said he would run for juvenile court. Reverend Roy Love, who was a Baptist minister, he was the president of the biggest Baptist convention in town, there were a number of churches involved. And, they asked Reverend Henry Bunton, who was a CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister, he, he's now back--retired as a bishop in one of the CME church. They ran for school board seats and we called that the volunteer ticket. In the public works commission race--[Henry] Loeb was running for mayor, so there's no incumbent, that, that was one advantage. Then it started out with seven white candidates, Will Fowler was the city engineer, he had announced that [William] Bill Farris had been a city--some administrative position, he announced. Oh, Drew Canally announced some guy in the Public Works Department, named R. B. Sugarman--announced--I'm R. B. Sugarmon, he's Sugarman. He announced. And one other person--two other people, I've forgotten not really major candidates, but, this guy called me up, and said, "Look, I work for the public works commission, and they told me, if I wanted a job, or was going to keep my job, I'm a have to run." I said, "Well, you got a, you know, got a family to support, so, you know, you got to do what you got to do." But anyway, after the election--after the--it got started, Henry Loeb's opponent decided he had some kind of medical problem. He withdrew, so Loeb was unopposed. So, he spends his time trying to leverage these candidates to thin out that race 'cause the, the '[Memphis] Press Scimitar,' which was supposed to be the more moderate of the two, had a report and it covered all the black events, and wrote up about it, you know, blah blah, blah. They ran the same story two or three times that the--giving that ratio, unless the--some of the white candidates drop out of--I had almost a lock on winning the thing. We had figured that if I could get about thirty-five thousand votes, given--factoring in an increase because of the race issue, factoring an increase because of voter registration growth, and all, I had a shot at winning. So, I called him, I said, "You know, you--act like the peckerwood Paul Revere, 'The niggers are coming! The niggers are coming!'" So, he never spoke to me again (laughs) after that but anyway, when it turned out--as a can--it, it divided the house, and [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.] spoke here--I, I've got, I found a copy, I was looking through stuff--a copy of the program. He spoke here, I think, it was the--July 31st. That was about a week before the election. Packed house at--Claiborne Temple [Memphis, Tennessee]. I've, I've got a picture of that hanging in my office. Daisy Bates had come earlier, for a fundraiser, and, and it divided the city. The people--you know, the garden clubs endorsed, lodges endorsed, and then, as it is now, it was that if you're in line to vote at seven, you can stay in line until the, you know, the polls stayed open for you 'til the line cleared. The police would cut off the line--whoever was getting the last person in line at seven. And at some of our wards they were still voting at ten o'clock. The lines that ran blocks waiting to vote. But, that happened across town, so, I got thirty-six thousand votes, and I lost by twenty-one thousand (laughs). It was the biggest turn out by far, ever, in a municipal election. So, I, I saw a headline in, in one of the papers. I told one of the reporters, "Well, we won everything but the election." I, I think that's true from hindsight, because what that--what happened, we all lost but, what happened was that we came out of it with several thousand people, who were energized and didn't want to quit. Story_ID: 13743 Speaker 1: Right after that [losing a Memphis, Tennessee election], we worked on a constitution for organizing ward clubs. We set up bylaws, and had, had a meeting, people voted on it, adopted it. If you were in a precinct, and you wanted to organize, you could get somebody to talk about the constitution, bylaws, have a meeting, and elect your chairman, a secretary, so forth. And the chairman, by virtue of being elected chairman, was a member of the central committee of the club, which, were the chairmen from all the precincts in the club. And, if you had more than ten people, you could have the chairman plus one as--on the central committee. And the central committee elected the countywide officers, and the central committee endorsed. And we started out, I think, with about fifty-five precincts organized that way. At our peak, which was during the [Lyndon B.] Johnson-[Barry] Goldwater era, we had a hundred and one precinct clubs, with about seven thousand members, and, we had muscle. Story_ID: 13744 Speaker 1: Those days, the [Tennessee] governorship was every two years. They changed to every four, sometime since then but, in that election, we had the, the August primary. In, in those days, winning the August--the Democratic Primary was tantamount to winning the governorship, because the 'Solid South' hadn't melted yet, at that point. So, the, the guy who won the primary was a, was named [Earl] Buford Ellington, I believe I got my timing right. We had endorsed Edmond Orgill, he was a former city mayor we knew and were comfortable with. Nashville [Tennessee] black voters had endorsed Clifford Allen, who had been, I think, an assessor up there, and he had had a decent reputation. They endorsed him. Chattanooga [Tennessee] black voters went with Rudy Olgiati, who was their mayor, and who had good relationships with the unions up there. And so--and then, then Jackson [Tennessee] did something similar. So we had split our vote up across the state, and, I think, out of about seventy-five thousand votes cast statewide, we had cast an effective seven thousand, but we cancelled each other out, all the way across the state. So, we got the stats from the election returns across the state, tabulated them. And we got lists of teachers, black barbershops, black--those days, you could get everything by race, you know. And, we got that--no computers, but we did it manually. I've got a copy of the statistical abstract of Tennessee. Every county above 10 percent black, I got--and the Prince Hall Masons [Freemasons], were instrumental too. The Grandmaster was a resident here Charles Williamson. And, and we, we talked to him, and he agreed to send, we sent a letter, out saying, "Look at what we've did. We did nothing, we cancelled ourselves out across the state, so if you want to see what we can do about it, we're going to be at Park Johnson Hall, at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]" gave a time and a place. "We'll be there, if, if you're interested, come or send somebody." We had people from fifty-two--fifty-two counties at that meeting and, they adopted a statewide constitution. We had a east division, a west division, and a middle division, and the cities. And, that was the Tennessee Voters Council. At its height, which was the [Lyndon B.] Johnson-[Barry] Goldwater election, five congressman, both senators, and the governor had winning margins less than the number of votes they got from the black wards in the state, which meant, we clearly had delivered their victories to them. That, that was our height. It was, you know, it sort of, went down after that. But, the, the election following, following that organization, we had endorsed Frank Clement, the statewide thing and he had won. And, he had asked to meet with the leadership of the Voters Council, he wanted to thank us, and get some idea of what sort of stuff we were interested in, as far as the government, and the programs, and all. And so, we met with him and, the first thing he did, he had two secretaries, and he said, "I know that you folk interested in helping your folk get jobs, and I've got these two ladies here. She's going to handle the east-west and, and you give us names, and we'll see what we can do." And so, Avon Williams, I think, said, "Governor, that's not what we had in mind." Said, "What's that?" Said, "We, we have a study that Vivian Henderson and"--oh, a guy named Long--they were doctors at Fisk and they had been doing research under one of those grants on, on civil rights--employment in Tennessee government. "And this shows, by percentage, where our folk are", you know --how few. "And, you have the resources. You've got all these employment security offices across the state. You can locate people and identify, what we want, we want you to look at this study, and we want to come back here in two years, and you show us how these figures have changed. We don't have one name. You, you look at the numbers--you change the ratios." He told somebody he'd never had a meeting like that before in his life. "We don't have any names. You--we have need and demonstrated absences of where our folk ought to be," you know, you--Tennessee had, had highway patrolmen before New Jersey did as a result of that. And, that--'59 [1959] election gave us, in Memphis [Tennessee], a cadre, in every precinct with any significant black vote and, that was the backbone of everything the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] did for that decade. We, we had a boycott of Main Street that our precinct leaders manned. I mean, they got people out of their neighborhoods. And the idea was, stay off Main Street. You figured if people on Main Street weren't--people that sneak into these stores--we're talking about lunch counters, and talking about jobs, and--all. And, we said, "You don't need to be on Main Street." And the idea was there. This, this was the election we or--we organized this thing in '59 [1959], so it ma--it, it--I think it was the next year, that happened, this that Clement won. I, I want to go back though to the--what happened following the '59 [1959] locally and, and a little bit about the club. That, that '59 [1959]--that August primary, then there was the December general [election] when [John F.] Kennedy was running for president. And, [Dwight D.] Eisenhower had carried the precincts in Shelby County [Tennessee] in the previous election, by two to one, the black wards two to one 'cause the old [Abraham] Lincoln League, the Republican, you know, Civil War heritage thing. Story_ID: 13745 Speaker 1: John Seigenthaler had been a reporter for the 'Nashville Tennessean' then, and he had been keeping up with political stuff across the state. And, he was aware of what was going on here and, he had been down, I think, during that primary, just looking around. Speaker 2: Seigenthaler was--? Speaker 1: He--Seigenthaler was a reporter for the 'Nashville Tennessean'. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which was the 'Tennessean' was owned by the Amon Carter Evans Family, out of Houston [Texas] Amon Carter Evans Airport down there, Texas--money--. Speaker 2: Seigenthaler, did, did, didn't he have a position in one of the administrations? Speaker 1: He--with [President John F.] Kennedy, Kennedy. Speaker 2: Kennedy, right. Speaker 1: He was, he was, he was a reporter for the 'Tennessean,' and he--they assigned him to, to [Robert] Bobby Kennedy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the campaign manager. But he had, he--because of his, his reportorial work, in Tennessee. He was familiar with Tennessee, and black politics and he was focused on what we were gonna do, what we were doing here 'cause he was aware of what we did in the '59 [1959]--in the August campaign, as far as, the, the turn out, and everything we had done. So, he, he sort of kept, kept his hand in, down here, what was going on. And, on election night, the Democratic Party headquarters, here, got a phone call from Robert Kennedy, from Hyannis Port [Massachusetts]. The--everybody's com-coming in, piling in, and waiting on ward returns, so the chairman, a guy named--oh, what's his name--Jim something--should know it. He-he was a good friend. He's dead now, but--anyway, he got everyone quiet--and said, "Bobby Kennedy is on the phone." So, he says, "Wants to know the returns." So just as he starts reading the returns, and he says, "No, you got certain returns, you want." He had every black precinct in town, a list, and he, he was calling them out and, this guy was reading off, and we were--we, we had reversed it. The black wards are going two to one, for [John F.] Kennedy. So, he lost us the, the county but narrowly. But we had just completely flip flopped that black vote. So, after the election, he, he called, I guess they were planning the inaugural stuff and he said that-- Seigenthaler called, he--and he said that the president's brother is--he, he's, he knew what y'all did down there. You turned that vote around, and he wanted to know if there was anything they could do that, you know, to thank your people. So, I said, "Well, I, I think, one thing you could do. Most of our folk don't have a lot of money, so they probably couldn't do anything with it but frame it. But, I, I bet all of our precinct leaders would love to have an invitation to the inauguration. So he said, "That's a good idea, I'll see what we can do." Every one of our precinct leaders got invited to the inauguration. Well, what our--we had a lady--one--our precinct leader in Foote Homes which is one of the public housing projects, like we had one in LeMoyne Gardens [Memphis, Tennessee]. She took her and the--she's the one lady--the, the one-legged lady who didn't let that stop her one bit. She took, she took her invitation to the tenant association meeting, and showed them. They raised the money, and sent her. I love that. That's, that's one of my favorite stories about that. Drewsie Anderson, was her name and, you know, it just made--it lit up the whole place, you know, that she got invited, and went. Story_ID: 13746 Speaker 1: We had meetings every month, and we would bring in people about issues, and discuss. So, we, we had a lot of information flowing through these precincts. And people gradually came to recognize that if it was something going on, they'd ask the precinct "What's going on?" They--so, we had a good network going across the city. And for a few elections, you could go through black wards, and there'd be lines of people to vote, and they had one thing in their hand, that was our sample ballot. Everything else would be on the ground. I mean it was that way for oh, four or five years. But we had people come and talk about issues, and debate issues, and people got used to asking us, "Well, what's going on with this?" or "What do y'all think about this?" So we, we had good information, that not, not bullshit, pardon my language, going. And by then we, we had a, we had, we got a sales tax increase passed, for school purposes, that we--we don't have an income tax--property and sales taxes. And, the only source we could--they just increased property, they needed some more money for schools. It passed in the black precincts. The black precincts passed it all and we knew that's the most regressive we could--'cause we're against it, generally but, these people said, "Look, if it's going to help the kids, okay." I mean, and--the black vote put the damned thing across. The one time we gave out a membership card, people joined they got a member--the Shelby County [Tennessee]. I got a call, in my office on Vance [Street, Memphis, Tennessee], they had picked this woman up. She had passed out on the street--this was like in July, election is August and, the only thing she had on her ID was that membership card. So somebody in, in the ER room recognized it said "Shelby County Democrat, I know somebody--said they knew me." Called me up. It--her name was Nellie Martrey (ph.), so I, I told them where she--where they could, you know, send her home and all that. So, I went to see her, and she was supposed to be bed--in bed sick. And, she got up and was passing out our material. I said, "What are you doing up?" She says, "Our folk want to know who we're backing. I had to get"--. I mean, this woman was out there working, she had passed out, you know. I mean, we had that kind of commitment, in those days. But anyway, the next year, following that reorganization, in the November election--presidential election--in, you know, and the inauguration stuff, the three county commissioners came up. Well, we had, we had backed [C. Estes] Kefauver. Let me see, was he up then? He was coming up the next year. He was on the ballot for reelection. We had not been able to get into the black wards, in the county. People wouldn't come to meetings and the reason they wouldn't is because there was a lot of--there were a lot of still--African American, black farmers in the county, cotton, basically. And, the city banks wouldn't finance--this is a pattern from the [Ed] Crump era. City banks wouldn't finance, and there was a county bank, the Barrettsville Bank & Trust, they financed the Crump loans for black farmers and, they were pretty lax on them collecting, and made sure they collected. But, they didn't necessarily--they weren't sticklers about you getting there on time--let 'em know--unless, your voting poll didn't go for the party ticket, their ticket, you know, 'cause the--they wouldn't--and--unless they be--the bank would tighten up on the loan. They wouldn't--didn't even want to be seen talking to us, you know, in those days. So, they were the last--these three county commissioners were the last vestiges of the old Crump organization, and they were on the killing floor. The group we had been working--white--we were always meeting behind closed doors, not public, just the kiss of death--black vote's kiss of death. Everybody thinks you're backing me, I'll lose my effectiveness, and, I can't, you know, we've got to do this gradually. So, Lieutenant Lee suggested, "Let--these folk on the killing floor, and they are in office. They have power. Let's see what they're prepared to do to stay in power." So, we had a meeting with them back in the grand jury room, and we said, "We want--we'll back you, but we want, we want you to do something before election day--'cause you're in office, you can do it now," and they said, "What's that?" We said, "Take every sign, "White--", just, you know, "White Only" off every public building under your control now. You start hiring black people in non-traditional positions now, including deputy sheriffs." I--we had three or four things, and then, we said that Paul Barrett, he was there--we said, "We don't expect you to be able to come out and endorse Kefauver. You said that people would think you'd gone crazy. And, your people would probably think, you know, you some--they would, they wouldn't do it. We don't want you to do it. What we, what we want you to do is keep hands off the black boxes. Don't, don't influence those people, either way, just lea--we want to get with them, to see what we can do." So, they talked about it, they finally said, "Okay, we'll do that." So, we had planned--cause we had--I don't think there was--there was one black church in town that wasn't fully behind us, by that time and, we had planned to release a letter through the ministers, on Sunday, before election day describing this ticket, and why. And one of the members of the committee told the papers, and they had a headline big as the he--Pearl Harbor headline, 'Jobs For Votes Deal Exposed'. That's what it said, you know and so, they called us, and we said, "Yeah we had a meeting." And said, "The politics is about using the leverage of the ballot to advance your people. Now if you can, if you can point to anything that it says, any of those people at the meeting got a job, that's news." I said, "What we got, is jobs for our people, that's politics." And so, Harsh called, he said, "One thing I learned from Boss [Ed] Crump," he said, "You--in politics, your word is the only thing you've got going, and if you lose the--people, when they rely on your word, you ought to get out of it." And he said, "Now, we are willing to keep our word. Are you willing to keep--?" We said, "Yeah." And so, they went ahead, and they won and, they did hire black--the--the signs came do--we carried the black boxes for Kefauver. Yeah, he died two years later, but that, that would have set him for life, you know. In terms of, not--he--that was his first--the second term up, since he had won the office. And so, we had another problem at the next election. But one of the people, who was hired as a deputy sheriff then, he died about three years ago now. And, when he died, he was the jury commissioner of Shelby County. I, I mean that, that's, that's sort of, what happened with it. And, and, most of the judges, in office, were at his memorial. So, you know, we feel pretty good about that, too. Story_ID: 13747 Speaker 1: That's about '60 [1960]-, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], and that '62 [1962] election was the one that [Frank] Clement won. All right, [C. Estes] Kefauver died [1963], and that left a vacancy in the [Tennessee State] Senate. We had met with Clement. He had been doing some of the stuff but he had--I-it was sort of, piddling. But, he announced for the senate face--for Ross Bass, had come to us, for--seeking support and, they were, they were, at that point, debating the Civil Rights Act [1964], one of those right--early '60's [1960] Civil Rights Acts and we said, "Well, it's too soon, you know, 'cause you, you're a congressman and you got to vote. So, you know if you, if you vote for that bill, then we, you know, we can consider you." This was before we found out Clement was thinking about running. "And if you don't, you don't need to waste your time, or ours 'cause you can forget it, you know." And so, he voted for it and then, then Clement announced, and says, "Oh hell, what have we (laughs)--" Here we got a governor we put in office, and we got a congressman, who voted for the bill that, you know, to some expense to us, cause his own constituents--'cause he was from, he was from the county--his county--one of the counties in his district was the county where the [Ku Klux] Klan started. So, you--that, that's the kind of (laughs). So anyway, when Clement announced, in his opening statement, he said, he would not have voted for the Civil Rights bill that the congressman from Pulaski [Tennessee] voted for, had he been in, had been in--the legislature. And we took that--and what he went on to say was, he would have supported another--he was trying to moderate it, you know, but he was trying to get that [unclear]--. We took the first phrase, "Clement" you know, "repudiates Civil Rights Bill." And that helped us to commit to this guy, and he won. Clement told somebody, "I should have--." He hired --that's when you started implementing looking at that list seriously, in terms of, employing people in state government. Like, that's when he hired the state troopers, and all that. He said, "I wish I had done that sooner." (Laughs) But he was enough of a politician to appreciate what we'd done to him. Story_ID: 13748 Speaker 1: The next year, I think it was after the '59 [1959 Tennessee gubernatorial] campaign, that's the legislative races. A. W. [Willis] and I both decided to run, this--there was a [Tennessee State] Senate seat, and a [Tennessee State] House [of Representatives]--I mean, those seats coming up--well they came up every two years, just as the governor, I think now. Anyway, we flipped a coin who'd run for the house, who'd run for senate. So, I won the senate seat, which I, I mean, to rent--the race for the senate seat. And I got beat, and he won the house seat. Well, when he went up there, there weren't any black senators. He was the first black this--in this decade--in this--that century, you know, since, since the Reconstruction, I guess in the house. And--. Speaker 2: This, this is in the House of Representatives? Speaker 1: House of--State House of Rep-- Speaker 2: Tennessee State House of Representatives--. He had some legislation, he got introduced, and when it came to the senate, the senator from Madison County [Tennessee] killed it. He bottled it up in the, in the committee up there. So, following that, that first session of the legislature that was, that was '61 [1961], I guess, '62 [1962] he went home, decided to run for mayor. The Tennessee Voters Council unit up there, Joe Murray's group, they supported him for the senate race and, since he didn't vote, they opposed him in the mayor's race, and he got his ass kicked, pardon my language. And, that mellowed out a whole lot of folk in West Tennessee. They, they--before they took a position, they counted the number of black voters in the county, you know. But, it was--he was an object lesson, you know. You--it's too--you can't, you can't ignore these people any longer. You got to make sure--so, that did a whole lot to change some attitudes up there. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a powerful story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I bet it did wake some people up. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 13749 Speaker 1: The Democratic Club here [Memphis, Tennessee]--and as I said the [Barry] Goldwater election [1960 presidential election], that, that was at our --that was our, our highest point. What happened here, following that, was not--well, it was political too. They had been trying to restructure the county, and we'd stopped it, a couple of times 'cause they, they weren't--first, they wanted council managers. We says, "Naw, it's gone be like Houston [Texas]." They, they brought the Houston manager up there, and he--that's when we found out, they had two, two members of the council, but neither one of them had ever carried a black--(laughs). Well, that ain't, that ain't what we want, you know. So, so that even the, the chamber was pushing this thing. And, they agreed that the, the council manager was not an option. They wouldn't even try to push that. So, the, the big issue is--. Speaker 2: Now is the model where, basically, the party chose black--. Speaker 1: Hmm? Speaker 2: --officials, for the--. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, they got, they got the people picked--. Speaker 2: --in Houston Speaker 1: --yeah for the power structure--picked them--people who wouldn't rock the boat. But anyway, they had been trying to get reorganized--tried to get away from the commission form, they wanted to go to a mayor council. I mean they wanted to get away, away from the commission form but, some form of mayor council was the only thing on the agenda as far as, as far as we were concerned and, no run-off. And, they had agreed, the committee working had agreed, no run-off would be on the discussion--they, they had gotten one in afterwards but I'll, I'll get there, I'm getting ahead of myself. So, the big issue was whether there'd be a, a big council or small council. And Nashville [Tennessee] has a big council, and, and it's kinda--we, we weren't that interested in a big council but we did want some districts to guarantee representation. They wanted all at large. And, I guess, they figured they could finance campaigns but I don't know what they--but they wanted all at large. So anyway, in the discussion, what, what happened, we--agreed to a compromise and it, it looked like that might be the better thing anyway, because the district seats guaranteed representation. But a lot of times the district representative couldn't grow beyond his constituents, you know, she couldn't go beyond--so, we decided--we came up with a combination and I think we start--that first structure was thirteen council seats, and it was, six at large, and seven districts. I believe that's the way it was. Which meant that, to carry some--'cause we also wanted to leverage, and get--we didn't want just representation, we would have been a minority in the representation at that point, we were a third of the vote. We could raise hell, but couldn't pass a damn thing. We, we wanted leverage to get things passed, budgets adopted, and this sort of thing. So that combination looked--on the at large seats, we figured, at worst, we could have the balance of power in terms of advancing somebody. And at best, we could make the at large seats, seats where you could have people who could grow, because they'd have to talk about a broader range of issues, and they'd have to appease a broader range of the thinking, and you could have people who could be advocates of your (unclear) on these, on the, on the ward group. And, somehow, you could, you--it would--so we, we figured we could try that. But what happened was, while we were working on the final touches of that, the old commission adopted a run-off. Now, it--that was unconstitutional, because we--it had to take a legislative act, to change that through--this, this was gone be home rule, once this new charter came into effect. It wasn't even in effect then. So, we had to decide what we were going to do. Are we gonna go to court? If we wound up in federal court, we, we had the--a couple of judges we got there, we--it'd be a year and a half, getting a, getting back in, two years longer that--one of them, on the--to highlight when, when the first school board hearing came to, came to his court. The school board had met the night before, and adopted a resolution, saying that the school system of Memphis [Tennessee] is--is desegregated and, the chairman came and, and in, an-an--they put that in the record. And, when he got through, the judge said, "Well, I want to congratulate the school board, they are law abiding, outstanding citizens. This case is moot." He dismissed the damn case. We didn't even get to--we had to the supreme court, to get back down for a hearing. So, we said--well, we figured, "Well, let's get this thing imperfect on the ballot, I mean, get it implemented. And, let's see if we can get the first commission--the first--you know, this new--form of representation--get our folk elected." We had some, some district seats we were sure of and, we, we had the at large, where we thought maybe, we might be able to get enough of those people off of our slate, to where we could repeal that run-off later. Well--and if we don't, then we go to court. Well, what happened was the issue--the--it, it--something What happened was, it didn't work that way. Th-the, the, the mayoralty people, A. W. [Willis]--was Willis's plan to run, he--so he ran. Henry Loeb ran, and th--a, a former mayor, who had gotten a lot of black support he ran. And, and, the two--Willis and that guy split the, split the vote we had, had to get and Loeb won, and we got the commission. We got one more commissioner than we thought we'd get, 'cause of a white guy, who was a drunk filing against one of the others split that vote, so this guy won. And the public works strike--the public workers went out on the issue that brought [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] here. And, we had planned aft--if we didn't win, we'd, you know, we'd go to, we'd file a case. Well, that superseded everything, that, that strike. And so, it was decided well we'll put a pen to that so that, this will work. And then King got killed. Speaker 2: Now, the public workers--that the garbage workers that went on strike for--. Speaker 1: Yeah that's the garbage workers. Yeah, the garbage workers. They--that--the first thing to hit the new, the new governing body was that petition, the garbage workers' petition. And so, we never got to our stage two on the implementation to get that, get that run-off thrown out. My son [Tarik Sugarmon] got that thrown out, what, two or three elections after that. But, when King got killed, my generation of leadership went into shock. I mean it, it took us a long time, to, you know, just, just to recover from that, 'cause--. And so, by the time we got back into any kind of thinking function, we--there was a whole new, whole new set going on, you know. Harold, you know, Harold Ford won his election and, you know, you, you pretty much (unclear) where it is now. So we never did get a chance to see whether--'cause what we had, it we, we, we figured with, with our precinct leadership at that point, if we could have gotten that first commission, the first new council, with the at large plus the district seats there--we might have gotten a culture established. Because we, we had enough people to do the educational stuff on issues then, that might not have--we might have gotten by a whole lot of crap we deal with now because we would have had, we would have probably had a culture that was focused on urban growth, and how to solve those problems between the context of the, of the issues put on the table by the, by the people from the districts, you know. We--I mean, i-it was a--gonna be an experiment, to see whether we could work it 'cause we, we had the thing in place that we thought we could use to educate, and advocate. But we never, we never got a shot at that. Story_ID: 13750 Speaker 1: Did the firm [A. W. Willis, Benjamin L. Hooks, & Russell B. Sugarmon, Jr.] deal with any, any other civil rights cases? I mean the--. Speaker 2: My firm? Speaker 1: The, the cases from down in Mississippi--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, you talking about, you talking about--? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, you mean my old firm? Yeah, the, the--well, what happened was the office there was used by--the, the law--the bar associations all across the country during that Mississippi Freedom Summer let lawyers take leaves to come down to Memphis [Tennessee], and to Jackson [Mississippi], and they were based here, and Jackson. And, they provided legal representation for people that anything happened from--we, we--our, our office was about a hundred miles north of Jackson, up to the state line. And, that line, down to the Gulf [of Mexico], was handled by the lawyers in the Jackson office. So, we had people rotating all summer doing--here doing stuff. Until [Michael] Schwerner, [Andrew] Goodman, and [James Earl] Chaney [civil rights workers murdered in Mississippi], wasn't much--you know, just some minor harassment stuff going on. The kids had to come out every night and that's like a pressure cooker, cause they were afraid to open the windows, and turned--keep the lights on at night. And we had opened up an old hospital on Williams [Street] because--a black doctor had built a two story building, which was the only place, for years that blacks could go if they needed to be hospitalized. And it was still up, and there were bed frames up there and stuff. And his--the doctor's widow let us reopen that, and that, that was like an R & R [rest and relaxation]. Your kids would come out of Mississippi to spend weekends, and--I met some interesting kids--I mean there was a cross section of America. It--that was before the Black Power thing had sort of driven the movement through the race channel, for working. And, you know, Martin King's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] America is about people, you know, far as I'm concerned. And when, when they, when--the--it--the--the [Democratic] party convention happened in Atlantic City [New Jersey], the convention was held at--in that convention hall that opens out onto the boardwalk. And, it was in August, and, and we had a lot of d-delegates from Tennessee, and the Mississippi Freedom Democrats came up from Mississippi, and from Alabama. And they were challenging the regulars at the convention in the Rules Committee. And, [Richard J.] Daley had a man running the Rules Committee. And Fannie Lou Hamer testified before that Rules Committee about three days. I mean--and this is a thing shared by hardened Chicago, [Illinois] hall. And she kept them mesmerized. She--when she came into a room, the conversation stopped. You know, somehow people--you think you have some values, and all it is, is a hope, until you get tested. Well she was a woman who had been tested, and you could tell it. And, when she showed up, you knew, this woman was special. She testified for about three days, they voted--went--and at night, when the conventions recessed, they had just discovered, before the convention, the bodies of Schwerner, and Goodman, and Chaney, an-and the--. Speaker 1: They had been missing all summer. Speaker 2: The, the boardwalk--they had, they had laid it out, so that they put a, a wire fence--a wooden fence with wire, you know, mesh about fifteen feet away from the door, so that the convention people could walk along but on the other side, across the face of the boardwalk, there were these kids, you know and, Vietnam [War] veterans, and stuff. The--not Vietnam--yeah, yeah, they had Vietnam War was going on too, but, it was a hundred yards of young Americans, black, white, green, whatever. You know, that were there, and they had three charcoal faces of Schwerner, Goodman, and Chaney floating above the crowd and it was like somebody had turned the--the sound down. People would be walking out, and it was, "Whoomp!" They'd see those faces, and thought--(pause). Anyway, she had, she had said that the sheriff had handcuffed her to a--the cell cot and, he had told her he wanted to sign a confession that she had been paid by the communists to organize--there was a discredit in the movement. And, she refused. So he came in one night, and he told her, if she hadn't signed the next morning, they were gone dump her in the river. Well, hell, they--at that point, it was, it was legitimate to worry about that. And so, she said, she cried and she prayed, and she prayed and she cried (pause). Speaker 1: It was tough--she was beaten, too. Speaker 2: Well, a little, but, but the threat of, you know, dropping into the river was the thing. But, she said, when the sun started to coming down the wall, she decided, she said, "You didn't live all this time for nothing. If you die, you died for something." And she didn't. Story_ID: 13751 Speaker 1: The [George] McGovern--the [Donald] Fraser-McGovern [sic, McGovern-Fraser] Commission was the result of that meeting and that was when they adopted the demographic test that the delegations had to reflect the demographics of the congressional districts from which they came. And the future [Democratic National] Conventions in Miami [Florida], was the result of that. And--but, but--. Speaker 2: The [Mississippi Freedom Democratic party] delegation didn't get seated in, in Atlantic City [New Jersey] though? Speaker 1: What they did was they divided each one. They were gonna--and, and the regulars went home from both of them. Rather than, rather than share the seating. Speaker 2: They offered a compromise--? Speaker 1: Offered the compromise--. Speaker 2: The compromise was an insult to the regular delegation--. Speaker 1: --so they, they all left. Speaker 2: --and you know, they left. Speaker 1: So, yeah, so--. Speaker 2: --seats were empty--. Speaker 1: --for Atlantic City--yeah--. Speaker 2: --but the convention refused to sit any, but two, of the--. Speaker 1: --something, yeah, something like that. Yeah (unclear)--. Speaker 2: --Mississippi Democrats. Speaker 1: Yeah. But the result was the Fraser Commission--McGovern Commission on Party Reform and that--and Miami was where that showed up. Speaker 2: Were you aware of--it's been written, that there was a bit of trickery at that convention, sending the--. Speaker 1: The Chicago [Illinois]--oh, oh Atlantic City--I mean, in Miami? Speaker 2: No, in Atlantic City. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Sending the delegation, of Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, across the street to talk to vice president--well, candidate [Hubert] Humphrey and, hear the positions of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and everybody else, while, on the floor, a compromise was, was voted in, that the leaders of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party didn't know anything about. Speaker 1: No, I--didn't hear about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think they were--the vote occurred while most of them--. Speaker 1: 'Cause what happened, we, we gave the Mississippi people our badges to get in, you know, during some of that stuff. Speaker 2: I think that's when that--the compromise was finished, though--. Speaker 1: Yeah, oh--. Speaker 2: --they came in, some sat, symbolically, in the seats--. Speaker 1: --yeah--. Speaker 2: --but they didn't--. Speaker 1: Oh, no, I, I don't remember that. But, now, that, that was--that was, I mean, you know. They had the pictures up there, and they want--I know they wanted Bobby [Robert] Kennedy to come in late. They didn't want Lyndon Johnson--they didn't want him on the floor before the nomination had taken place for fear of what would happen. And, I knew that. But the Miami Convention though, scared the--you had Indians in full regalia; you had welfare mothers with huge labels and attitudes all over the place--I mean here, you had gay militants. I mean, I mean--. Speaker 2: That's in '72 [1972]? Speaker 1: --th-the Miami one was where [George] McGovern was nominated--in Atlantic--in, in, in Miami--. Speaker 2: '72 [1972], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, '72 [1972]. And, and, there the Vietnam [War] veterans were right--the, the damned--they, they had indicted their leadership, and made them report to a federal court, ninety miles away from Miami. And, that was to deprive them of their leadership. And, it turned out, that that's exactly what they had planned. It, it--that just came out last, last decade, or so that they were designed that way. But, on--in that, in that, I was on the Rules Committee in Miami. And the veterans had wanted to get a special order, 'cause they had them timed to come on after prime time television. They didn't want--they didn't want the country to see that convention, and a lady from Connecticut, raised her hand, and, and she, she hadn't--nobody had pegged her as being one of the, the radicals on the--so-called, you know, on the, on the, on the committee. And the chair recognized her, and she yielded to one of the, one of the guys who said, "I move for a special order, so that the resolution being sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans Against the War, can be read at eight o'clock." And that was prime time, and we passed it. So, the chair announced that the rule--the, you know, the count, and then the rule was adopted. And, these guys started applauding us, and the whole committee turned and started applauding them. That's okay. So--. Speaker 2: Do you have any stories about the '68 [1968] convention, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: No, I, I didn't make it to that one because, I mean--you know, '68 [1968] was--that was--the action was here [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you're right about that. Speaker 1: So, no. I, I think, I think, probably, after the--we lost hat effort to try to get that structure adopted and implemented, my generation had shot its load, you know. Story_ID: 13752 Speaker 1: Where were you--do you remember where you were when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: On the way back from Nashville [Tennessee]. My wife and I, I had been up there for a committee meeting, on something. I had to pull over. I mean, I couldn't see to drive. Speaker 1: What, what was it like, when you got back? Speaker 2: Grim--you know, incredulous anger. But, you know, it was like getting kicked in the stomach, you know. And so, we, we, I mean, we just--psychically, you know, we had been on such a roll, and had, and had--came so close, you know, to getting that ring where we could put the structure together that you could, you could make good things happen through, you know, for everybody, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the assassination? If you might have--I mean do you think that James Earl Ray actually did it? Speaker 2: I don't know if he did it, but I'm convinced that he ain't the one that, that planned it. I mean, II think there was many--you know, there's much more than just him doing that that is involved. Story_ID: 13753 Speaker 1: '72 [1972] now, now, did, did you continue to be part of the Democratic National--I mean, a [Democratic] National Committee Member? Speaker 2: I was through the [President Jimmy] Carter--the two Carter years. And, I--resigned after that, ause I, I just, you know, I figured, I'm in the way, right now 'cause I, I wasn't geared psychically, you know. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories from the Carter days? Speaker 2: I have one from the Kennedy days, [United States Attorney General] Bobby [Robert] Kennedy, when the Freedom Rides happened [in 1961]. He--we had gone up there to see the president. [John] Seigenthaler [Assistant to Robert Kennedy] set up a meeting for us, cause w-we had an idea that if they would back--and af--that--I don't think they understood, up until [the 1962 integration of] Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] and the Freedom Rides, the emotional nature of the problem. And we had gone up to see him about them sponsoring legislation which would create federal election criteria which would be race blind. And state--and we figured that would create splits across all these states. There's a little, there was a little power structure that exists everywhere and if we--our folk--we could exploit the cracks, you know, create a basis for a fight, state-by-state. And we met with Robert Kennedy on that. Seigenthaler, I think was in the room and Bert [sic, Burke Marshall, Assistant Attorney General]--what's his name? The--[later] dean of the Yale [University] Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] was chief of the Civil Rights Section, of the Justice Department, at the time [1960-1964], nice and decent guy. Anyway, we met with them, and Kennedy said, "Well, I'll--I know what you all did in Tennessee." He said, "But the problem is, you need to go home and tell your folks to get up off their asses, and register." He had no idea about the--so, anyway, then the Freedom Rides happened, and he sent Seigenthaler to investigate, and they cracked Seigenthaler on the head [in a Ku Klux Klan attack on Freedom riders in Birmingham, Alabama] --remember he--that picture of him bandaged up. So, I called the--I called the Justice Department, and, and the dean [Marshall], I think the dean answered the phone 'cause I think Seigenthaler was still nursing his head. And I said, "Is the Attorney General in?" Said, "Is he busy?" He said, "He's looking over some legislation we're gonna try to introduce." And I said, "Would you give him a message from me?" And, he said, "Yeah, what is it?" He said--I said, "Remember that meeting, and he told us to 'get up off our asses'?" He, he said, "Yeah." I said, "Tell him, we're off our asses." (laughs) He said, "I'll give you the phone." The buses were burning in Birmingham [Alabama], so--[laughs]. Speaker 1: He did--you know, I've read before, I know, that--elsewhere, that he just didn't get it at a certain point. Speaker 2: At a certain point--I think he got it after that period, though, I mean. Speaker 1: I think was that just outside of his experience--. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--. Speaker 1: --he didn't even understand what--. Speaker 2: No clue. He and his brother [President John F. Kennedy] either but, I'm think--when they did, they did the right thing, you know. And I'd much rather have somebody--not understand and mess up, than understand and get a flash, you know, have an epiphany. That's what he had. Now, I was all for Bobby Kennedy. I--we went to the organizational meeting for the Southeast, in St. Louis [Missouri], when they were organizing the campaign and some guy from New Orleans [Louisiana], they, they had not decided on who they were gone look to, as--a--their man on the county--the state apparatus, you know, campaign apparatus. There was a struggle going on between, I think, the governor and the mayor about who would control that, that machinery. And so, the guy from Louisiana kept insisting on Bobby Kennedy telling the two--I forgot their names, but there was--between two people, down there. And, there were four or five states, represented from the Southeast and we're all sitting there listening to this dialogue. And so, he said, "Well, I--we came all this way, we trying to help your brother." And, Kennedy says, "An-and I keep saying that we are monitoring this carefully. And we're trying to see how it develops, and we're not prepared, at this time, to make a decision." So, the guy said, "We're spending our own money, to come help your brother get elected. And I don't think you should treat us that way." He says, "Well, if I've insulted you, I apologize. But, it's a goddamned stupid question." I said, "Wow!" (laughs) So, I--liked him. He was passionate, you know, really. Story_ID: 13754 Speaker 1: Are you familiar with John Jay Hooker? He was a bright potential Democrat liberal, we had backed him in the primary, and he had run for governor, and he lost. But he had taken--gotten on TV, and took--and answered--took questions. And he was, he was a--the spectrum of liberal positions. He was just spouting. So, including a lot of integration stuff, and we called his office--his headquarters, after he'd gotten back to Nashville [Tennessee], and said, "Hear me on channel--?" Said, "How'd it go, over there?" He said, "Oh, it was great," he said, "I only got four threats on my life when I left." But anyway, the next election--he lost by fifty thousand votes. The next election, the next time--this was a two-year term governorship, I think. They had decided that they lost in West Tennessee and some of the, some of these old county political, political machines that the, that the former Tennessee legislators who had disappeared in history had set up, and they were still in place. So they put a lot of them in place. And, our folk, from the [Tennessee] Voter[s'] Council, kept complaining to us, "We've been fighting these people, why--when are we--?" And, you know, "I know they need him but we don't need to work through them." So, Henry was running John's campaign. So, we kept complaining to Henry. Henry says, "Look--" he started giving us some numbers, and some turnouts, that was it--and we even got the--we had looked at it the last time. And, this, this is what we got to have, here. And they said, "I'll tell you what--we need from you people--we need something like a 65 percent turnout, and we need 80 percent of that vote and you've got a governor." So, that night, we had gotten them, something like a 70 percent turnout, and we had gotten, almost 90 percent of the black vote out. And Henry called down at--they were falling out of bed in Nashville, and he--and I said--no, we called him, says, "What's going on up there?" He says, "It's not looking good," says, "How's it going down there?" I said, "Remember those percentages?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "We got our part of the governor, where is yours?" (laughs) You love it when you get a chance to tell people (laughs). Story_ID: 13755 Speaker 1: You said there're a couple other anecdotes from this period of time [Civil Rights Movement, 1960s]. Speaker 2: Oh, I was just talking--that had to do with just, just, in--at one point, during the, the sit-in period. I had my phone unlisted after the campaign in '59 [1959], 'cause it would ring all night on weekends, fire trucks come, police--blah, blah, blah--so we had it unlisted. And, we would--this was my, my first wife [Miriam DeCosta-Willis] and I--we would get in the car on a Friday, with overnight stuff and after we got in the car, we'd drive around and decide where we'd spend the night. You know, check into a motel--that-that's to keep from getting phone calls and crap. So, one time, we--Howard Johnson, it was on Lamar [Avenue], it's now (unclear)--we were there, and the phone rang about five o'clock, one Saturday--we checked in that night. And, it was a guy, police inspector [Graydon] Tines on the phone and he identified himself, and said, "We have some information that you and your wife need to know, and so, if you could, be at the police headquarters at seven. We're, you know, we are gonna have the information to you, and a few other people." So, I--we get there, and I'm there, A. W. [Willis]'s there, I think, [Benjamin] Hooks, [H. L] Lockett, [A.] Maceo Walker--I don't think--Jesse Turner might have been out of town. But, he said, "We've got information that one of these--" and there was a group here, called the Invaders, and they had some black and white kids, and they talked a lot, and blah, blah, blah--. Speaker 1: Was it a gang, or--? Speaker 2: It was, it was, yeah, it was a group, not, not a criminal gang--. Speaker 1: --activists--? Speaker 2: Yeah, activists, or something. They called themselves on the cutting edge, you know. And they had decided they would start a--could start a race riot, by have--not one of us killed, but one of us shot, by one of their white members, and blame it on the [Klu Klux] Klan. So, this was what they related. So they said, "So, we're gonna be keeping a close eye on each of you for the next few days. And--but you know, just be careful, I just wanted you to know that." So, I was more focued--with how he knew where I was, you know, some--'cause we didn't--my mama didn't know where we were. You know, we just decided, you know, we, you know, we, we try to be up to, up to par on things, and we--we just know. So, we went home, and Maceo called his wife, said, "Harriet, meet me at the airport. Bring some clothes", and he went to Little Rock [Arkansas]. He's got relatives over there at--but we had just went home. So anyway, nothing happened, but I, I know the gang. I know the guys, I know, you--I mean, I know them now, you know. They swore that the--they weren't planning to do anything like that. I don't know, I don't know how the police were--that--they might have been talking. But, I don't, I don't think, you know, they, they might have misread them. Story_ID: 13756 Speaker 1: My wife [Miriam Decosta-Willis] and I had been active, as I said, locally--volunteers. The [U.S.] State Department used to have it, they may still have--the Ambassadors, at every station had a budget, where he could bring people in, at our expense, to spend a--some time in Washington [D.C.] then get to wherever they wanted to in the country, for a one-on-one--get them firsthand exposure to America. So that they had a seeding of people, who were either--were or would--were becoming movers and shakers, in those countries, with some actual firsthand impressions of the country. And, you get to meet people all over the world. So, they--this one time, there was--Kenya had just gotten its independence. And one of the guys coming over from Kenya was a guy named Jokade (ph.). He had been a Mau Mau, he had a degree from Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], I think. He was the editor of the largest daily paper in Nairobi [Kenya]. And he wanted, if possible, to interview a member of the [Klu Klux] Klan. So, they had this note, you know, if it's possible so I thought about it. And our police commissioner had been a--he was a retired naval officer, named [Winslow] 'Buddy' Chapman and I called him up. He was, he was the commissioner and I said, "Mr. Chapman, you got a minute?" He said, "Yeah." Said, "Well I was wondering if you could do me a favor." I said--he said, "What's that?" I said, "Well, we've got, we've got a Mau Mau, a former Mau Mau, coming in from Africa. He's a Kikuyu and he wants to interview a member of the Klan." He said, "Are you serious?" So I said, "Yeah." He said, "A member of the Klan?" Yeah, he says, "You been drinking?" Says, "No." He said, "How do you think I should know how to find a member of the Klan?" I said, "Well you all know how to find us all the time. If you're a equal protection cop, you ought to be able to find--." He said, "Well, that's legitimate comment, let me see what--." Then I told him--the, the guy was a--was the editor of the paper, you know. He, he was a Kikuyu, but that didn't mean anything about who he, you know, his, his--what he was--wrote and everything. So, he called me back, and he told me that there's a, there's a truck stop, about a mile north of Millington [Tennessee], on the west side of the road, and he goes up there about three o'clock on whatever day it was. I think you will find some people that you can talk to. So, I told him, and they--he did. He went over, and he got to interview a--some Klansmen had came down from Tipton County [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: That's some interview. Speaker 1: They were, they were intrigued, as intrigued as Chapman was about this, this guy's a Mau Mau, so then, you know, they're, they're from two different poles, and they're sitting up there talking. So he got his interview. That's incredible. Story_ID: 13757 Speaker 1: And let me see, what was the other one about, it just--I can't remember what the other one was about now. Oh, this, this was about three years ago [2000]. They brought in three members of the Jordanian Supreme Court and they wanted to look at our court's process--court's procedures. So I was thinking, "How can I make this a--" you know, I've, I found that, that itinerary. I set up an itinerary, and what--it's like, I wanted a message to be what they were doing. So, I had them go to the U.S. Attorney's Office, first. She happened to be a black woman. Had them meet the U.S. Public Defender, the Chief--it was a white woman and every judge she talked--they talked to was female. They didn't have one male judge in one--every one of them, you know. So, when they got back home, apparently they loved it. The only--a-and the--we had home hospitality, another woman, who, who--she is a lawyer, she is a--she does divorce mediation work and she and her boyfriend, they had a ukulele. So, they had them singing. They were playing ukulele, and singing, singing 'Hava Nagila', and all kind. It was wild. So, a, a few months later, the, the eight--contract agency in Washington [DC], the lady that we dealt with on that. She, she called up and said, "Guess what happened." Said, "What?" Said, "The Jordanian government wants to send some more of their judges to Memphis [Tennessee], and they'll pay for the trip." (laughs) I said, "You know we're trying to--." I know women in Jordan--they are ahead of most of those countries, but women are in bad shape everywhere over there, so we was trying. Apparently, they didn't want to leave the public defenders' office, and defend, because she's a knock-out, you know, she's a lawyer, but great looking (laughs). Story_ID: 13758 Speaker 1: Tell me about becoming a judge. Speaker 2: Oh. Well, I had--like I said, I went out--I went to law school [Harvard University School of Law, Cambridge, Massachusetts] 'cause, 'cause I wanted to--I wanted to be a mechanic, a social mechanic, and that. And, and the closest I came was that structure I was talking about on the county government changing thing--to make, you know, not make them better, but differently. And after, you know, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and all, I kept watching how what I was hoping happen, wouldn't. It was, it was going in different directions, so I just figured the--I guess the main thing I can do, at this age and time is be of service. But, I just did--a vacancy came up, and I put my hat in the ring, and I got elected. I mean, the county commissioner elects, and you have to serve out the remaining term that you've won for the--I mean, I mean, you serve 'til the next election. You run, and if you get elected, you fill the remaining term, and then you go into regular cycles. So after I got on, I never had any opponents, so, I just do here. I'm gonna quit, I mean--after this election, I mean after--I'm not running in the next election, I'm just gonna retire after that. I didn't get on the bench 'til, 'til late. I could've done it earlier, but I kept hoping that we could, we could do some things that, that I was hoping we could get done before, you know, Dr. King's death, and all. That, that, that sort of, sidetracked us, and it turned out, that was our last hoorah. I mean, my, my generation--. Speaker 1: So you said your son [Tarik Sugarmon] has gone--? Speaker 2: He's a judge, he's a city court judge. But, I'm not sure that--. A lot of that generation of our kids aren't that interested in politics. I guess a lot of them watched us, in terms of the time and, and the stresses, and all, so--. I've got a, I've got a grandson who's--his last year at UT [University of Tennessee, Nashville, Tennessee], and he's in computer graphics, and I mean, I don't know. He may--do something interesting. And I got a granddaughter that way, she's not, not out of high school yet but she don't get nothing but As, and she likes to read and think, so I don't know where she's going to go with it, but she may, she may prove to be somebody of matter. Speaker 1: Okay--. Speaker 2: So, we shall see. Speaker 1: How--now you, you're a, you're a judge of the juvenile court? Speaker 2: No, I was a referee juvenile judge--this is a general session so this high-volume--and I do mental health commitments two months a year, and we've got six of us. So we just have two months, and--. And television, really, have made these things not as satisfying as they used to be 'cause they--it's not like television, and we all have these preambles, you know, about what the burden is, and obligations are, and blah, blah, blah and it goes right--people don't process it. And, you don't get any satisfaction out of seeing somebody screw up a good claim, you know and, you can't help, you have to be--sit there and be neutral. It's not like you walk back, you know, work with people verbally. They have the burden, if they don't make it, that's tough. And that's not, you know, that's not very satisfying. Speaker 1: So--. Speaker 2: The, the clerks office has a little formal printed statement they read, which is supposed to look--you know, take the, you know, get, get--try to find some way to get some legal advice, 'cause--. Speaker 1: Okay, do you find that black people are often taken advantage of, in court? Or do you think--poor people? Speaker 2: I would--yeah--. I was gonna say, I, I wouldn't limit it to race. And, we've got some statutes that are horrendous, on--loans, and you know. The legislature--I don't think highly of our legislature [Tennessee State Legislature]. I mean, I think, I think we've got a bunch of charlatans--don't quote me. I know I'm on tape. We got, we have some terrible, terrible, terrible law--lending laws. And then we can't, you know, what--that needs--that's a matter of the legislature changing the laws, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any stories from the courtroom, you want to tell us? Any cases that, that you--are significant, or of note? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, they, they're usually just run-of-the-mill cases. Not, not--I mean, nothing of first impression. The mental health docket is the one that you can get some unbelievable things out of. Story_ID: 13759 Speaker 1: I--our, our mental health laws, as well--our whole, our whole public finance structure is in crisis, in this state [Tennessee], you know. We--I saw--the state could wind up finding itself in receivership, if, if the bond trustees of the state take a good look at it, they might have an obligation to make an application to have a receiver appointed 'cause we, we have two basic public tax sources--property, and sales. Every state around us has three, property, sales and income which means that if we want to raise a hundred and fifty million dollars, we got seventy-five million split on those two. And they each have fifty on each. So, we are distorted against--all the way around our borders. And, as far as sales taxes, the board of counties, those people spend more money over in the next county than they do in this state. And, until they get some kind of compact, where the state can get its share of sales on internet sales that's bleeding. And, in Chattanooga [Tennessee], because of Georgia lottery--middle class is moving over the state line, so their kids can go to school in Georgia free. Now, we've got a lottery coming in the, in the line, now but it--we've lost a ton of time. I mean, the last figures I saw on the Georgia--the incoming students at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] background, training and all, compared with Ivy League Schools, in terms of that--but they're bringing--'cause those kids are staying home, you know, and ours are moving over the state line, or disappearing, whatever. So, you know, we, we have got some real serious funding problems, on top of the national (laughs). Story_ID: 13760 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general? Speaker 2: Well, I--think that--in Memphis [Tennessee] not, not Tennessee in general, but in this city in particular, we need somehow to get a handle on what happens to kids right after they're born because a lot of our kids are born into circumstances where--and I hate to say--use profiling, but you can almost predict what's gonna happen to them, which is not much positive. And, you know, the first seven, eight years is critical, the tracks are laid, and maybe, in, in ten years, some of these parents are afraid of their own kids, these days. And, we need, we need to start right at, right at the maternity room door, to identify kids who need help. Juvenile court, I think, needs to develop programs because juvenile court is police power, and by the time these kids get to school the police power is serious. I mean, in terms of, some of these people--with how you deal with them. But they can bring parents in on dependence and neglect, and, and try to get them focused on what it is that helps their kids as opposed to what it is that hurts their kids or identify them as people who don't need to be parents, you know. Because, there are foster care options, you know. Then you can get the, you can get parental focus, I think, at an early enough level where these kids can get on a different track from the one they're on in terms of peer groups which are up to no good being the ones who give them the values. And, and parental surrogates help these kids get values that give them a chance. And the, and, I think that we have another, we have another terrorist army coming. as sure as it's here. And, these are people who've been to jail for seven or eight years, who are coming out now. We've had a whole bunch of crimes committed by people recently out of jail and that's just compulsory or mandatory sentencing, and in some of these prisons, the only way you survive is join a gang, a white, a black, or Hispanic gang and you come out of there and the only thing you've learned is how to hurt people. And we've got a wave of these coming. And we need to do two things, stop the--stop feeding that wave and two, trying to--do something to get these folk back on a track that matters to the society because we are, we are--we haven't seen how bad it can get. We get two million people in jail, and I'll bet you that, not many of them are lifers. I mean, a lot of them are just rotating through, and every time they rotate through they come out better prepared to be criminals, and better prepared to hate somebody. You know, that--one of those kids who drug that guy [James Bird]--the last one who was drug--was never a racist 'til he came out of jail. Speaker 1: What, in, in Texas? Speaker 2: In Texas, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, in Texas. Speaker 2: Yeah and so, I don't, I don't think that, that didn't stop them, that just put them on the shelf for a while. And then they come out better equipped to do that, that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 13761 Speaker 1: When you look back over your own life and career what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: I think part of it is, in Memphis [Tennessee], because of the--that club we had a lot of poor people, lot of poor--a lot of people with not much of a ledge to stand on--but, anywhere in town, you can get people who will take you on, in terms of a challenge about threat--now, they need--now there's not quite as much focus on legitimate threat as there used to be. But I think, we've got people here who have a sense of who they are, and that they matter, regardless of education. Speaker 1: And the last question is--basically, well the--is there anything that you, that, that you, that you would do differently than you've done, if you could back up things? Speaker 2: I'm not--I'm--I, I, I can't think of anything differently, at, at the--. I, I think I might have put a little bit more time and effort into one or two things but I don't know if that would've, you know, mattered--to get something over that we reached for and didn't quite get. The, the, the main thing I'm disappointed in is that we did not get to see how that [voting representation] structure would have worked, with the at large, at large plus two combination to pass something 'cause that, that would've depended on focus--shaping issues, in terms that would attract more than the narrow district concerns, while it reflected district concerns. Speaker 1: Do you think you might end up writing about, about that period? Maybe try, try to leave a roadmap for other people? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't--it depends, I'm--like I said, I'm not running again. But that, that's three more years, so, I don't know what my capacities will be by that time, you know. Maybe. But, but it depends on, you know, whether I'm able to organize any ideas that make sense, by then. I'm seventy-four. Story_ID: 13762 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, two ways, one is, my--wife [Regina Sugarmon] and I bought--Elmwood Cemetery [Memphis, Tennessee] is--I love that place--I mean it's got just so much history. It's got people--yellow fever epidemic, Civil War Confederates, Civil War Unions. Iit's got mistresses, madams, mayors, generals everything there--ev--slaver who left money for education of the freedmen, you know. Speaker 1: Bolton. Speaker 2: Bolton. Speaker 1: Now, you, you told me, off-camera, about his grave. Can you tell us about that just before we--? Speaker 2: Okay, one of his progeny, from the slave side of the family, is, is Julian Bolton, the commissioner. He was a slaver, and in his will--I got a little booklet that describes him. He left money for the education of the freedmen and Bolton Academy was established out of that fund it's now a public school, Bolton Academy--Bolton High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And, he--when he died--you, you can drive along the, the road, in Elmwood, where his grave is. There's a statue, a full-size statue looking down at the headstone at the foot of the grave, which is a--what you see, and to see whose name is on it, you have to get out of the car, and go around to his side, where you read what he's reading, which says, 'Bolton'. But it's--he had asked his family to leave something that reflected his character and personality. So on the statue, the vest is mis-buttoned, a shoe lace is untied, one hand is behind his back and you look at it, the fingers are crossed (laughs). I love that, I mean, you know, that's a perfect--a nice witticism, a nice little thing that--if you remember it. But, I--we got two full-size plots, and what was a wagon trail but since they don't need wagons anymore, they've, they've laid them out so you can buy plots there. So I was talking with the lady at the--the lady who manages the place now. And, I said, "If you want to, you know, want to be cremated and have an urn, do y'all have sites for urns?" She said, "No, you just buy the case--." I said, "Isn't that kind of expensive?" Says, "Well no, you can put as many urns in there as you can get." I says, "Well that solves the question." I says, "I was thinking about having a bench, instead of a headstone, something like 'Rest a Spell'." I said, "But now, if I can do that, I'm gonna put on there 'Here Goes the Neighborhood'." (laughs) Everybody else's got a single family, I'm gone have a tenement in mine (laughs). So that, you know--(laughs). I don't know, I, I think that the--I don't know if I'm cynical or not, but I've, I've been giving more to animal and natural causes, recently, than I used to. What we are doing to the world is incredible, unbelievable and don't care. That, that's what bothers me. So, I'm, I'm--I care, but, you know, I think it's time to look at how preposterous we can be sometimes, and have a laugh...