 Story_ID: 27419 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. And I don't have my mic on. I'll start again. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Jacqueline, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, White, W-H-I-T-E, Sales, S-A-L-E-S. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 8, 1946. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm owner, president and CEO [Corporate Executive Officer] of HAZMED, Inc. Speaker 1: Okay, and, ma'am, what is today's date? Speaker 2: May 24, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Lanham, Maryland. Speaker 1: In the HAZMED office, right? Speaker 2: Yes, in HAZMED headquarters office. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 27420 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Healthy organic produce. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Early spring. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France]. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "You pay the cost to be the boss". Story_ID: 27421 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side, and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Augusta, A-U-G-U-S-T-A, Browne, with an "e" at the end. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in February 11th, 1920 in New York. Speaker 1: Is that New York City [New York]? Speaker 2: I believe so, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: Yes, my grandparents from St. Croix in the Virgin Islands [of the United States]. And I can trace my ancestry, the European side, all the way back to Denmark. The plantation that my ancestors worked on is called "Prosperity" in Christiansted, St. Croix. And it was owned by many different countries, but at one point, it was owned by Denmark and hence, my European, Danish roots. And, of course, my African Amer--African roots are, who knows where? Speaker 1: Okay, do they have any stories--St. Croix achieved its independence some time in the middle of the nineteenth century, I guess. Are there any stories in your family about the liberation of the slaves or, or-- Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather used to tell stories about the plantation, so most of the stories I know are about that. And the landlord of the--or the owner of the plantation was an absentee landlord. They were in Denmark. And my grandfather talked about he and his brothers riding horses through the plantation, and they were like overseers of the workers. I also heard my grandfather tell stories about how it was the women in St. Croix who tied up their skirts and took torches and burned down the plantation and hence, ended slavery as we know it in St. Croix. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is interesting. There are a couple stories like that from the Virgin Island, the Fire Burn Rebellion-- Speaker 2: Right, yes-- Speaker 1: Is this the one you're talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: It was the women. Speaker 1: Queen Mary Bottom Belly, Ella Fire Burn, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --had a little song about them. Speaker 2: That's right. I heard my aunt say that, not too long ago. Speaker 1: Can you sing the song? Speaker 2: No, I don't (laughter)--my aunt can though, but my generation lost all that. Speaker 1: I think it's like [singing] "Queen Mary, a where you go this morning, dah, dah, dah, dah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I make the fire burn". Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard my aunt sing it. Speaker 1: It's interesting. So, that's a great history. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: That bottle of dirt right there is from Prosperity, and I keep it on my desk. When we went to St. Croix, I dug it up and brought it back. Story_ID: 27422 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Lillian Augusta Browne] came to the U.S.? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was sent to the U.S. to go to med school, to live with an aunt and go to med school. I actually have, from the Ellis Island Foundation, the ship manifest. He came on a ship called 'The Guyana' from St. Croix [Virgin Islands of the United States]. And he came through Ellis Island [New York]. Apparently, when he got to his aunt, she had different idea, and she wanted him to go to work. Consequently, he never went to, to, you know, med school. But he did work in the sciences. I understand that my grandfather worked for a chemical company, and he was considered a chemist. And I know he had something to do with mixing colors for products. It may have been colors and pigments for pharmaceuticals or cosmetics. That's kind of what I could piece together from the stories they would tell. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a chemist? Speaker 2: Yeah, they called him a chemist back then. Speaker 1: For--do you know what cosmetics firm? Speaker 2: I thought I heard somebody say Maybelline or--but I'm not positive of that. My aunt would know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so your mother grew up in, did she grow up in-- Speaker 2: She grew up in New York [New York]. She grew up in a Jewish neighborhood in Brooklyn. They also lived in Harlem, just before Harlem turned. And then the family moved to Queens out on Long Island. At that time, Queens was like country. Speaker 1: Then to Queens, okay. All right. Now, did your mother have a chance to go to school, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. My mother went to Girls High [School], and she went to Harlem School of Nursing [New York, New York] where she became a registered nurse. Speaker 1: Now, is Harlem School of Nursing associated with Harlem Hospital? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she did all her practical work there, and she actually taught students during the War [World War II]. Story_ID: 27423 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lillian Augusta Browne] have any stories she shared with you about growing up or what it was like in those days? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she talked to us about how my grandfather always had like a second job, and at one time, he was the super [superintendent] in one of the buildings that they lived in. So they had a really nice apartment. And they always had a car, which I understand was a big thing for black families back then to have a car. But my mother talks about that all the time. She talks about when Harlem [New York, New York] changed, that she was walking from the store, and she got hit in the head with a brick. And she almost died. She was very injured from it. And that's when my grandfather moved out from Harlem. I think they moved--and I don't know any of the dates of this, but I just know my mother was a young girl when that happened. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in 1920. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you say about in the '30s [1930s] or-- Speaker 2: Could be. She was young, 'cause I think she was like twelve or something when she got hit in the head. And then they moved to Brooklyn. Speaker 1: It's funny when you talk to people. Some people consider that like the hay day of Harlem, (laughter) some people. So it's later, you know, I mean it starts going downhill. Speaker 2: Yeah, things started turning. Speaker 1: All right. So that's when they moved to Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I understand that my grandfather didn't want my mother to be a nurse. Nursing wasn't looked, looked upon very highly back then. Speaker 1: I think they just--I don't know how far they were from professionalizing nursing. I think the first nurses were the practical nurses, and they made--the registered nurses came later. So, your mother became a registered nurse, right? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was a registered nurse. Speaker 1: There's a big difference. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 27424 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Nathaniel White. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 4, 1921, and he was born in Savannah, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, now, these are two places that are, a lot of people in New York [New York] are from Georgia, that part of Georgia, off the coast, and from the Islands, you know. It's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they came up that way. Speaker 1: Yeah, so-- Speaker 2: If you look at the Great Migration, yeah. Speaker 1: So, how far back can you trace your father's ancestors? Speaker 2: The unfortunate thing is that my father's family all died off very young. And I used to ask them, where are my relatives. And, or the answer I used to get is they all died off. So I only knew my father and his two brothers. I never knew my grandparents. My grandmother died in childbirth, literally on the street. And there's a long story behind that. Speaker 1: Can you tell it? Speaker 2: Sure. She went into labor. And there were some problems. And they couldn't find the black doctor. So they went to the white doctor to see if he would help, and he said that he didn't deliver the "N" word babies. And my grandmother and that baby died out in the street. So that's the story that's been passed down. My father hated the South. He never said anything positive to us about the South. And he came to New York when he was thirteen with his two brothers, his older brother and his younger brother. I understand my grandfather, again, who I know nothing--never saw, that he left one day. They said he went to take a walk, and he never came back. And what the family heard was that he went to Florida and tried to get the migrant workers to mobilize and to speak out and that he was killed by the white people in Florida for doing that. Speaker 1: So he was killed for organizing? Speaker 2: Yeah, trying to organize the, this is what I heard. Speaker 1: So did your father talk about growing up in Savannah? Well, that, his mother, this is his mother that dies in childbirth, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, the only thing he ever talked about was when he used to go to his uncle's farms. His uncle had a farm or something. And I would hear him say that when he went to his uncle's farm, that his uncle didn't have a lot to offer him to eat. So they would have like biscuits and molasses and things like that. But it sounds like he really liked his uncle and he had some good experiences out there. And that's all. He never really, he didn't talk about Savannah [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he went to high school and everything in New York. He went to Boys High. Speaker 1: Okay, so he moved to New York prior to going to high school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So him and--were his two brothers older than-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the older brother brought my father and the younger one to New York. And his older brother, he was a Pullman porter. He worked the railroads until he retired. Story_ID: 27425 Speaker 1: Alright, so your brother went to Boys High? Speaker 2: My father [Thomas Nathaniel White] went to Boys High [School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: I mean--I'm sorry, yeah. Speaker 2: And my mother [Lillian Augusta Browne] went to Girls High [School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they didn't know each other (laughter). Speaker 1: So they didn't know each other when they were in high school? Speaker 2: No, they met later at some dance. Speaker 1: All right, now, that's the question. How did they meet? That's the next question. Speaker 2: Yeah, apparently, my mother was a party girl. She loved to party and dance. And so they would go to those dances at the Renaissance or all those places. And my father was tall and good-looking, and he could sing. And he was like in some singing group, a loosely-knit singing group. And so parties, singing, and, you know, it all works. And that's how they met. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this would be about when? And this is, would it be during the War [World War II]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, 'cause that picture behind you is my father in his Army uniform. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And actually, they got married while he was in the service 'cause I remember hearing my mother say they only had a couple of days together. And then they shipped my father out to New Guinea 'cause she was saying, she didn't even know where New Guinea was. She had to look on the map. Story_ID: 27426 Speaker 1: Did he [Thomas Nathaniel White] have any stories about New Guinea? Speaker 2: No, not really. The only thing that he, I would hear him say is that some of the children would have blonde hair and blue eyes. And so, you know, the children of war, I guess. Speaker 1: Perhaps, I mean, you know, I--the New Guineans look like many African Americans. Speaker 2: Well, from the War [World War II], you know, just like Vietnam. Many of those children are mixed with African American now. So. Speaker 1: Okay, so he suspected--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Innocent children of-- Speaker 1: --that was the reason? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, children of war. Speaker 1: Okay, anything else about the--how did he feel about the Army? Speaker 2: Not very good. I understand that he, it was a little rough on him. I think coming out of New Guinea. I think he, when he left the Army, I believe he was a sergeant, but he should have been a higher rank. I think he lost a rank. I'm not sure exactly the whole story. But there's some little story in there. Speaker 1: There're different levels of sergeant, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he lost, yeah, he lost just, just before he was getting ready to leave. I think he'd had enough. Speaker 1: Now, this is the segregated-- Speaker 2: Yes, the segre--(laughter)-- Speaker 1: --U.S. Army--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd had enough. Speaker 1: --where, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And my father was quite militant, very militant. Speaker 1: And I think that history will show that many of the officers in the U.S. Army were Southern men. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's why I know. That's what my father says and a lot of people I've interviewed. So, I could see why-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, but, so they got married while the War was going on? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So was it 1941 or two [1942] or-- Speaker 2: I'm not really sure. I think, I have those papers, but I never really look at it. Speaker 1: Okay, but did your father come-- Speaker 2: I was born in '46 [1946], and my mother said that I was born right after my father came home, you know, came out of the War [World War II], and the next nine months, I was born. So. Speaker 1: Okay, so he came back '45 [1945]-- Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause I was a baby boomer. Story_ID: 27427 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, how they walk, how they talk and how they look, what kind of talents they had and what they, what they thought, what their disposition was like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Both, both. My parents were tall. My father [Thomas Nathaniel White] was six [feet] five [inches]. My mother [Lillian Augusta Browne] was five [feet] ten [inches]. I'm six [feet] three [inches], and my mother was very, very light complexioned with beautiful long hair. My dad was very dark complexioned, with wavy hair. They both are extremely attractive people, really good-looking people. And I'm a mixture of both my parents for sure, physically. And I'm--my parents were pioneers. My father was militant. He could talk his way into anything. He had a great career. I mean my mother was the ultimate mother. She was a professional woman. She was a heck of a role model, and my mother would--she was a pediatric nurse. She would deal with children all day. In some cases, she would lose a child 'cause my mother was a nurse during the polio epidemic, when they couldn't do anything for children. And she would come home, cook dinner and I might need a costume for school the next day. And she would just make it or do whatever she had to do. And we never knew what she had to deal with that day at work. My dad worked for Republic Aviation on F-105 and Grumman Aircraft. And he was considered an engineer. He was a brilliant man, and he had so many other things that he did. And I feel like I get my entrepreneur, my entrepreneurial spirit from my father. When I was thirteen, he built a blackboard in my room. And he taught me Algebra. I don't even think I was thirteen. Story_ID: 27428 Speaker 1: Now, where did your father [Thomas Nathaniel Browne]--now, he went to Boys High School [New York, New York]. But did he go to college? Speaker 2: He went to Hofstra College [Hempstead, New York]. He didn't graduate. He went to a technical school--all I know, it was in Vermont 'cause he always tells, tells me stories about how many of the people had never seen a black man when he was up in Vermont. See, he was self made, which you could do at that time, with the education that he had. I remember one time--and one time he had a television repair shop. He always had something on the side 'cause he told me that you could have your nine to five, but if you really wanna get ahead in life, you have to have something else that you do on the side. And he had a radio program on Station WGBB called 'Long Tom Time.' And, my dad was something. He managed a nightclub 'cause I remember seeing him go out in a white dinner jacket. Speaker 1: Now, did he still sing? Speaker 2: Yeah, he always sang. Speaker 1: Okay, well, I mean-- Speaker 2: There was an article on him--and I have it somewhere, where they talked about him being the Paul Robeson of his generation. My father had a beautiful voice, and he would go in the bathroom and shave and groom and he would sing the 'Lord's Prayer,' and he'd sign 'Porgy and Bess,' the songs from 'Porgy and Bess.' And there was always singing in our house. Speaker 1: Did he sound like Robeson, he had the basso (unclear) (simultaneous) voice-- Speaker 2: He had a beautiful voice. Speaker 1: That kind of deep voice? Speaker 2: Beautiful, and I haven't seen that in anybody else in the family, which I find very interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because my father had a beautiful voice. Speaker 1: So on the radio show, what did he do? Did he play records? Was it a talk show or what? Speaker 2: My dad was there at the early rhythm and blues era, Laverne Baker with 'Tweedly Dee' and those kind of songs. And we had a garage that my father built all these shelves--he's always building something. And he built all these shelves in there, and he had all these disc jockey copies of records. Unfortunately, we don't have any 'em 'cause after he passed, in my mother's grief, she discarded everything. But it was early, early R&B [Rhythm and Blues], that he was playing on the radio. It was interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he talked those people into giving him a radio show. Speaker 1: Yeah, Laverne Baker and there's Lloyd Price, people like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, all the early stuff. Speaker 1: All right, so what was the name of his radio show again? Speaker 2: 'Long Tom Time.' Speaker 1: Long Tom-- Speaker 2: Time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was on WGBB in Long Island. Story_ID: 27429 Speaker 1: Now, you have brothers and sisters, right? Speaker 2: I have one sister. Speaker 1: One sister? Speaker 2: Yeah, just one. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in '46 [1946]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and when was your sister born? Speaker 2: '5-- '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's her name? Speaker 2: Jerrilyn, J-E-R-R-I-L-Y-N, White. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, so when you were growing up, your household consisted of your mother, your father and you and your sister? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Anybody else stay with the family or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We lived away from the family because we lived way out in Amityville [New York], and the rest of the--and that was considered the sticks. That's what they used to call it, the people in New York--New York means Manhattan and, you know, they would call us the sticks. And when the family would come out to visit, they would come out on Sunday, and they would come with sweaters and when (laughter), I remember they'd always say, "Oh, it's getting dark." And then they would always leave before it got dark 'cause they claimed we didn't have street lights. We had street lights, but it was the country, you know. It was Long Island. Speaker 1: Amityville is a town made famous in the movies for the house [from 'The Amityville Horror']-- Speaker 2: Yes. And 'Jaws,' Amity. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: No one ever heard of Amityville, 'cause I used to tell people, I'm from Amityville, and they'd say, "Where's that?" But after 'Jaws,' we're known throughout the world. Everybody knows Amityville now, on the map. Speaker 1: Did you ever see the house? Speaker 2: Yes, I know where the house, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's still there? Speaker 2: Yeah, the house is there, last I knew anyway, it was there. Story_ID: 27430 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, an earliest memory? Speaker 2: It's really funny because my earliest memories, and I must have been like three or four, three or younger. I have a memory of being in a crib, and being stung by a bee when we were camping. My parents were real outdoors people--that's a whole 'nother story. And I remember being stung by a bee and being in a crib. I remember--and again, I had to be like three, possibly, probably three. I remember when our dog had puppies. And I went in the garage, and there were all these puppies. I remember I was four, I remember when my grandmother died. I didn't know my grandmother had died. But everybody was crying, and I remember my mother crying, and later on, I figured out that that's what it was. And I remember when I was five, them showing me my baby sister. She was a little bitty thing. She was premature. Those are some of my earliest memories. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in Amityville [New York]. So you all are living in a house, I take it? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a house. Speaker 1: Was it a big house or-- Speaker 2: For those days, I don't know what it was considered. But it was a very nice house. We had a beautiful backyard. My father, again, I told you my father was always building something. My father built this beautiful fan-shaped patio. I think I have a picture of us sitting on the brick of that patio. And we used to dance out there. We had a lot of parties out in our backyard. I had a good time growing up out there. Story_ID: 27431 Speaker 1: Now, here's a question we always ask, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights. The ocean because I, I'm a water baby, I always tell people--and mountains because we always went camping. We were a real outdoors family. And the smell, I could smell the ocean. At nighttime, the air would get thick, and you could actually smell the water. We lived about, I'd say ten or fifteen minutes from the beach, just, and we--just nature. We were always in-- we were really outdoors folks. Story_ID: 27432 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Ronek Park. Now, that's the name of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, R-O-N-E-K. And I visited there some years ago to see our old house, and the guy came out. And I was telling him, I said, "Did you know this development was called Ronek Park." And he didn't even know that. So the history is lost about it, but, yes, [William] Levitt built it for the black GI's [Soldiers]. And most of the people who lived there worked for Republic Aviation. They were the big employer. So they were--and that was where my father worked at first before he went to Grumman [Aircraft Engineering Corporation]. So they were building the F-105. Speaker 1: So is there significance to the name Ronek? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaking of sounds, that was one thing that I had written about this morning that I'd forgotten. I often heard the sound of jets breaking the sound barrier because that was a big thing then. I don't know what, why you'd wanna break the sound--I guess they were testing the jets. And so they would come over the house, and sometimes, it would cause our window to crack or shake. Speaker 1: Right, there-- I was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --talking to a scientist about a week ago about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a big thing. Speaker 1: --that. He was working on sonic booms-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and he didn't realize that happened sometimes, 'cause I, I lived--I grew up next to an Air Force base, or near one and heard the same thing as a kid, sonic booms. It was a regular thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then we had a Nike site out in Amityville [New York] as well, missile site. Speaker 1: Nike Zeuz missiles, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So you put 'em in small towns. You don't put 'em in the middle of Manhattan [New York], and so it makes sense. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's the reason why they needed labor for, you know,-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Republic Aviation. Story_ID: 27433 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? Speaker 2: I went to school in the next town called Copiague, C-O-P-I-A-G-U-E, New York. And that was interesting because Copiague was all Italians. And Long Island, you could live where you wanted to live, but people tended to live with their own. And so Copiague was 99.9 percent Italians, and the kids I went to school with were first generation, pretty much. And so I went to Co--I started elementary school there. And I graduated through the Copiague school system. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, what was it like? Were there many other African American children? Speaker 2: At the time that I went there weren't that many. In later years, when my sister came along, five years later, there were more. But in--like I was in academic courses 'cause I was college bound, there would be like three of us, me, Tommy [Thomas] Austin and Carl Varady (ph.). We were pretty much it in the academic programs. And those were the people that I would be in class with. Speaker 1: Okay, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, school was--school was school. You know, and it was important. It was important to my family. In my family, you knew you were going to college. Nobody asked you, were you going to college. It was just what college were you going to? But, yeah, I enjoyed school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was smart. Speaker 1: All right, did you have a favorite course, I mean or area of study? Speaker 2: I liked math. Speaker 1: In elementary? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked math. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I told you, my dad taught me Algebra, advanced, and then, you know, I took trigonometry and geometry, I loved it, I loved math, science, yeah, English and all that stuff I could do without. But sciences and math were my favorite courses. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: We had this Spanish teacher. I can't even remember his name. He had a real nice, Italian name. And he didn't teach us any Spanish. We would come to class, and he would tell us all these stories. So I enjoyed that class. (laughter) We had a good time. Speaker 1: There are teachers that do that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed, (laughter), you know, I enjoyed going there. He would just sit there and tell stories and he was enjoying teaching. He was enjoying the students, and I--we studied, and we had to take tests because, you know, New York, you had the standardized Regents exams you had to take. But it was a fun class. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who are your friends? Who are your friends growing up? Speaker 2: I always had a lot of friends. And in school, there were the friends that I went to class with, and we were just school friends. We didn't do anything together outside of school. I was Girl Scout. And I was the only black in my Girl Scout troop, Troop 2. And so I would do things with them. And then there were the kids on my block 'cause my father [Thomas Nathaniel White] was kind of strict. He didn't allow us to go to a lot of parties. A party would be at our house. And so I played with the kids on my block. I didn't go around the corner and all that. I played with the kids on my block. We played all kind of stick ball, double-dutch, you know, the good stuff that kids used to do, ride our bikes. So I had different sets of friends. And to this day, I'm still the same way. I have just different groups of friends. Speaker 1: Okay, so you would have started school, what, in 1951 in kindergarten or-- Speaker 2: I started kindergarten when I was four. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's 1950. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Back then, they weren't as strict about it. So I was four years old. Speaker 1: Now, you were probably tall for your age, I would guess? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, always. Speaker 1: So was that easier to get in kindergarten at (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No, they knew I was four. They didn't care. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a small class, small school. It didn't matter. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so let's see. Now, so you were a Girl Scout and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were you involved with any other activities growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, sports was not big at that time. They didn't really have girls' teams, so I mean, we just had gym, and I belonged to some of the clubs that the high school offered. But most of my activities were through Girl Scouts and with my family. We did a lot as a family. We did a lot of family activities together. Story_ID: 27434 Speaker 1: Do you still like outdoors activities? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I imagine, being in Girl Scouts and then going camping with your family. Speaker 2: Yeah, we, my oldest son and his daughter, they're my outdoor buddies. And so every year in October, we do like a national park. And like last year, we did Acadia National Park [Maine]. We did the Grand Canyon [Nationl Park, Arizona]. We did the Albuquerque Bloom Fiesta [New Mexico]. And when we go, we really go. You know, we go in a helicopter. I rented a small Cessna [aircraft], and we went up, you know, we took a boat trip, I mean we, we just do the whole thing. We go for it. And his daughter is fearless. My grandbaby is fearless. I love her. Whatever, you know, we do--everybody can't go on these kind of trips because anything could happen. You know, we see, like I was holding a tarantula or whatever it was, I mean just, we just have a good time. We just-- Speaker 1: So do you think that your love for the outdoors had anything to do with you working for EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] later on or being involved in the EPA? Speaker 2: Not-- Speaker 1: Or made it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --really. I worked for EPA because EPA had the money from the federal government to give me to go to grad school. That's how I got in environmental engineering. And so when I got that degree, I said, you know what, I'm gonna work and give back to EPA. Little did I know, they didn't wanna hire me because it was dominated by men, and they hadn't really dealt with women in the technical area. And then to deal with black women, that was just like too much for 'em. And so it took a couple of years for me to get in. Story_ID: 27435 Speaker 1: Now, did you go to a middle school or junior high-- Speaker 2: Yes, same thing, Copiague Junior High School [Copiague, New York]. I went to Copiague Elementary, Copiague Junior High and then Copiague High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the junior high was very far. And they made us walk. So I do have one of those stories about walking five miles to school. It was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It was that far--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was long, it was a long walk. And we were on split sessions because the school was overcrowded. The town had started to grow. And I remember coming home, and it would be dark, walking home from school. Speaker 1: Now, did you begin to take science courses in middle school? That's usually when they start-- Speaker 2: I don't have a good recollection of the courses that I took in middle school, more so in high school 'cause it seems like it was a lifetime ago. But I always took, I was always on an academic track. And, you know, in New York we had the track system in the school. So they put kids on tracks. So I was always on the advanced track because I think it was third or fourth grade, I was learning French. They were doing this experiment. So because I was on the fast track, I was given certain courses. Speaker 1: Okay, now had you identified what you wanted to do when you were a you know, middle aged kid? Speaker 2: I think around high school I decided I wanted to be a doctor. My parents were technical, and so that was my world. I knew a lot about medicine from my mother and the conversations in the house were technical kinds of conversations. And I, so I wanted to be a doctor. And that's when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I majored in microbiology and minored in chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you know any doctors growing up, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, we had two doctors in our neighborhood, one at either end of the street. And, but I knew my mother [Lillian Augusta Browne], and old-time nurses. She stitched up the back of my head, old-time nurses were like doctors. We seldom went to a doctor. You know, back then, they thought penicillin cured everything. Penicillin was "the medicine", and I remember when we got sick, you would hear those needles boiling in the kitchen. My mother would boiling the needles and you got a shot of penicillin. She always fixed--my dog got sick. My mother took care of the dog. Speaker 1: With penicillin too? Speaker 2: Yeah, we got a shot of penicillin (laughter) And if we were really sick, she would call the doctor just to check and maybe--I remember a few times the doctor coming to the house. That was back in the house visit days. But most of the time, my mother took care of us. Speaker 1: Okay, so you really didn't have to go to the doctor for much. Did you have a favorite teacher in middle school? Speaker 2: Not really, not that I remember. Speaker 1: In high school? Speaker 2: Just, I liked the Spanish teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, he was a high school teacher? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a high school teacher. Middle school is a little bit of a blur. Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in high school activities, you know, clubs and did you run for office or anything or-- Speaker 2: I didn't run for any office. I think I was in a couple of clubs, Future Homemakers or something, but like I said, with Girl Scouts and my family activities, I stayed pretty busy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, I mean my parents were very involved when we were growing up. And so a lot of the activities that we did were family centered. And it's a shame that we've gotten away from that as a society. Story_ID: 27436 Speaker 1: Now, do you sing? Did you, did you inherit that from your father [Thomas Nathaniel White], singing? Speaker 2: Heck, no (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Unfortunately. I haven't, I haven't heard anybody in the family yet that can sing. Speaker 1: Just your father, huh? Speaker 2: He could sing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you take a love of music after him? Speaker 2: Oh, I love music, yeah. My father, like I told you, he was always building something. He built a stereo system. Now, you remember, this is early stereo, right? And he built the, I don't know what you would call it, but it had all the tubes and everything in it. Speaker 1: Amplifier? Speaker 2: Am--yeah, I guess it would be what an amplifier is. And, yeah, it would be the amplifier. And he had a huge speaker. That speaker must have been three feet tall if not taller than that. And he would play these records that were used to test stereo systems. So you would hear a train going, you know, from one speaker to the other. And he would turn it all the up, and I remember he used to play jazz on it. And he just had all--we always had music in our house. My father was either singing or he was playing music. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And what about television? Is that a part--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a TV, but, you know, TV was just TV. We wanted to be outside. And it's funny because I remember when the news would come on--back then it was 'Huntley and Brinkley' or something like that. We, you would try to go the other way 'cause you didn't wanna be there and have to watch the news. But every now and then, my father would make us sit down and watch 'Face the Nation' or 'Huntley and Brinkley.' We hated it, but I was never a big TV person. I would rather listen to my radio, which I did most of the time, dancing with my friends on the patio in the backyard 'cause my parents would always--I could have a party every night in the summer 'cause they always let me have my friends come. But going out to other parties, they weren't too good with that. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And as an adult, I still have the parties. Story_ID: 27437 Speaker 1: Now, the Civil Rights Movement was really strong when you were in school-- Speaker 2: My, well, in college when, not when I was in high school. But my father did take me to the first March on Washington, which many people don't remember. And I said I was gonna research it. I promised one of the professors at Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] that I would give him some information about it. But I remember that I feel like I was like twelve or thirteen. It as the '50s [1950s], and I think I read about this one time, about this march. And we, my father [Thomas Nathaniel Browne] was a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And we went on a bus from New York down to Washington [D.C.] for this march. So it was the actual first march. Speaker 1: Okay, and I haven't heard of that either. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know that A. Philip Randolph had threatened to do one in the '40s [1940s], you know. Speaker 2: This had to be in the '50s [1950s] because like I said, I think I was twelve, thirteen, somewhere around in there. I'm not sure of my age. But he took me, and he didn't take my little sister. So I'm thinking that-- Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in the NAACP? Speaker 2: Yes, my father was very militant. On his obituary when he died--he died very young. He died at forty-five, and I still have the article in the paper, and they called him a civic leader. And I didn't see him that way. He was just my father, you know, but I knew he was militant the way he used to talk about the South. And, and he was always a member of the NAACP. Story_ID: 27438 Speaker 1: And the Playboy Club. Speaker 2: And the Playboy Club (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yeah, he [Thomas Nathaniel White] and a guy on his job, one of the engineers, they had--they went in together and had a key for the Playboy Club. Speaker 2: Now, that was common in those days that people--well, not common, but people-- Speaker 1: That was big. Speaker 2: People who were aspiring, middle-class people were members of the Playboy Club--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was big. The Playboy Club was big. And this is when it like first came out and all that. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was a member of a club in New York City [New York]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he and, like I said, he and somebody else, they went in together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The early days of the Playboy Club. I had forgotten about that (laughter) until we just started talking. Story_ID: 27439 Speaker 1: So high school, as your--so you see, in high school, you see your career as being in medicine? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And you see yourself becoming a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was always interested in science. You know, I would sit outside, and I would turn up rocks and stuff like that. We would go fishing a lot. I had my own worm garden for my worms, and I always had, always had a little project or something going. And then I had, like this little entrepreneurial bent. I had a, I sold lemonade. So I decided, I just wasn't gonna have lemonade. I made ice cubs, and I put a cherry in each ice cube. So my lemonade had cherry ice cubes in it. So, you know, I always just had this, I had the science, scientific part of me. But then I always had this entrepreneurial side. I always had some kind of project. I spent one whole summer trying to fix a record player. I didn't know why the record player was broken. I didn't know anything about the record player, but I knew in my mind that I could fix this record player, and I spent a whole summer tinkering with that record player. I never did fix it. Speaker 1: Your father didn't help you out or-- Speaker 2: I never told my father that I was trying to fix it. Speaker 1: So the challenge was to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was a challenge 'cause I looked at that record player, and I said, I can fix this. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So when you--did, what kind of college counseling did you have at-- Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: So they didn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Nobody in Copiague High School ever talked to me about anything about going to college. They, and I talked to some of the other black students about that, and they said they didn't get it either. We had a great principal, but they did not embrace us. My parents took care of that part. Speaker 1: Okay, so at least they didn't discourage you, right, from going? Speaker 2: No, but they didn't say anything about it, you know. I don't ever remember talking about that. Speaker 1: I hear what you're saying, but that's an improvement over some of the stories we heard (laughter). Speaker 2: I can imagine. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you graduate with any sort of honors or anything? Speaker 2: Yes, I was a member of the Honor Society, and in graduation they lined you up according to something. Either it had to do with your grade point average or whatever. But I was like number--I was in the top group of the people that lined up. But I was definitely National Honor Society, and I did well in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was very competitive. I always wanted to do better than the smart kid. That was Tommy [Thomas] Austin. We always were like neck and neck, you know, trying to outdo each other. Story_ID: 27440 Speaker 1: So, now, how did you decide on Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Now, that's a story (laughter). My father [Thomas Nathaniel White] wanted me to go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. I got accepted at NYU. I got accepted at University of Puerto Rico [San Juan, Puerto Rico], which I don't know. I had some, I always had, I always had some crazy idea about some things. So I had this crazy idea, I'm going to Puerto Rico to go to college, right? And I heard this young lady say that she went to Howard. She was from my high school. She went to Howard. I think she lasted one full year before she flunked out. And she was like, "Oh, this school called Howard down in Washington, and it was so great. And I had a great time." And I said, "Good, I wanna go there." So I applied to Howard, had never seen Howard, didn't know anybody else that ever went to Howard, didn't know anything. I was from New York. I don't know anything--this was down South. I didn't know anything about it. But she told me this, and I--'cause I wanted to get out the house. I wanted to be on my own away from my father's rule, and 'cause, you can see that everything was kept very protective for me. I had my own little protected playground where I could play. And that was it. And so I said, I'm going to Howard. So my father said, "No, you're not." You're going to NYU. I was like, "I'm going to Howard." Now, that was a bone-of-contention in our family. I had to stand up to that man and tell him, "I'm not going to college if you don't let me go where I wanna go." You know, no disrespect 'cause, you know, back then you didn't, they didn't play disrespect. My mother sided with me, I found out years later. I also found out years later that my father told her that if anything happened to me at Howard, he was holding her totally responsible. And she later told me that it was a difficult time in their marriage. He did not groom me for Howard. He, you could see that he was grooming me for NYU. Off I go to Howard. My parents dropped me off down there at Howard University and left. And I looked around at Georgia Avenue, and I was like, what did I get myself into (laughter). Speaker 1: I can imagine your reaction--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was like, what was I thinking? Speaker 1: I can imagine your father's reaction. What did he say? Is there a story about his reaction to Howard on freshmen day? Speaker 2: He, you know, I think, by time it was time to drop me off, he was just, he was just through with it at that point 'cause he realized that I had my own mind. And he groomed me to be that way. He groomed me not to back down, to--I mean, so what could he expect? I was not gonna back down. It was more about getting away from New York, getting out of New York and being on my own to do what I wanted to do, when I wanted to do it than it was about going to Howard. Speaker 1: And I don't know, I'm tempted to ask you this. Now, I'm a Howard father, and I remember dropping my daughter off about seven years ago--it wasn't that long ago, six years ago and being there as the freshmen were moving in and looking at the guys leer, you know, at these young ladies as they come in, and shaking my head. You know, I, you know--did your, was your father there? Did he help you move in and everything? Speaker 2: Well, he helped me move in the dorm. And then, you know-- Speaker 1: It wasn't that bad then, I mean, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, this was 1963, so he helped me get in the dorm. Then we had the kisses and whatever, and then they went on back. My girlfriend had come down, my childhood friend. And so then they went off, back to New York. But I was in shock. I was like, what did I, you know, what did I--what did I sign up for here? Howard University was the best thing that I ever did for myself. Speaker 1: Did your mother know doctors who were trained at Howard, at Harlem Hospital? It would seem like she would have to-- Speaker 2: If she did, she didn't talk about that, you know. It was a battle in that household. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It really was. Speaker 1: Well, it seems like she'd have to know some, you know? Speaker 2: She probably did, but, you know, we didn't discuss it. I think she probably spent more time trying to calm my father down. I think that was her role in the whole thing, was calming him down because she knew her child, and she knew I was going. He knew I was going. But he was trying everything, and that's when he realized that he could no longer control me. I was ready to come out of that little nest they had built for me, that they had put everything in there for me. And I wanted to come--he had offered to buy me a new car. Now, '63 [1963], people weren't buying their kids cars, you know, to go to college. He was gonna buy me a brand new car to commute back and forth from Amityville [New York] to NYU. And I was like I don't want a car. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this too. Did you know of the reputation of Howard University Medical School, which had a, you know, a great reputation then? I mean did you know about it? Speaker 2: I knew nothing about Howard--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Charles Drew, (unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I, the only thing I knew about Howard was what that girl told me. She said she went down there. It was called Howard University. I don't even know how I found--I guess back then, we didn't have the Internet, so I must have looked in the encyclopedia. I don't even know where I found out about it from. But that was all I knew. I didn't know anybody else that went there. I knew nothing about Howard. I had no, I had no connection to the Southern culture, you know. I was in New York. I was living in New York, you know, and Long Island. I didn't, that wasn't in my world. So-- Speaker 1: All right, so you said it's the best thing that happened to you? Speaker 2: The best. I have no regrets ever. It's the best thing I ever did. I went to college with people of color from all over the entire world. And I was there at the best time to be at Howard University, in the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 27441 Speaker 1: Okay, so what was going on, on campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that made it (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, everything, everything. I remember I was dating a guy whose father [Thomas Nathaniel White] was a doctor, actually. And he was born in Jamaica, I believe it was, raised in New Jersey. And he was friends with Stokely Carmichael. And so Stokely came to us one day in the cafeteria, and he said, "We're gonna go down South and sit in at the lunch counters, and we want you all to go with us." And so I called my father, and I said, "I'm, you know, this guy's asking about us going down to sit in these lunch counters. What do you think?" And my father said, "I didn't send you down there for that." Now, obviously, I didn't wanna really go 'cause if I really wanted to go, I would have gone. But that would have been disruptive to my education. And I really came there for an education. I mean, like I said, growing up with a militant father, I had to consider it, but then I had to weigh it. And I said, you know, I need to stay here. He, let him go there and do that part. Let me stay here and do this part. So that's how it ended up. But I remember sitting there having the conversation--I can see it like it was yesterday, having that conversation with him about it. I pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta sorority], and Donny Hathaway was there pledging Alpha. And I mean it was just--Jesse Norman and I lived in Slowe Hall together. Guy Draper was there. He was Alpha Phi Omega, and I mean it was just, it was just a great time. There was so much going on. Speaker 1: Jesse Norman, the opera singer? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Donny Hathaway, the blues singer--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were down, Jesse and I were down at Slowe Hall together. And I saw her some years ago at a party, at a Maya Angelou party. And I reminded her, 'cause she's pretty tall, so we're kind of--and I said, "Don't you remember me from Slowe Hall." And she looked at me, and she was like, and she just held my hand. And we just stood there together, holding hands, not saying anything. And then she looked at me, and she said, "Howard didn't do too bad, did it?" It was great. Story_ID: 27442 Speaker 1: Okay, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], 1963. You were talking about some of the personalities there, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was great time. I remember-- Speaker 1: So your major is? Speaker 2: I majored in microbiology, and I minored in chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was a, sort of a pre-med bent. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well, go on now. You were a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta sorority], you pledged Delta, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I pledged Delta in 1965. And, oh, that was fun. I had a good time at Howard. I mean the academic curriculum was awesome. I got a good education. Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers? Speaker 2: I can't remember any names. I don't think I could remember any names off the top of my head. Oh, B.J. Gardner. She wasn't in the sciences, but she taught me sociology. And I just remember her 'cause she's a Delta. And I'm trying to remember my botany teacher. That lady was so interesting. I'm not good at that kind of stuff. I don't really remember. Speaker 1: So in microbiology, who was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who was the chair of that department? Do you know? Do you remember--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I have no clue. I may not have known then. Speaker 1: Well, do you have an advisor that you remember from microbiology? Speaker 2: I was the kind of person that--I'm still that way today, I don't always deal with details that aren't relevant. I decide what's relevant to me, and so with the things that I decide are relevant, I mean I'm 190, 200 percent. And all the little details around the edge, I just tend to leave them until I need 'em-- Speaker 1: Now, did--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and that's just the way I am. Speaker 1: Now, did you have calculus in high school? Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's unfortunate 'cause they didn't require me to have calculus, and I really needed calculus. And I found out later that I needed it. And it made it very difficult not having it because a lot of the, the Indian and African students who were in the sciences with me, they had it. So I was at a disadvantage. And I really should a taken it in college, but I just didn't. I took, I think some other algebra courses or something. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: That made it hard. It made physics very hard. Speaker 1: Let's see. So were there any other female students in premed? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was when I got to grad school that the females were pretty much gone. But in chemistry, there were always more males. I mean from high school, for my coursework in high school to my coursework in college, I always tell people I was with the boys. Speaker 1: Yeah, the rich tradition of the Howard Medical School really includes, mostly men. I can't think of a woman in that tradition. But, yeah-- Speaker 2: I was with, I came up with the guys. Speaker 1: I suspect that it was unusual for women to be (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, and that, that has impacted me to this day because I still gravitate towards men, and so that can be problematic sometimes. I have to catch myself because, you know, it could be some woman's husband I'm talking to. And I'm not thinking of it that way. It's just--and then by my height too, the men tend to be more my eye level even. So, you know, there's two strata in a room, these people at a top level and these people. You know, so I, I just tend to gravitate towards men, and like I said, I have to catch myself some time with that 'cause it's just what's comfortable for me. Speaker 1: Now, you are, you're like six [feet] three [inches], you said? Speaker 2: I'm six [feet] three [inches], flat foot. Speaker 1: And a nice-looking lady. So-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --I mean, in those days, I imagine, you really created quite a stir on the campus, probably the tallest-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have, and I had a-- Speaker 1: --prettiest person there. Speaker 2: --I had a very good figure. Yeah, but I got attention. I ran for junior class queen. I think I lost by two votes or something like that. But I was on the float (laughter). I forgot about that too. I don't even know if my husband even knows that, just--whatever, you know. I wasn't really into that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't, you weren't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I wasn't into all that. Speaker 1: --tempted to try the Actors Guild--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I did a little bit of modeling just because people would beg me. And, but I just wasn't, you know, I was a technical person, and I was into those kind of things, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I know most people would be expecting a nerdy-looking person probably in the sciences or something, but, as a stereotype, but that's not necessarily what they get. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you said there were a few, but there were some other women in premed with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there were some. Speaker 1: Okay, did any of the instructors make an impression on you at Howard, in the sciences? Speaker 2: Not really, not really. You know, I was more into just getting what I had to get, you know, studying, focusing on my grades. The instructors I saw as just a tool, to get me, you know--and, you don't get a lot in lecture. I mean most of it, you have to go away and do it yourself. So, you know, I would take some notes. Story_ID: 27443 Speaker 1: You got there just after the March on Washington in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: No, sixty--I got there in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was August--it was at, did the March take place--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I thought that, I was here. I was here-- Speaker 1: --while you were a freshman? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was here--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You were here, okay, all right. I know it was late-- Speaker 2: I was here 'cause [President John F.] Kennedy died. Speaker 1: Yeah, he died in November, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he died when I was here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, those two (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was so much, it was so much history--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the bombing in Birmingham [Alabama] took place in September-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was so, everything was going on. You know, all the, you know, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all of that. It was just an exciting time at Howard. Speaker 1: So you never went South with the-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't go South. Speaker 1: --SNCC group? Speaker 2: I made the decision not to go. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Sometimes I think about that and wonder what would have happened in my life had I gone with Stokely Carmichael. Speaker 1: So he would periodically (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I may not even be here today. Yeah, who knows? Speaker 1: Well, he would periodically come back, right, to Howard's campus? Speaker 2: Yeah, but he didn't do much. I don't think he ever graduated (laughter) from there because we didn't see much of him. Once he got the taste of that, he was into it, and we--then we stopped seeing him for the most part. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's very interesting. Speaker 1: So, so, let's see, who else? Yeah, JFK [President John F. Kennedy] is killed in November of '63 [1963]. Then, now, did you ever think about changing your major as you went through? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never did. Speaker 1: So you were very comfortable? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. I wasn't wishy-washy. I'm not that kind of person. When I make my mind up, a lot goes into me making my mind up about something. I like data, so I get a lot of data. Once my mind is made up, that's--I'm pretty much on track with it 'cause I put a lot of thought into it, all the "what if's". You know, I've made a risk-based decision, how much risks, how much pain am I gonna be willing to take if I go with my, you know, my feelings? So, yeah, I was in. Story_ID: 27444 Speaker 1: Now, what did you do in the summertime? Did you--between it? Did you stay in [Washington] D.C. or did you go back to New York? Speaker 2: Well, the first summer I went home. And the freshmen went home. The next summer I went home, but I lived out the suitcase. And I remember my mother was like, "Aren't you even gonna unpack?" And I'm, "Yeah, I good." And then after that I never went back home. So I did get married before I finished Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And-- Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met your husband and-- Speaker 2: It's not a good story. But I'll just tell you the part that, I didn't meet him on campus. He was not a student. And it just, it's, you know, it's a part of my life I just put aside. But I did marry. So. Speaker 1: Okay, so, is this a marriage that--this isn't the same marriage you have now? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, this is, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was just-- a young marriage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was twenty when we got married. It was young. Speaker 1: All right, so there's-- Speaker 2: Not for, not for that time because people did get married when they were twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two. But, you know, what do you know at twenty? Speaker 1: So was he a student at any other campus in the-- Speaker 2: Nah, but he had a good story (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Okay, so, when you graduated, you were married, and did-- Speaker 2: When I graduated from Howard, I was married. And I, I had my first child. I carried that baby during the very last semester, 'cause I stayed out a semester. I wasn't pregnant when I got married or anything. It wasn't a shotgun wedding or anything, but I just thought that when you get married, you're supposed to have kids 'cause that's just what you do. You know, it wasn't like, I wasn't from the generation of talking about it, and all that. You just, you have children. So I said, "Okay, so, I'll have a kid" (laughter). And so I carried my oldest daughter the last semester, and then when I finished, I had her in February. Actually, I finished in January, you know, I came out-- Speaker 1: Of '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then I had my daughter. Story_ID: 27445 Speaker 1: Now, this is, '68 [1968], like in April, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. You were here-- Speaker 2: Oh, I remember that 'cause I had a brand new baby, and I didn't know where I was gonna find baby formula. The city was on fire. And everything was closed down. It was, it was a very scary time. And I was living with my mother-in-law over in Northeast, by Catholic University area, Brooklyn [New York, New York]. And you could see this--we came into town for church, and you could see smoke everywhere, very scary time. Story_ID: 27446 Speaker 1: Did you graduate with any honors or anything from Howard [University, Washington, D.C]? Speaker 2: No, no, I just graduated. I was pretty average. I think I--I probably could have done much better with my grades than I did, but a couple of things happened. One, I was having an awfully good time. Two, my father [Thomas Nathaniel White] died while--so that was extremely difficult. I think I got a 1.2 average [Grade Point Average] that semester. I wanted to come home. Speaker 1: Was that like 1966 or, 'cause he died at age forty-five-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, 'cause I got married August of '66 [1966], and my father died like June of '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Was this a big shock? I mean did you--I mean he died young-- Speaker 2: I didn't know he was dying, you know. He had cancer, but I didn't know he was dying. I mean that just didn't, I couldn't get there. And, but he was so sick, and I wanted to come home, and my mother [Lillian Augusta Browne] kept saying to me, you know, "Your father wants you to finish college. He wants you to stay there and do your work." Well, how can you concentrate, you know, you come from a closely-knit family. It was impossible for me to concentrate. And I did so poorly that semester. And then I was in this, you know, relationship and, you know, it just was a lot--I was doing, there was a lot going on. Speaker 1: It sounds like a lot of stress. Speaker 2: I had a lot, yeah, I did. I had a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But life, you know, it was just life. I guess I was living life. Story_ID: 27447 Speaker 1: Now, you went on to graduate school here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, I mean did you go right away or-- Speaker 2: No, I worked for six years. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran a medical laboratory over at D.C. General [Hospital, Washington, D.C.]. I was working for Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.]. And then I transferred over to Freedmen's [Hospital, Washington, D.C.] 'cause my boss there went into private practice, the doctor that I was working with. And he gave me my first job at a college, and-- Speaker 1: Who was this? Speaker 2: Dr. Henry Roth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the thing was that my husband--I feel like I'm telling all my business, but my (laughter), my husband had literally walked out and left me with this baby, and with our child. And so I had to get, go to work immediately. And I was willing to take like any job that I could find. I didn't care what it was. I had already made up my mind to that, and I worked--somehow or other I got this interview over at Georgetown. And Dr. Roth hired me right off the, right away. I don't know if he just felt sorry for--I don't know. And I'd just come out of college, and he hired me to run the, his rheumatology laboratory. It was a great time. It was a great learning experience for me. It--I mean, it taught me how to multi-task. I learned so much there. And I was in the hospital environment where I, you know, wanted to be anyway. And Dr. Roth was a great boss, and I went over to Georgetown sometimes to their lab to learn some procedures, and I had to go in the animal house and get mice and bring 'em over, and dissect them for some of my experiments. Oh, it was great. I had a great time. And when he went into private practice, I went over to Freedmen's and ran the lab for Ken [Kenneth] Austin in the rheumatology department over there. Speaker 1: Now, is this in '68 [1968], 9, [1969], I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all like '69 [1969], '70 [1970], in there. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Freedmen's in '70 [1970], or '69 [1969], right? Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe around '70 [1970]. I'd have to look it up. It's on my resume, somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: We're trying to get 'em in chronological order. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is in order. It's like '70 [1970], '71 [1971]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So '68 [1968] at Georgetown Hospital with Dr. Roth and then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --then you moved to Freedmen's-- Speaker 2: And, yeah, yeah, because I know I went to graduate school from Freedmen's, and that was '74 [1974]. So I probably got to Freedmen's around maybe '72 [1972] or so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, grad school in '72 [1972]-- Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], I went to grad school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you got your Master's degree in '75 [1975], was it a year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, okay, so how did--tell us how you got the opportunity to go to grad school? You just, after being-- Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was bored. Yeah, I had run a rheumatology lab, and I had a specialty lab. So the residents and the doctors would come in to see what I was doing 'cause I wasn't doing the run of the mill tests. All my tests were very long procedures, and very interesting tests. And so I was bored with it. It was like, you know, "I'm not gonna be a doctor. I'm not gonna be a nurse. I'm, this is it, you know. So what's next?" And this is really a true story. I was just thumbing through a Howard University course catalog. And it opened up to this page. And it said "environmental engineering". And I'm like, "What is that?" Nobody'd ever heard of environmental engineering. So I read it, and it said that they had all this money, and they were looking for students. And it said what kind of degrees you had to have. They said, we'll take degrees in the sciences, 'cause there's a bio parts, bio-environmental engineering. And we'll take students that have engineering degrees. And there's money available. I called up. I got the information about it. I told Dr. Austin. I quit my job, and I went to grad school 'cause this was something new, and it sounded like fun. And it was a good time. I had worked already six years. I'd learned a lot. And it was good. And so I carried my second child that I gave birth to while--I said, this is a good time to have a baby so I don't have to lose time at work. And so I had my--matter of fact, I got my degree on--I went to graduation on Sunday and had the baby on Thursday. Story_ID: 27448 Speaker 1: Now, what is environmental engineering? Speaker 2: Environmental engineering are, is an area that has to do with protecting water, air and setting up procedures for waste management. So it's basically, you apply engineering principles in protection of the environment which relates to protection of human health. So like I majored in water quality. So we learned things about waste-water treatment. How does a treatment plant work? How do you design a treatment plant? How do you operate a treatment plant? How do you determine what the constituents are in the water that need to be treated? How do you know that you're effectively treating? Then we focused on water quality, the drinking water. What should the standards be? What kind of contaminants? How do you treat drinking water? Those kind of things. Then we went to solid waste, which is your regular municipal trash. Hazardous waste, which is where I ended up in my career, 'cause I love the real dirty stuff. Then we studied air quality. So you see, it's all about these environmental factors that affect our health. And that's why the government regulates in all these areas, which I later worked with as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was so interesting. So, it brought together science and engineering together in this discipline, and-- Speaker 1: Was this a new discipline at that time? Speaker 2: It was new. When I got my degree, there--I looked in the papers. There were no jobs that began with the word "environmental". And that's why I sold life insurance for New York Life. I sold pharmaceuticals for Bristol. I was just biding my time to get into the field. Speaker 1: All right. I'm gonna ask you about that, but I wanna ask you about grad school a little bit more. Who was your advisor in grad school? Who was teaching that at Howard? Speaker 2: I was under Dr. Varma, V-A-R-M-A. Dr. Varma passed away. He was from India, and he was my advisor. And I studied, several of my courses were under Dr. Lilia Abron, who's one of the HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: And to this day, we're best girlfriends. It's interesting. She wanted me to stay and teach at Howard. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was an interesting person to interview. Speaker 2: Yeah, she wanted me to teach at Howard. That's my girl (laughter). Yeah, we've become good friends. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, but there are no--now, this is-- Speaker 2: Oh, you know who else was in my class? Michele Hagans, Hagans that has the houses and stuff in Northeast [Washington, D.C.]. What is the name of that big development in Northeast, that has the Costco? She put the Costco up there now, and I just can't think of the name. It escapes me. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not a [Washington] D.C. (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh-- Speaker 1: I'm, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Michele Hagans is big, she's big. She's a big developer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was in air quality, and she says she's now a real estate mogul. Story_ID: 27449 Speaker 1: In the past, before we had people really formally interested in the environment, as a course level, you know, as a core college course, people had to get rid of solid waste and treat water and all that. So what, in what way was environmental engineering different from the former ways an engineer would, you know, dispose of-- Speaker 2: I don't know that it was different. But it, now, we had a formal program to train people to meet those needs. Before a lot of those things were being done at the state, local level, and people came in from all different disciplines, and they just did whatever, you know, best they could. And we had the Water Quality Foundation. But, now, you know, we had the beginnings of the Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]. And so we had a federal agency that was now gonna have control over this. And we needed to train people in this area, make sure that they understood all perimeters, unlike how it was done before. It was very piecemeal and it was more on the local, state and local levels. And because when I was at EPA, I helped write the federal regulations for waste management for hazardous waste management and medical waste management. My name is all, you could see on my curriculum vitae, my name is all over, in 'New York Times,' all everywhere about medical waste management and setting up federal laws to protect human health and the environment. And that hadn't been done before. See, they hadn't trained people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So this the reason for--the reason for EPA was to dispose of waste and to treat-- Speaker 2: Well, EPA was to write the regs [regulations]. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: To write the regs [regulations] to control hazardous wastes, the different types of wastes, to protect the environment, to write regulations to protect the environment. And then the states were to have their own programs. And they could be more strict than EPA rules, but they weren't to be less strict. So it set the tone for the country of how we are gonna protect the environment and protect human health because that's what it's all about. You know, if you're drinking water out the tap, you wanna know that there're regulations in place to make sure that you're not drinking unacceptable levels of lead, mercury and other contaminants. That was what EPA did. Speaker 1: Okay, so would you say that your course of study involved ways to dispose of these things and to purify water that were more environmentally friendly? Speaker 2: Right, and just learning about them, how the constituents move in the soil, how the constituents move in bodies of water. You had to understand that. What's an aquifer? You know, how do you test to find out whether, what's--how do you test to find out what's in the aquifer? You know, how do you test to find out if the aquifer is polluted? How do you know that this gas station down the street, hasn't polluted the drinking water for somebody downstream? You know, these are all the--it's a very complicated area because everything is codependent. You know, what's up in the air comes down in the soil, ergo, acid rain. Speaker 1: So before 1970, the government was not regulating these things at all? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: And so when I was at EPA, when I joined EPA in 1979, I came in on the writing of federal regulations. It was an exciting time at EPA. I was up-- Speaker 1: This is nine years in though, to EPA and the federal, detailed, federal regulations are being put together? Speaker 2: Right, but, and EPA is, you know, like the hazardous waste regulations, they started writing them in 1976. I got there in 1979. That was just the tip of the iceberg. That was just getting, setting of a framework. You know, they're still working on 'em to this day. I mean-- Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to establish what EPA was and how it was different. Story_ID: 27450 Speaker 1: And you said when you graduated, you couldn't find a position, and so-- Speaker 2: I went up to EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], I think it might have been maybe 1977 or so, '78 [1978] or whatever, and this--I walked into the personnel--I'm one of the few people that walked into the personnel office. And they sent me on an interview right away. And there was this guy sitting there, and he looked at me--when he looked at me, I knew I wasn't gonna be hired 'cause I had had training from New York Life Insurance Company. And that's what all that training was about was human interaction, how you're gonna sell an intangible. So I looked at his body language and knew I wasn't getting a job. You know, it was like, "Who sent this woman in here? Are you for real? This black woman is coming here to get a job with us? Un-un." So I left. And when I went back in 1979, they had let the Jewish women in. And they reached out for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't the first female environmental engineer or you were the first-- Speaker 2: At EPA? Speaker 1: At EP--yeah, EPA? Speaker 2: There weren't that many of us with--I would say I was among the first. There weren't that many of us with that degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I got there, there was one black woman. I can't think of her name. There was one black woman who was--I was in the Office of Toxic Substances. And it was one black woman there. Speaker 1: Okay, but she was not an environmental engineer, was she? Speaker 2: I don't believe so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I was among the first-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to come in with that degree. Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was among the first, if not the first, to graduate students with a Master's in that degree. And that's something I really wanna research because I believe Howard may have been the first to have that degree. Story_ID: 27451 Speaker 1: As an environmental engineer with EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], 1979, what projects were you working on in-- Speaker 2: Well, let's fast forward a little bit to 1980 'cause I have a better sense of that 'cause '79 [1979], I was in a group in the Office of Toxic Substances and they weren't quite sure where they were going. It was very clear to me. And so I transferred over to the Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response. And I was working in the hazardous waste. It was called RCRA, the RCRA division. And we were writing regulations for the management of hazardous waste. And hazardous wastes are basically wastes that come from industry, that are industry generated. So your manufacturing paint--and at that time, paint had solvents in it. Now, paints are water based, thanks to our regulations. But paints had solvents in it, and then they were taking paint, the unused paint, the waste paint and throwing it out in the landfills, just throwing it anywhere. And all those chemicals were leaking into the ground and contaminating groundwater. And then the plants, the plants that manufactured the paints, you know, you can imagine the byproducts from that production and the chemicals, the waste chemicals were being disposed of the best way they knew how, but not in a way that would protect the environment. So I wrote a reg [regulation] that addressed the disposal of solvents, and I had to do all these studies. I had to go out to all these facilities--I did a lot of traveling, a lot, and go out to these facilities and do studies. And you can't regulate something you don't know anything about. And then we had to come up with concentrations that weren't gonna be safe, and then we had, you know, contractors doing studies for us. And so the result was, we wrote--I wrote a listing that said these chemicals are listed and they have to be disposed of according to the hazardous waste regulations. And the regulations lay out how you manage it. So you just can't take it and just throw it in a landfill. You have to put it in a certain pack, and it has to go to a hazardous waste facility, and then we worked on how that facility has to be designed, right, so that the waste can be contained. So that's the land disposal restrictions, and I also worked on that. So, it was, I mean it was extremely interesting. I learned so much, and I had so much autonomy. I mean I could just do, go in and do stuff, you know, and it was--I don't know that people get that kind of autonomy anymore. But I was like a GS-9, and [GS-]11 [General Schedules, government job levels], you know, meeting with attorneys from major corporations 'cause all the major corporations, the DuPont's, Dow's, they all came to EPA and walked the halls because they wanted to make sure that we knew what we were doing. We were writing these regs, so they wanted to have input. And there was no formal process for them to have input in those days. Now, there is, but back then, there wasn't. They just walked the halls. They'd walk into our-- Speaker 1: They could come over to EPA and just haunt EPA? Speaker 2: Yeah, they walked, they would come in my office, and they would say, what are you working on? And what are you doing? And then, you know, tell them, and they would say, okay, well, we have some data. We'll send this data. So most of our data came from industry, like it or not. That's the way--who had the data. Same thing with the pharmaceutical companies. Speaker 1: Did EPA do any of its own research to provide its own data? Speaker 2: Some, some, yeah. We had a research arm, but they couldn't do the research like the industry was doing. So, because the research arm had to do research for the entirety of EPA where, you know, the big Dow's and DuPont's and all that, I mean they had the resources. Story_ID: 27452 Speaker 1: Now, you started in 1979, and the EPA was started in '70 [1970] under Richard Nixon [President Richard Nixon], and then Jimmy Carter [President Jimmy Carter] took, I guess--Gerald Ford [President Gerald Ford], then Jimmy Carter, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was still water, it was more about water back then. I mean it wasn't really, under the EPA logo, I don't believe at that time. I think it was the water quality or something. But it was more about water. That was the big focus. When I went for my first interview, it was a water guy that I was sitting in front of. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wonder, though, what the, did the resources for EPA change, you know, when [President] Ronald Reagan was elected from, you know, any way from what they were when Jimmy Carter was president. Speaker 2: Well, EPA always does better under the Democratic administrations. The Republicans are always anti-regulation. So there's always a change. But-- Speaker 1: And that's--I wondered, did politics play a role in the regulations that were being written when you were at EPA? Speaker 2: Yes, because when the Republicans are in, they try to squelch things, you know. So certain things that we were working on, all of a sudden, they weren't a priority. Other things we could--yeah, priorities would shift, depending on what administration was in and particularly, with air quality because people feel more affected by air quality regulations than any other regulations, for obvious reasons. You know, all industries are gonna put something out of the stack. Speaker 1: Okay, so did the size of the organization change in the-- Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of it if it did. It didn't feel like it did. It felt to me like it actually was growing. It was just the policies would change and the direction would change, you know, more money would go to maybe clean up of hazardous waste than would go to air. And then the next--the administration would change and it would go the other way. So the pot of money would just be allocated differently depending on what administration was in. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 27453 Speaker 1: So you, you wrote the regulations for-- Speaker 2: I did small-quantity generations of hazardous wastes. I did the solvents listing. I did the land disposal restrictions. That was big, land disposal restrictions was big. We had a congressional mandate to do that one, and-- Speaker 1: So what was that about? Speaker 2: Oh, that was big. We had to write regulations that would determine what could be buried in the land, what type of waste could be buried in the land because at one point, they were just throwing everything in the landfill, you know, and contaminating ground water in many locations, especially industries. You know, they were, they would manufacture something, and they would take all their wastes--say the steel finishing operations, they would take all their wastes, and they would just throw in the landfill. So we wrote regulations that laid out first, how landfills had to be built, you know, how many liners, leachate collection, and all that type of them. And then our regulations also talked about what concentrations of wastes could go in a certain type of landfill. It said that certain wastes had to go to a hazardous waste facility. They could no longer go to a municipal facility. And I think some people experienced that. You just can't--well, I don't know about now, but a few years ago, you just couldn't take any kind of waste from your household and just take it down to the municipal facility. So some wastes, they have, some neighborhoods have special pick-up days where you can put your hazardous waste in these big dumpsters. We had it out when I lived in Davidsonville [Maryland], and then that would be carted--you know, used paint and all that kind of stuff, turpentine and all kinds of household chemicals. Speaker 1: How is that kind of waste disposed of? Solvents and-- Speaker 2: Well, it goes, it's either incinerated and then, again, the incinerator has to meet certain standards that we set or it goes to a hazardous waste landfill which is different from your--where your garbage is going. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I call garbage, what comes out of the-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So, is that sort of a protected landfill where the-- Speaker 2: Yes, it has liners--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --material won't seep into the groundwater? Speaker 2: It has liners. It has the certain liners. It's gotta have leachate collection. When you put trash and garbage and waste in, you get water. It's called leachate, and the leachate is contaminated with every chemical that was in the waste. And so the lechaite has to be collected, and the leachate has to go off and be treated a certain way. So hazardous waste landfills have stricter requirements. Speaker 1: And you called it leachaid? Speaker 2: It's called leachate, L-E-A-C-H-A-T-E. That's the liquid. Speaker 1: Leachate, okay. Speaker 2: That's the liquid that comes off. You know, if you have trash in a garbage can too long, you'll notice at the bottom, it's always wet. There's always--well, can you imagine a big landfill full, how much water or leachate you're gonna get off of that? Speaker 1: I can't (laughter). Speaker 2: And how contaminated that is. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: It's contaminated with everything that's gone in, in there. So we set up requirements for all of that. It was a major undertaking, and it had very stringent deadlines. If we missed any of the deadlines, Congress said, no hazardous waste could be disposed of in the land. So talk about our backs being against the wall, it was the most stressful. We had marriages broke up, we had people who had nervous breakdowns. I'm serious. It was the most stressful time in my career at EPA, but it was also exciting 'cause I'm a stress junkie. So it was exciting, you know, trying to make these deadlines and-- Speaker 1: So you had a, I guess you had like a supervisor over you, like reading the materials, I mean or supervising the entire--the section you were working on or something-- Speaker 2: Doing the best she could. My supervisor was an attorney. My direct report to was an attorney. She didn't, you know, I went to her with a question one time, and she said, I can't help you 'cause she couldn't. You know, it was a very technical question. Speaker 1: So you knew the science and the technical-- Speaker 2: And she was an attorney. Speaker 1: --data, and then she would try to make sure that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So she couldn't help me, you know, with that part. I had to go ask other people and say, you know, "What do you think? I'm stumped here, and I'm not sure how to set these levels and that kind of stuff." It was tremendously interesting. It was hard on my family. I was gone a lot. I worked Saturday, Sundays. I spent long hours in the office. We were constantly up in the administrator's office because we would bump heads with other part of the agency, 'cause something that we would be doing for our program would affect another program. So there were big battles going on. I was up on the Hill with the assistant administrator of EPA. He had to testify in front of Congress. I had to put together the briefing book for him, and it was just really a good time to be at EPA. I was glad I was there at that time. Story_ID: 27454 Speaker 1: So you were there for, almost ten years, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a good career at EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]. Speaker 1: From '79 [1979] to '89 [1989]? Speaker 2: And I got--I left in '88 [1988], actually. And I, I got promoted up. I was on the SCS track. I was a fifteen, and so I went over to the Department of Energy. Speaker 1: So, well, tell us why you left EPA? Speaker 2: Oh, I went over to the Department of Energy [DOE] because the women who were mentoring me told me that to get into the SCS program, it would be a good idea if I went over to DOE for a year and then come back to EPA. So a few had already gone before me, so they were there to like, receive me basically, when I got over to DOE because DOE finally figured out that it had radioactive wastes that was hazardous. So it had a big issue. How do we deal with toxic or hazardous, radioactive wastes? From the Manhattan Project [research program that developed the first atomic weapon], when they were testing nuclear weapons. This waste was still all around the country. Speaker 1: It was in different places around the country? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I know one place I think it was, was Mound Laboratories [Miamisburg, Ohio]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was at Mound, it was at Fernald [Ohio], it was at Rocky Flats [Plant, Denver, Colorado], it was at Nevada. It was all over. And, ooh, that sounded interesting because here I had written regulations, and now I wanted to understand the implementation of it. So while I was on this SCS track, it just sounded like the right thing to do, and I was being mentored and encouraged to do this. Speaker 1: Now, what is the best way to get rid of these kinds of hazardous, dangerous-- Speaker 2: That the radio--well, first of all, it depends what kind of radioactive wastes it is 'cause there are many different--there's high level, there's low level, there's transuranic. So low level, I helped write the, the program for that as well, which you'll see in my CV [curriculum vitae]. But that's being disposed of at Nevada test side. And some high level is being handled up in Washington state at INL [Idaho National Laboratory]. Some of the transuranic is going into WIPP which is a salt-dome formation in Carlsbad, New Mexico. So, I mean, I just--I've had an exciting federal career. I'm a tell you. I went over there. They didn't know what they were doing, and I'm like, I'm here to save you (laughter). That's how I felt. And they embraced me that way. I had to--it was a different culture. So I was lucky I had somebody to protect me and show me how to work the politics 'cause there were old guys there who were saying, "We've been doing it this way for, how many years? We don't know what she's talking about, but we gonna keep on doing what we're doing." Speaker 1: And the Department of Energy is an older agency [motorcycle in background]. Speaker 2: So, my work was cut out, but I wasn't there very long, not because I didn't like what I was doing. Story_ID: 27455 Speaker 1: But medical wastes, which I was doing at EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], I was the medical waste person for EPA, and I put together the 'EPA Guide for Infectious Waste Management.' And that was my project. And when I went over to DOE [Department of Energy], I kind of took medical waste with me because I was still the person everybody was calling. So I was kind of working it out of my hip pocket. Well, what happened, medical waste washed up on the shores of New Jersey, and they were start-- Speaker 2: And those are the stories where bags of syringes and-- Speaker 1: I have all the newspaper articles where I'm-- Speaker 2: --pills. Speaker 1: --I'm cited and quoted, and they're in the information I gave you. Speaker 2: I remember that scare. Speaker 1: Everybody was coming to me, you know, "What do we do? What do we do?" And I think one of the articles even says that I was at DOE, and I was, had left EPA, but they still come to me for advice. Well, when the big consulting firms realized that they were gonna be able to make money now off of medical wastes. It was no longer gonna be my hip pocket project, they started coming to me at DOE and asking me to come to work for them. And I shook hands with a lady from SAIC [Science Applications International Corporation], and I said, I will work for you but under my own company name. And I shook hands with her over a cocktail and quit my good GS-15 [General Schedule level 15] government job and started HAZMED. Speaker 2: Now, this is 1988? Speaker 1: As a subcontractor to SAIC. Speaker 2: Okay, HAZMED originally stood for, I think-- Speaker 1: Hazardous and Medical Waste Services. And I saw where the medical waste part of it would be about a two-year ride. I figured I could get two years out of that. And then everybody would know what they needed to do. And then I would just go right into what I knew best, the hazardous waste regulations and help, you know, industry and other federal agencies 'cause, believe it or not, the government is the biggest polluter, still is. So that's how I started HAZMED. Speaker 2: Okay, now, I read out in the lobby that you started with five thousand dollars of your own money because you couldn't get any backing from the banks. Speaker 1: Oh, there was no bank, money from any bank. No, that was, that was pre-banks. I got an American Express Gold card 'cause it had a ten thousand dollars line of credit on it. Also, I needed some money to, for whatever I needed it for, for business. I went to Household Finance, and I borrowed some money to go on vacation. Speaker 2: And I read that you couldn't get money to start a business, but you could get ten grand to go on vacation? Speaker 1: Go on vacation. Yeah. I knew if I would--'cause I always had good credit. I knew if I went in there and told that lady that I wanted some money to put in some company, that lady was gonna look at me and say, "Ms., you have lost your mind." But I know that folks understand about going on vacation. And I knew I had good credit. So I said, "I need some money to go on vacation, going to Hawaii." And she said, "Well, we'll check and you come back tomorrow." And I came back tomorrow, and she gave me the money, and I paid my little loan off. Speaker 2: Did this have anything to do with racism at all or just bank policy as a-- Speaker 1: Ah-- Speaker 2: --or a loan company (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think there might have been some people who could have gotten money for their business, but I didn't expect that I was gonna be able to get money for my business. And I want to tell you that when I did get money for my business, it was through my husband's Republican connections 'cause, you know, it's all who you know. Speaker 2: And I've heard it said, you know, that you can get a bank to loan you--if you're black, you can get a bank to loan you enough money to buy a Cadillac, but if you try to buy a truck with the same money, to do some work, you would, you know, they would really scrutinize you a lot harder. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, 'cause I now, people understand vacations. See, when I was at EPA, they were--EPA was a young agency, it had a lot of young people working there. And they were single, and they were all into the environment. And they would tell me, oh, you know, we're going--they would go on these big vacations for two weeks. And they'd go trekking around the mountains and stuff like that, and they would borrow money. And that's when I found out, I said, these kids are borrowing money to go on vacation. And that's when I knew that the banks understood that. And this was Household Finance. Story_ID: 27456 Speaker 1: What are the ramifications of running a STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] oriented business? Speaker 2: That's a big question. First of all, running the business is running the business, you know. I don't care what kind of business. When I was in my tech group, we were all different businesses in there. We all had the same issues, you know, personnel, number one, always. Where to get work, how to manage work? Where to get funding? We all had the same issues. But when you're in the science and engineering, people don't even know what you're doing. They don't understand what you're doing. So I'm a consultant, you know. That's what we do. We provide services to our customer. I know how to put together a package. I know what a deliverable should look like, and so I realized that even to get my first office space, I had to sit the people down, after they told me, "No," sit 'em down in a room and put on a presentation to get them to understand what it is I'm doing. They don't even understand what I'm doing. You know, "She wants to borrow money for office to do what? You know, environmental what?" And so that's what I realized I had to do. I had to educate people, and to this day, I still don't think that my children and a lot of my friends still ever understood (laughter) what it is that I do or have done, you know, in the past. And in, in our culture, in particular, you know, it's about celebrities. It's about, you know, if you're a lawyer. Everybody gets that. If you're a doctor--but they don't always get what STEM people are doing. If you're a nuclear physicist, what's that, you know. They don't always get us. So we don't do it because we know we're gonna get any accolades. We do it because we know that we're making a contribution. I know that in twenty-five years I have helped make this country a safer place for us to live. I know that, and I feel real good about it, and I don't, you know, when you all called me, I was shocked 'cause we just don't get a lot of that. We're the unsung people, you know. [outside car noise] Story_ID: 27457 Speaker 1: Was HAZMED profitable from the beginning? Speaker 2: HAZMED was profitable from year one. I made one hundred and seventeen thousand dollars at the end of year one, profit. Speaker 1: Now, did that meet your expectations at that time? Speaker 2: I didn't know what to expect because you know, in my head, I'm like, "Girl, you got a good idea, but you gotta prove that you can do this." And that's why I paid myself. See, I know a lot of people go in business and say, "Well, I didn't pay myself for five years." Un-un. I was the number one employee, and if I couldn't pay the number one employee, how was I gonna pay anybody else. I have never missed a payroll, ever, and never had to go to bed worrying about a payroll. So that's why I paid myself from the beginning with the first--and I had to do the work, find the work, do all the administrative stuff--and you know, government contracting has a lot of that. It was good, it was good, though. Speaker 1: Now, where were your initial contracts from? Were they from-- Speaker 2: I did work for the Department of Energy [DOE]. I did work for EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]. I did some private work 'cause I was doing the medical waste stuff, so I did some private work for a couple of hospitals. And that's how I, where I started. And then I did some work for, it was called Reynolds Electrical Engineering Company in Nevada. They were the Department of Energy contractor. And I did some work with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's how I started, just-- Speaker 1: All right, and you were looking at regulations for-- Speaker 2: Radioactive, well, management of radioactive wastes-- Speaker 1: Okay, that first-- Speaker 2: --hazardous wastes. Speaker 1: --in the beginning, okay. Speaker 2: And medical wastes, I was working on medical wastes. Speaker 1: Radioactive, medical. Speaker 2: I was helping the EPA with the medical wastes program which, again, had been my project. So, of course, they wanted me involved. That's what I shook hands on to start the company. And I did a lot of training. You'll see in my CV [curriculum vitae], I did a lot of training for the hospital association. I did a lot of training for EPA. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I was working with Department of Energy with the radioactive wastes. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is interesting. So, you're training about the regulations you actually wrote. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Right, and that's what I wanted 'cause I was sitting in this place writing about stuff-- some things I had never seen, to be honest with you. And now I wanted to go out and see what this is all about? You know, so what is the impact of these regulations? And how do you implement 'em? Writing them is one thing. These people had to implement 'em. And that's what I got with working with the DOE and then, of course, with HAZMED. Speaker 1: Okay, so, and you worked with people on implementation of RCRA [Resource Conservation and Recovery Act], the Comprehensive Environmental Response-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Compensation and Liability Act. Speaker 2: Right, that's the Superfund [federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 27458 Speaker 1: The [President Ronald] Reagan administration got in trouble while you were there, the head of EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], the--one of the head-- Speaker 2: Anne Burford? Speaker 1: Yeah, she got in trouble for Superfund [federal program to clean up hazardous waste sites], something. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Superfund's always been a problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's been a problem (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What was the problem there? Speaker 2: I believe the problem was just where was the money going, and they weren't cleaning up fast enough. Superfund was a big pot of money. So obviously, when other folk needed money, they were like, well, you know, we'll just take a little bit out of the superfund, you know. And then the sites weren't getting cleaned up and-- Speaker 1: Who provided the superfund money? Was it Congress that provided it? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Congress, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and it was provided as a superfund because of emergency feelings that people had? Speaker 2: There was all this contamination from industry. In many cases--and we worked on these projects, in many cases, they didn't know who polluted it. So there's a part of the Superfund where you have to go out--they call 'em principal responsible parties, you have to go out and find these people. You have to dig in the records, who polluted this place. The government cleans it up, and then tries to get the money out of these people. So the Superfund is used to clean it up. If the people have some money, the money might go back in the pot. If they don't have any money, the government pays the bill. So it can be difficult because Joe Smith could have had a business there, but it could have been five businesses before that polluted the place. So you have to find out who actually did it; very interesting. Story_ID: 27459 Speaker 1: Maybe some of the cases that you advised on or were consulting on? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That woman right there in the picture with me, that drawing, with the long hair, she was one of my long-term--we're best of friends, customers from Department of Energy [DOE]. We worked on some difficult project together, and through that, we just formed this bond. And then we had to travel with all these guys all the time. We'd be the only two women. Sometimes there were two other women, but just mostly us and these guys. And we used to call them "zoonies," 'cause they were like, they were all into this radioactive stuff, not the part that I knew, this whole science of, you know, radioactivity and all that. And they would be talking and she and I would look at each other and say, "Can we believe them?" (laughter). Of course, we would have to make a decision, based on what they were talking about. And so we're best of friends now. I went all the way to North Dakota, my husband and I, when she got married. Speaker 1: Is it difficult to find a consensus on what a proper way to dispose of hazardous material is? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And I know now we have, most scientists believe in climate change, and you've got that fringe out there that says, it doesn't exist. So do you have like--how does the government decide like which scientists to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You fight it out. Some of it's political. Sometimes the science doesn't win out. I had a supervisor that taught me that. Speaker 1: Was there ever a time where it was just egregious? I mean were you just, or-- Speaker 2: With the land disposal restrictions, yeah. That was a hard one because Congress wrote a very prescriptive law. They shouldn't have, so they boxed us in. And when we went up on the [Capitol] Hill, trying to get clarification, but basically, to tell 'em they were wrong. You can't 'em they're wrong. You just have to ask for clarification and try to--they were like, no, that's what we meant, and we got a slap on the hand. And so we had to go back and try to make it work. It was very difficult. That's the one where I said people got divorced, went crazy, all kinds of things happened. It was a lot of pressure on us, a lot of pressure on me with that project 'cause I was really out front. That was a chance for me to showcase myself. And I got promoted, but it was hard. Speaker 1: And that was back when you were at EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the most challenging--that and one DOE project that I worked on was extremely challenging. Speaker 1: But as a consultant with HAZMED-- Speaker 2: Well, the DOE project, I was with HAZMED, I had HAZMED at the time. That was really, that was challenging 'cause it was a lot of professional judgment and then convincing everybody else. Speaker 1: Okay, so did the company revenues grow over the years-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, they grew and grew. And I have to say that right now is the hardest it's been, if you can believe that. It's hard right now. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: The whole government climate, sequestration, the whole way the government is moving, the--we can't figure it out. It's a new day in government contracting. I think the majority of the government contractors are being challenged, large companies, you know, they're starting to lay off. Speaker 1: It's hard to predict how the-- Speaker 2: We don't know, yeah, we don't know where it's going. Story_ID: 27460 Speaker 1: In '89 [1989], you wrote a book with Linda F. Chaff. Now, who is she? Speaker 2: What was the name of that book? Speaker 1: 'Buckle Down Your Medical Wastes Program.' Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, I don't even remember that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: There was so much stuff (laughter) back there. I don't think I wrote a book, wrote that with her. Maybe she interviewed me for part of it or something. Speaker 1: It says you're a co-author with Linda F. Chaff in 'Buckle Down Your Medical Wastes Program.' Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't remember that. I'm not saying it didn't happen 'cause it's a lot of stuff I don't remember. But-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear). Speaker 2: I probably did, I probably did. Speaker 1: All right. This is 1989, and there's a VHS tape that goes with it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't--it's probably back up in there (laughter) with all my stuff. I mean that was a time, there was so much medical wastes stuff happening, you know, that I just--yeah, it's probably back there. Or maybe she put my name on it. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now-- Speaker 2: I'm gonna look that up myself. Speaker 1: --you were a panelist in 1993 with the U.S. Army War College [Carlisle, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was great. Speaker 1: And what was that about-- Speaker 2: National Security Seminar. Speaker 1: --and what did you talk about? Speaker 2: It was the National Security Seminar, and they were talking about--they had all these colonels, lieutenant colonels, and they were talking about, "What is the Army gonna look like?" That's when things were changing in the Army. You know, there was no more draft, and the Army just wasn't sure what its direction was supposed to be. Vietnam was all, you know, there was no major war going on. And it's like what do we do now? This was before Afghanistan, Iraq and all that. And they had this hiatus, and they just weren't sure. And so they were, not asking me to talk about the environment or anything, but just as a professional person, to give my opinions on the topic about, you know, what they think--what I thought their direction should be. And there were--on that panel somebody was a mayor of one of the cities. And somebody was a college professor, and one guy was the co-founder of Caterpillar Company, just a group of people coming together. And we spent like a week with these people, brainstorming. It was my introduction to the Armed Forces, my introduction to people who had gone to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] which I didn't know. You know, I only knew the enlisted Army. I didn't know this world. And I came out of that--I grew from it. I guess they got something from me, but I grew from it, to know what talent we have in our Armed Forces. It was a very interesting experience for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I feel enriched by it. Like I say, I don't know what I offered. They--we just, we just talked on different topics. You know, they just were rolling topics, what do you think about this, what do you think about that, and-- Story_ID: 27461 Speaker 1: Just kind of describe what HAZMED did during the '90s [1990s]. I know one event that--well, it was the [President Bill] Clinton presidency in '92 [1992] would you say, kind of loosens up money for environment. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I went to the White House back then. Speaker 1: Okay. About what year? What was the--what were the circumstances? Speaker 2: When was Hillary [Clinton] doing that healthcare? Speaker 1: That was in the early days. Speaker 2: I was called to--with an SBA group, and a few-- Speaker 1: In '92 [1992], '93 [1993]-- Speaker 2: --people to go. And I went up there and sat in the Rose Garden and they kind of did a hip-hip-hooray for Hillary and her initiative and show of force, and that kind of thing. And your initial question was what--I'm sorry, I went on the other side (laughter). Speaker 1: What HAZMED was doing in the '90s [1990s], and what, you know, during the Clinton administration, basically? Speaker 2: We were doing quite a bit of work with Nevada, Las Vegas. I don't remember exactly when I opened the office out there, but we had an office in Las Vegas. And I used to go back and forth. And we were working on setting up the program--that was a big one--for the management and disposal of radioactive-mixed waste in Area 5 at Nevada Test Site. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was big. Speaker 1: I think during that period of time, in 1995, Dr. Shirley Jackson, who we've interviewed too, was the head of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission [NRC]-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --chair. So you had to work with the NRC and EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] and-- Speaker 2: Not as much. Primarily, with DOE [Department of Energy] because-- Speaker 1: DOE, okay. Speaker 2: --you know, DOE has these facilities all over the country. And we had to set up the program. We had to set up all the standards for this program. There was no program. And we had to set up all the standards for this program. How do you test your, you know, sample your wastes? I had to show them how to write sampling and analysis plans. And what they were trying to do was they were trying to certify wastes to be disposed of in the desert, in Area 5. So the waste had to meet certain criteria. So what are those criteria gonna be? So we had to set up the criteria. And then we had go to out to each of the sites and make sure the wastes that they wanted to send, met all the criteria. How do you know that this bottle of wastes meets the criteria? What about this one here? And you've got 'em in the same place. Are you segregating your wastes? Are you labeling and managing your wastes? Is there a process to track it? If a drum moves out, how do you know where it went to? So we needed to know that when they put those sealand containers on those trucks, that those wastes in those containers met the criteria to be buried out in the desert. And so I had people going around to all the different sites, doing these audits. It was quite intense. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: It was fun, though. We were in really crazy places and crazy things were happening. Speaker 1: Crazy places like where? Speaker 2: Well, a lot of these places, like we went to this place in Rocky Flats [Plant, Denver, Colorado], and it was all underground. And we had to be in full gear with gas masks. And it was like something out of a science fiction movie. I guess I can tell this. I don't know if Rocky Flats is all gone now. It was like out of a science-fiction movie, you know, and everybody is walking down the halls. And they're all in the white suits and there was, you know, I asked them, I said, "Now, I have this gas masks. How am I supposed to know if something's wrong?" And they said, "Oh, you'll know," and it took, it look like half a day to get the gas masks 'cause you have to go through all this testing and make sure that its fits properly. You know, they put it on, and they put gas on you, and you have to smile and laugh and make sure that you're not smelling any of the gas and nothing's coming in. So you had to do all that, all this preparation, all this security before we even went into the place. But it was like, total science fiction. It's amazing, just trying to see what they're doing, are they meeting the requirements of this program. And so we have funny stories and things that happened, you know, like people who get nuked. When you leave the facility, you have to go through radiation detectors and make sure you're not tracking any radiation out, and if they get a positive read, whatever you have on, you have to take it off. So, somebody lost their leather jacket (laughter). You know, it's--one of my people walked into an area. She walked in. They opened the door--she's in street clothes. Everybody inside was in full protective gear, and they're like, "Get outta here," you know. And she's like, "Oh, my God." The next day, the whole plant knew about it, just crazy stuff. Story_ID: 27462 Speaker 1: Now, you were, meanwhile, you're a finalist for 'Entrepreneur of the Year.' You had--the firm wins 'Minority Small Business Firm of the Year' and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Lots of awards. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Around the year 2000 is when the--now, did things change in 2001 with the Bush [President George W. Bush] administration in terms of activities of HAZMED? Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001], I'm trying to remember the kinds of things we were doing. I think we were taking on different contracts at that time. I think we were getting more into defense, yeah, 'cause 1997 we started getting into defense. And we still have people, we still have people up there at Aberdeen Proving Ground dealing with, they call it environmental risk management up there. They clean up spills. They do recycling of radioactive targets from the testing of nuclear warheads. Oh, they do so many things up there. It's amazing, it's--I don't even know all what those guys do. They run the chemical pharmacy, and we, we still--we've been up there many, many years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we started reaching out into other areas. I believe we started with, maybe we started records management at that time. But we started branching out. Speaker 1: Now, did you do any consulting on 9-11 [September 11th, 2001] in terms of the wastes of the buildings in the-- Speaker 2: No, we didn't get involved in that. Speaker 1: I know the talk about the contamination of the area. Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't, we didn't really get involved in that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, but HAZMED has been involved in security or, issues, right? Speaker 2: [No audible response]. Speaker 1: You've been involved in security issues too? I mean or is it just in regards to waste management? Speaker 2: In regards to waste management. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, we, now we have--well, let me take that back. Yes, in regards to waste management, but we also have done work with INS [Immigration and Naturalization Service] and Department of Homeland Security. And that's how we got into the new (unclear). If you look on our website, we have this whole Homeland Security capability 'cause we, over the years we started growing into other areas. And I think it was around maybe the late '90s [1990s] that we started with INS which was the predecessor to the Department of Homeland Security. You know they brought INS and several other agencies together. And we were working on the border. We were working with this system called ICAD [Intelligent Computer-Assisted Detection], and it helped to detect border intrusions, and we had people up in Vermont for many years working on that project. And we also started working in the late '90's [1990s] or early 2000 with FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], helping them with issues that they have as well. So, and we're still working with FEMA. Speaker 1: Now, what in terms of-- Speaker 2: Records management. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Records management work. See, in about 1994, I recruited my husband from his job into the company because I wanted to get into information technology. And that was sort of the area that he was working in. So, and that's when we started branching out and getting into INS, into the, kind of the Homeland Security. We did some work for the Department of Justice during that time as well. Story_ID: 27463 Speaker 1: So records, records management for an organization like FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], what would you actually do? Speaker 2: Well, if you can imagine an agency with file cabinets full of paper, how do you know what's in there? How do you retrieve it? You know, maps, all kinds of records, and so what we come in with is with software, a software-based system that you can put the records into. So it involves scanning, indexing and getting the records into this system. The system is HP TRIM [Hewlett Packard Total Records and Information Management] that we use, and we've gone out with our mobile lab to all of the ten EP--I'm sorry, FEMA regions and helped them get this HP TRIM set up and that large room that I was in across the hall, every now and then the projects come into there. And then we hire local people to help get the records scanned and get 'em into Trim. And so people can go in and search and find a record, and then they can get rid of the paper. And records management has gotten more complicated over the years because records now are not only pieces of paper. They're emails. There is a--you know, what's a record? And that's the first step of it, is defining what a record is, how long do you keep a record, so record retention, and then capturing all these records. So we're kind of more on the back end. We're working with capturing the records in this software that can then be retrieved, easily retrieved. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm always amazed these days when I hear stories on the news about people who work for government agencies or, and who don't realize that everything they do is recorded (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it doesn't, you know, it doesn't-- Speaker 2: Right, or people who think that laptop on their desk belongs to them. That laptop is being backed up in the server room so that if this building burns down, we have tapes over in the bank vault. We can just--that's what happened after 9-11 [September 11th, 2001]. Those businesses opened up around the corner from their back-up tapes. Yeah, everything is there. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a lot of fear in those days that the records would be destroyed with the-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --destruction of the buildings. Speaker 2: Exactly, and some people still aren't prepared for that because we lost our stockbroker in the World Trade Center. They actually, what happened was some of them actually died. And they had the, sort of the institutional memory for that organization, and they just weren't able to get it back after that. It's very sad. Speaker 1: And cost people a lot of money, I guess too? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 27464 Speaker 1: Tell us about your partnership with Bowie State University [Bowie, Maryland]? Speaker 2: I've always done work in the community 'cause I believe that that's part of it. My father [Thomas Nathaniel Sales] taught me that, and so I've been on several boards, hospital board, whatever. Someone asked me to be on the board at Bowie [State University] many, many years ago, the Board of Visitors, I think is where I started. I said, "You know what? We're in Prince George's County [Maryland]. This is a university in Prince George's County. I'm gonna help these people," you know. But, you know what? I fell in love with Bowie. I like that school. They, I like the way they reach out to their students. They give their students support. You know, Howard's [Howard University] a big school, and you kinda have--you're kinda on your own there. But Bowie, they really nurture their--because they have five thousand students, they can do it. They nurture the students. One of my employees, her son was going there. And she said to me, "My son's in college, and they're asking me to come for a parent-teacher meeting." I said, "Isn't that great?" 'Cause he's--what, the kid is eighteen. And so, you know, I'm just impressed at how they work with the students. And I've continued to help them. And now, as chair of the board, I'm like, oh--and I told them twice I wasn't gonna do this. I didn't have the time. But I'm doing it. So, we'll see. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have here that in 2006, HAZMED formed a strategic cooperative partnership with Bowie State. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What's the nature of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had this--it didn't go very far though. It was under Calvin Lowe, and then he left and Mickey Burnhim came in. But it was under Calvin Lowe. And we were trying to work on using Bowie as a Homeland Security demonstration site for a technology that we had called PatrolNet. And basically, it's a security system. And so we had sort of kicked it off. We had a MOU, but it never really got going. And then the new administration came in, and they had different directives. So that's what that was. Speaker 1: Okay, so the MOU is a memorandum of understanding, right? Speaker 2: Yes, memorandum of understanding. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think we still have our cameras over there, to be honest with you. Story_ID: 27465 Speaker 1: HAZMED--is HAZMED really an inter-wireless security, I mean serv-- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause that's what the ICAD [Intelligent Computer-Assisted Detection], remember I told you the ICAD project for the boarder. And that's how we got into that. And like right now, we're a subcontractor on a project for the State of Maryland to redo the whole nine-eleven system, nine-eleven or nine one-one, nine one-one system in the State of Maryland. So we're working with this company called Interact. So we've dipped, dabbled in that for a long time now, and Greg brought that to the table when he came in and sort of brought the information technology in, and we sort of--it was a logical progression. And we just sort of branched out and got into INS [Immigration and Naturalization Service] and boarder protection. And then we got under that security umbrella, and we--it continues to be good work for us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, is there a favorite project that you worked on over the years? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I liked the work we did for the Department of Energy [DOE] with the wastes acceptance criteria. They called Radioactive Wastes Acceptance Criteria Program. And that was where I got to use all my professional knowledge to help DOE figure out how to manage this radioactive wastes. As part of that, there was a project called Project Chariot. And Project Chariot was an extremely exciting project because it required us to move wastes that was buried in Alaska. And the Alaskan natives were saying that this wastes was making them sick. Well, you know, Alaska, you can't dig but a couple times a year for very short periods of time. And this waste was in a remote area. So they had to build a landing strip to get planes in there. They had to rope it off to keep the bears out, and they had to dig during this one period of time where they could get through the permafrost, to get to this waste. We didn't know what the waste was. There were no records. And so we had to use professional judgment to figure out what this waste was. There was, [Senator Theodore] Stevens and the political machine was like "You have to get this stuff out of here." And we had to get the waste to Nevada, get it certified and get it buried. There were a lot of late-night phone calls. We worked through weekends looking, pouring over data, trying to make the best sound judgment that we could. And I got a little plaque in there that I worked on Project Chariot. Speaker 1: This Governor Stevens of Alaska and the late--I mean the former governor of Alaska, the one that preceded Sarah Palin, I believe. Speaker 2: Um-hum. And Stevens was a senator back then. Speaker 1: Oh, he was senator. Speaker 2: Was he senator? Yeah, Stevens was senator. Speaker 1: Or maybe he wasn't the governor then. Maybe I'm wrong, right? Speaker 2: And--all I remember was it went political. So, you know, it became a priority. It was a very difficult project. The people had to go up there. They had to stay up there. It was very hard on the folks. I had to--luckily, I didn't have to go to Alaska. I was very concerned about that, leaving my family for that length of time. Speaker 1: Is it--how large of a staff do you have for-- Speaker 2: There are, right now, there are about close to seventy of us. We've been larger. We are on the brink of winning a major procurement, which is gonna really change the face of this company. So it's gonna be interesting to see how that's gonna go. We're very close to it. We're guarded, but it looks like it's gonna happen. So I'm pretty excited about that. Speaker 1: Okay, so how many offices does HAZMED have? Speaker 2: This is our headquarters office. The paradigm has shifted totally. Years ago, when I had an office in Vermont, an office in Las Vegas [Nevada], office in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, and before we bought this building, which another company of mine owns, we were renting space across the way there. Now, our employees are on the government site. The government wants the people there. Well, that's taken the burden off of me about having to have all these places with my name [siren in background]. Story_ID: 27466 Speaker 1: You were, you were talking about a new contract coming down the pipe for HAZMED? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we're, so we're pretty excited about it. It's always a very tense time. But I believe it's gonna happen. Speaker 1: Oh, and I was asking you how many offices that you have? Speaker 2: Oh, this is our main facility. And all we have here are just a few administrative people because now everybody's on customer site. And I'm actually pleased with that because it was a lot of stress on me to have my name personally guaranteeing offices all over the United States to house my people. But, again, like I said, the paradigm has shifted. The government wants the people, the contractors to be on site. So all the people, they're in, up in Pikesville [Maryland], they're in North Carolina. They're out there at Aberdeen Proving Ground [Aberdeen, Maryland]. So it's just a couple of VPs [vice-presidents], COO [chief operating officer]. Even the accounting, we do offsite. So this building, Johnson-Brown owns it. We have tenants on the first floor. HAZMED has some of this space. We have some incubator companies, but we have a lot of space here that we really need to try to rent. Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We've been trying. Speaker 1: --to have multiple offices anymore as you did in the past. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Have you worked overseas? Speaker 2: We haven't. I always say that it's difficult enough for me to work here and it's hard for me to imagine having to cross the ocean to get to work. I just haven't explored that market. We're a government contractor. We just kind of work for our clients here. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about--do you have interns that work-- Speaker 2: We have. Speaker 1: --with you. Okay. Speaker 2: We have. It depends on the project. So we have at the time, 'cause you know all projects are not amenable to having interns. But right now, we don't have any interns, but we have had them in the past, depending on the projects. Speaker 1: Do you utilize the neighboring schools for any of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --like Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Actually, you know what we do, when we have records management, when they have tasks that require them to use a laboratory here, then we will hire local people. And, for many people who will help with the lab, it's part-time work for them, to help them with their mortgages and we have students working there as well. So I'm always happy when we have opportunities to have people in the community because many of our people are scientists and technical people. So when I can just hire working-class people to come and work with us, it gives me great pleasure to do that. Story_ID: 27467 Speaker 1: I have a note here that Boeing selected HAZMED for participation in the Department of Homeland Security's mentor protege program. What's the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were a Boeing protege there. And we, that PatrolNet that I told you about earlier, which was our securities solution for border protection, we were going after some major bids and Boeing--we came up on Boeing's radar. And they knew that we had a good solution. We had many meetings with them. And they made us a protege. We didn't get any work out of it. We met some great people. DO--Department of Homeland Security never went forward with the procurements. As you know, there's been an issue with government procurements being stalled. So it didn't go very far, but we've made some good partnerships and good relationships with people at Boeing through that. So, you know, you never know. You never know when an opportunity is gonna come, and you have to reach out to one of the partner companies. Speaker 1: Okay, now, the current head of the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] is Lisa P. Jackson, right? This is the first black woman to be a head of EPA? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and I haven't met her. We're really not doing much with EPA these days. We're doing more on the defense side, more on the Homeland Security side. And not to say that an opportunity--I mean it's all opportunity driven. It's just what comes up on the radar screen, what makes sense for us at the time. What we're doing now is we're really working where we have relationships. We're trying to keep repeat customers and continue to provide services for our customers. And that's why we've been at (ARL?) since 1997. Story_ID: 27468 Speaker 1: You are currently the chair of the Bowie State University Foundation [Bowie, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Does that mean the chair of the board of Bowie State? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a big job (laughter)-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --bigger than I thought (laughter) it was gonna be. Speaker 1: Now, you've been on the board since 2006--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've been on the board for a long-- Speaker 1: Longer than that? Speaker 2: --I was on the board of visitors with Calvin Lowe. And then I went under Mickey Burnham and I guess I'm kinda committed to Bowie, and I'll always help them, even when I'm no longer on the board. I'll work with them. They're a fine school. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: That's proof. The First Lady [Michele Obama] came and gave the commencement exam--commencement speech, I should say. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: Just a week or so ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm waiting for my picture, took a photo with her. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what other volunteer activities are you involved in? Speaker 2: Well, like I told you, I was on all these boards. I was on the hospital board. I was on the economic development corporation board. I was on the Chamber of Commerce board. I worked with the Arthritis Foundation. I mean I was on, I was doing boards. And I just decided that I would whittle it down to Bowie because what I'm doing, besides that is counseling, providing guidance to other businesses, people who are new in business. I don't charge them anything for it. But I spend a considerable amount of time with it. When people call me and ask me to have lunch with them or to talk with them, I don't turn them away because I remember when I was looking for help. And I found it difficult to find people who were willing to take time to talk to me about being in business and what the challenges are of being in business. Speaker 1: I've read that SBA [Small Business Administration] was very helpful when you started. Is that true? Speaker 2: The SBA 8a program was helpful to us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did serve on an SBA advisory board for a while. SBA has its challenges. It depends on what administration is in and how much attention they get, what their funding is gonna look like. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, you're a member--are you a member of The Links or anything or-- Speaker 2: Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority]. Speaker 1: Delta, okay, Delta sorority, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Alpha chapter. I pledged Alpha chapter. Speaker 1: Okay, and I was told by our director that you're best friends or a good friend of Maya Angelou's? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I call--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Is there a story--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --her Auntie. Speaker 1: Is there a story there about how you met and-- Speaker 2: I always tell people, I met Maya Angelou doing good work in the community because see, when you do good work in the community, you meet good people. And you meet other people who are doing good work. And I mean I am steadfast, I don't care how busy I am, with giving back in the community. And I was doing a fundraiser for the Arthritis Foundation, and I wanted her to be honored. And so that was my first chance to meet her. Well, she never agreed to let them honor her, but through other people that we knew, I don't know how to put it, we just--we met and she liked me. And I liked her, and that's been years. And in her new book, 'Mom and Me and Mom,' I did the acknowledgements. She acknowledges me as one of her daughters, and I'm just blessed and grateful to have her in my life in such a capacity that she thinks of me that way. And I adore her, and she's very important to my husband and I, in our life. Story_ID: 27469 Speaker 1: Okay, now, this husband is your second husband, right? This is--or I guess, or maybe-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I don't know. But, well, tell us how you met your current husband? This is Greg [Gregory Davis], right? Speaker 2: (Laughter). (Unclear) (laughter). I met him socially, I'll put it that way (laughter). Wilson Goode was running for mayor, and I'd gone to a reception or something. And-- Speaker 1: This is in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a reception here in Washington [D.C.], a fundraiser reception. And I met my husband at that. And we kicked, we just hit it off. I have this thing, I like people. And I can feel when people are good and genuine. I could just sense it, you know. And I called my girlfriend, and I said, "I met this man, and he's just a nice, he's just nice." That's a big statement to say about somebody, that they're just nice. I didn't say he was fine or he was, had money, you know, you--no, he was just nice, you know. And I married, nice. And we work together. We brought all these children together. We have other people's children. Our godson, he's now our child. That's where the five kids, I have everybody's children. And they're our children. Speaker 1: Well, this is a good time to talk about the children. How many children do you have now? Speaker 2: I have five. I gave birth to two children. I have five children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we're a very blended family. The youngest, we're the godparents, and his mother who was our sister friend, died very young of breast cancer. And the night before she died, she gave us her child. And we paid for his college, and he's our kid. And then he's the baby of thirty. And then the next one is thirty-seven. He works in the company, in accounting. That's Nick. And then we have Shelly is next. She's forty, Sharma, forty-two and Stephanie is forty-five. So,-- Speaker 1: Okay, and you have, I think, nine grandchildren. Speaker 2: (Laughter) All those children are with us. Speaker 1: Their pictures are behind us. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Story_ID: 27470 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, boy. My hope is that, as a people, that we understand and embrace the importance of education. I mean I just hope that we can understand that. My concern, my major concern, is the breakdown of the family unit, the number of children being raised without a father in the home, the obesity among our women and our children. I'm just extremely concerned--the apathy that I see. I mean I, I demonstrated for causes. I piggybacked my children on my back, you know, to march for things. And I just don't see that now. I see them making a statement on Twitter, but I don't know that that does it. It, so where is that message going? How does that message make change? The people have always had to go out in the street and ask for change. So that's my concerns. Story_ID: 27471 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: I wouldn't do one thing differently. I really wouldn't. I, I tried to take myself on that journey one night laying in bed, and the, "What, I should of, or should I have, what?" No. I thought through everything. I've always had a good head. I've always listened to my instincts, always. And I think things through and I'm good strategic planner. No, I did the best I could every step of the way with the information that I had on hand. Like I told you earlier, I like data. So I always had data points. I want to think that I always made informed decisions. So, no, I couldn't of done anything differently 'cause I did everything based on what was happening at that moment in time. So I'm just worried about what I'm gonna do going forward because I, I look at life as a book. And those are chapters that have already happened in my life. I've already turned all those pages. So, now, what I'm gonna focus on is what's the rest of the story? And it's no secret, I'm sixty-seven. And my story's not gonna go on forever. So what am I gonna write in the next chapters? Story_ID: 27472 Speaker 1: Now, you, like a lot of the people, especially in STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] fields that we've interviewed, are occupied with a job that kids in grade school, sitting in public school now, can't even imagine, you know. (Unclear) if you said, "I wanna be a consultant with--they wouldn't be able to say that-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --with environmental, you know, environmental concerns" (unclear). They wouldn't even understand--like you said, a lot of people don't understand what you do now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But do you have any advice for students who don't know what's out here? Speaker 2: You have to ask, and you have to research. These students have the Internet, and we didn't have that. You know, when I went to college, it said about being an accountant and being a teacher and being a nurse. It didn't say anything about being a, majoring in microbiology, you know. But these children have the Internet. They can explore. They can go out there and see what's coming. They have no excuse, you know, because it's called research. And that's what they have to do. They have to research. They have to talk to people. We're here. I used to have the little girls come through 'cause I really wanted to promote the field to women, to girls because you see I testified on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] before a subcommittee in front of some young ladies. And I asked them, I said, "Well, what do you--how many wanna be--no, what do you all want to be?" And so nobody said anything. I said, "Well, how many wanna be a doctor?" Nobody, no hands went up. "How many wanna be a lawyer?" All the hands went up. This is post-O.J., right. All the hands went up. "How many wanna be a scientist?" No hands went up. I was like, "Am I fighting a losing battle here?" I really got discouraged, you know, because I don't know how you get people to love science and love engineering. I think we're, we were just born with some curiosity or something. I don't know. We're different. We are. I mean I don't sing, you know, I told you (laughter). I don't act. I'm a scientist, I'm an engineer, and I just knew I wanted to be that. And I don't really know how to get other people to join in on that. Story_ID: 27473 Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is that I care for people, and everybody who knows me, knows that, everybody who knows me knows that. I care for people, and it's shown in my work, protecting the environment, protecting the water that we drink, you know, protecting the air that we breathe, which affects our health. So protecting our health, you know, working with the youth. I didn't mention Erica who's a young lady that I've been mentoring since she was in ninth grade. She has cerebral palsy. She's now in grad school. When I got Erica, her mother was a crack addict and her father was in jail. And I'll be seeing Erica tonight at a Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland] function. You know, I care about people. I always have. I always have time, always have time to help somebody. I think it's important. That's all we have is one another. Story_ID: 27474 Speaker 1: What is your management philosophy? Speaker 2: That's a hard question 'cause I don't know if I have a philosophy about managing. I just understand that you have to have good, strong leaders in your management chain. You have to have people that share your vision, and you have to have people that are committed to what you're committed to. I mean you can't manage and carry out the mandates of the organization and help the organization grow and help your employees grow 'cause that's all part of it, is when people leave this company, I know that they learned something here. I know that. And so I, I have to hire and be the kind of manager that can do all those things, that can cultivate people, keep a client happy, keep my eye on the bottom line and make sure that I'm moving in a direction that's beneficial to the organization. A lot of people are stuck in this "me, me" mentality, you know, "What I'm gonna get." And I tell them when they come to me with that, I'm like, "Well, what about everybody else?" The same thing I tell my children. "But if we do that for you, what about the others?" Speaker 1: What's the hardest thing, I guess to, that comes with running an organization like HAZMED. You're a black woman, running an organization that's very successful, and you're doing--you know, what's the hardest thing about it? Speaker 2: It can be very lonely. You're at the top. You don't always know who to trust. I have my husband [Gregory Davis] with me. That helps, but there's certain things I still can't discuss with him because he's COO [chief operating officer], and I'm CEO [chief executive officer] and president. He has a different role. It's about roles and responsibilities. So it's, it's lonely--it can be very lonely. You have a lot of responsibility. You know, these people, they have mortgages, they have children in college, and they're depending on me to feed their families. That's a lot of responsibility. I accept it, but--and I try not to think about it. But it is a big responsibility. You have to be a risk taker. You have to know that all, everything could just blow up in smoke--the president can go on TV and make a speech, and everything blows up in smoke. And that means that you accept that it's not all about material things, that there's more to life than that. That all this stuff is just material stuff and material things. And if you don't feel that way, then it's difficult to be in business and to be an entrepreneur. We're risk takers. Story_ID: 27475 Speaker 1: Well, the last question is like legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: She cared about people. She was a good friend, good mentor and a good mother. That's it. Story_ID: 27476 Speaker 1: That was my husband [Gregory Davis] and I celebrating our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary last year, and we went to the site of our first date, which was the Serbian Crown in Vienna [Austria], just the two of us. That was a wonderful, romantic evening. Speaker 2: That is from our family reunion in St. Croix. I told you earlier that my mother's people are from St. Croix, and you see the Browne name on the shirt. Speaker 1: About what year? Speaker 2: That was 1989. Speaker 1: Oh, I don't remember the year. That was me giving a speech at the Arthritis Foundation fundraiser, and I'm not sure what year that was. Speaker 2: It was like the '80s [1980s] (unclear). Speaker 1: '90s [1990s]. I remember that suit. Speaker 2: That's me and three of my five children, my youngest daughter, oldest daughter and oldest son. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you name them for us? Speaker 2: That's Shelly-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): On the right? Speaker 2: On the right. Then it's Stephanie right in front of me, and that's Nicholas behind me, and this was taken probably around 2001 in our home in Davidsonville. Speaker 1: That's me and my mom. I lost my mom in 2001. We were extremely tight, and that was taken at the Maryland Top 100 ceremony. Speaker 2: That's me when I was being honored by the Girl Scouts, and that young lady, Emily, was the Girl Scout that shadowed me. Speaker 1: That's my baby picture. Speaker 2: 1946 (laughter). Speaker 1: 1946. That's my christening. Speaker 2: That's my mother and father. Speaker 1: And their names? Speaker 2: Thomas White and Lillian White. Speaker 1: And that's the whole family, my father, my mother, that's my sister, Gerry, and then it's me in front of my father. Speaker 2: That's my mother in--that's my mother in her nurse's uniform. You can't quite see the cap. Wasn't she lovely? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Um-hum. Speaker 2: You all look a lot alike. Speaker 1: And that's my dad, all dressed up. Yeah, that was my father. Speaker 2: That's me getting, that's me getting my Master's degree six days before having Nicholas (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, that's me back in the mid-'80s [1980s] on a camping trip at Assateague Island [Maryland]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, boy, mosquitoes (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and horses, the whole nine yards. Speaker 2: That's me with the red blouse on at one of the radioactive waste sites. Speaker 1: That's me at the Race for the Cure, holding the picture of my sister friend who died from breast cancer. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Linda, Linda Borden. That's Marcus, my youngest child, that's his mother. Speaker 2: Now, this is my mentee, Erica Twitty, that I mentioned, and that's at her graduation for Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland]. She graduated with her Bachelor's. That was a happy day. Speaker 1: That's my husband and I and Christopher Reeves [Superman] at the Kennedy Center. HAZMED was a sponsor of the Kennedy Center Speaker Series. Speaker 2: Oh, that's me with Donald Trump and his wife at Mar-a-Lago at one of Maya Angelou's birthday parties. Speaker 1: This with the assistant administrator, receiving an award at Environmental Protection Agency [EPA], you could see the EPA log there. Speaker 2: About what year is that? Speaker 1: That was probably in 1987 or so. Speaker 2: This is me at a fundraiser for the Arthritis Foundation. It was Oscar Night, and I was chair of the event. Speaker 1: Ah, it's another Oscar Night for the Arthritis Foundation. I was chairing the event, and that's an actual Oscar statue that I'm holding. It was sent--and there was a big guard behind me, (laughter) which you can't see. Speaker 2: To make sure you didn't-- Speaker 1: Wouldn't let me touch it. Speaker 2: This was in the mid-'90s [1990s] and I was being honored by the county, and I was giving a thank you speech. Speaker 1: You know, I told you I was an outdoor girl, and that's me upstate New York hiking the mountain. Speaker 2: Well, you can see what I'm doing there. I'm getting on a helicopter, and that's my granddaughter there with the backpack in front of me. Speaker 1: That's me and my youngest daughter at the Odyssey Retreat, business women's retreat. Speaker 2: Again, the outdoors, my love of the ocean and my two pet poodles. Speaker 1: That's our headquarters building, and I own the company that owns the building. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture that I took with Oprah Winfrey at Maya Angelou's birthday celebration. Speaker 2: That's a picture I took at that same celebration with Maya Angelou at her birthday...