 Story_ID: 95302 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing today with The History Makers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Darryl Stuart. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: It's Reginald A. Stuart, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, the initial A, last name S-T-U-A-R-T. Speaker 1: All right, and what does your middle name stand--middle initial stand for? Speaker 2: Alphonso, A-L-P-H-O-N-S-O. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee, 11/26/48. Speaker 1: All right, and so what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: No title, occupation is journalist. If I had a title, it would be worker bee. Speaker 1: Okay. You're not, you're not, you're not working for any newspaper or-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm a recruiter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but that would--that's just a job. That's a, that's a job. I'm not like an executive vice president or you know, no title. I'm not a president, I'm not a director, not a manager, just a worker bee. Speaker 1: You're a recruiter for McClatchy Newspaper? Speaker 2: McClatchy Newspapers. Speaker 1: And you've written a number of articles over the years. Speaker 2: A few. Speaker 1: Significant ones. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: This is August 29th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. Speaker 1: Skadden Arps. Speaker 2: Skadden Arps. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 95303 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Can I have more than one? We'll say peach cobbler, we'll say turnip greens, properly prepared macaroni and cheese, homemade rolls and what else? That's plenty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, barbecue, barbecued pork. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The next place I'm going to. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: He was a pretty good fellow, but he could have been better. Story_ID: 95304 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll keep them separate and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Maxie Allen, middle name was Helen, M-A-X-I-E, H-E-L-E-N, Allen, A-L-L-E-N. Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was 2/28 1920 I think, Athens, Alabama. Speaker 1: Where is Athens say in relationship to Montgomery [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Athens is at the northern edge, central, north central edge of Alabama. It's just across Tennessee line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a, about 100 miles south of Nashville [Tennessee], due south. And it's about 15 miles from Huntsville, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us--what can you tell us about your mother's ancestors? How, how far back can you trace your ancestors on that side and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well on my mother's side, they trace back to her grandmother, may have been great-grandmother, who was an immigrant from Haiti and she came to Haiti--came to the United States from Haiti with the promise of an opportunity to complete, or extend her education. And when she arrived, she was sold into slavery. Speaker 1: So this is in the 19th Century, this is early in the slavery days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--is this shortly before the [unclear] or does go much further back? Speaker 2: Shortly before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, shortly before. Speaker 1: So she had been free for almost 60 years at that point [unclear]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so she had an opportunity to come to the states. It was obviously a, a con job. And, and when she got here, she was sold into slavery. Speaker 1: Now what was her name? Speaker 2: I don't remember it right now. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA VOICE] Speaker 2: Emily Turner. Speaker 1: This is your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Either my, either my great-great-grandmother or great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, Emily Turner. Speaker 2: Right. So the family tree, I don't re--recall the exact order right now. Speaker 1: This is quite a [unclear]--so she was brought, was she brought by herself or with others? Speaker 2: We don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, it sounds like it was--if I was gone do a con like that, I'd probably get a group together, you know, it would be worth it, you know, to do that. Speaker 2: Yeah, we don't know. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So she was conned to come to the United States to further her education and was sold into slavery. Speaker 2: Right. That's our understanding of it. Speaker 1: And where did the--where did, where did all this take place here in the states? Speaker 2: Georgia. [Unclear] in Georgia, then went--once they were freed, they all migrated to Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were moving up north. Speaker 1: Now that's a heck of a story to start off with. Story_ID: 95305 Speaker 1: What else about that side of the family [his mother, Maxie Allen's family]? Speaker 2: Well once the family moved to Alabama, they were able to buy property, a small amount of property from a farmer who you know, was willing to sell property. And they farmed. And most [unclear] got married. My mom had three sisters--I'm getting ahead of myself. But they, they all grew up in, in-- Speaker 1: Did your mother grow up on that same farm that was purchased back in the 19-- Speaker 2: Well for a few years. Her, her mother died when she was six years old and, and then her father gave the four daughters to different relatives to raise. And so they, they, they were raised in different parts of the country based on which aunt or uncle took you in. And, and so my mother was taken in by an aunt and uncle who had moved from Alabama to Nashville. Now all the family history between when Emily Turner was freed and when she married, is a part I'm, I'm still vague on. But it's documented in the various family histories that we have. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just haven't memorized all of it. Speaker 1: Are there any Haitian survivals in the family in terms of-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Haitian names or-- Speaker 2: [unclear] names. Speaker 1: Or religious practices or-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Anything like that, yeah. Speaker 2: Everybody's been Americanized. Speaker 1: Well you know there, there's even some African survivals in African Americans now but we have to--it took a little searching around to figure them out, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Cause we didn't recognize them-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered if there's anything--any stories or did people in your family pass down any stories about Haiti? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 95306 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so your mother was really raised in Nashville [Tennessee] like you said, okay. Did, did she--what, what did she say about being raised in Nashville? Speaker 2: She loved it. She, she wanted to get--she, she liked her aunt and uncle so much that she wanted to be with them wherever they were, and just so happened they were in Nashville and they were working class poor people. But it was a chance to go with a family that--a part of the family that, that really liked you a lot. And so she told me that they had come to Athens [Alabama] for a funeral and, and she saw them at the funeral and she begged them to take her with them when they went back home. And she was probably six or eight years old then. And they couldn't turn her down. And so she went there and took care of them in their old age and, and saw them away when they got old, and stayed. She loved Nashville and, and the rest of the family did also. Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did she go to Pearl High School? Speaker 2: Pearl High School. Speaker 1: I figured, yeah, okay. Did, now did she go on to higher education? Speaker 2: She went to Tennessee State for two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay Tennessee--now what did she concentrate on at Tennessee State? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. You--was she, did she have aspirations to become a teacher? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother never talked, talked about the-- Speaker 2: She always told us she went there, that was about it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. She never said that she had aspirations to be a nurse or a teacher or anything like that or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. What did she end up doing? Speaker 2: Raising three kids and managing a family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Managing a family is a big job. And then she also was a, a, a very committed, committed parent first of all. And she was a committed volunteer. Very active in, in civic work and community, and in the church. Speaker 1: Okay. What was, what was the name of her church? Speaker 2: Saint Luke's CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church, Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. Speaker 1: Okay, and Nashville is one of the homes of the CME church. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I think Lane College is a CME college. Speaker 2: Well Lane and Jackson. Speaker 1: Jackson, okay. Speaker 2: And then the CME Church headquarters are in, in Memphis [Tennessee]. And Nashville's one of their big outposts. It was a bigger outpost years ago when I was younger, but now it's still just a big out, outpost. Story_ID: 95307 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William Harris, Stuart, Junior. No, he was William Harris, Stuart, Senior. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was--January- January--what's is his birth? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Twelfth Speaker 2: January 12th, 1920. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born? Speaker 2: Athens, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay same, same place. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Not a lot. A little bit. His father was a masonry contractor and he was one of 11 or 12 brothers and sisters. His father built railroad supply depots along the route from Athens to Nashville. And so he moved the family to Nashville when my dad was very young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they built a house in Nashville. He was very, very young. Shrewd businessman and got involved in various business enterprises in Nashville early on. Speaker 1: Now this is your grandfather, right? Speaker 2: My grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then most of the boys became masonry contractors, my dad did also, carried the trade on. And, and the Stuart family also when they came from Athens, they went to the same church that my mother was going to. I think it was all coincidental, though. Speaker 1: Did, do you--cause I heard other stories like this where people from the same home town end up congregating at the same church in a bigger city. Speaker 2: That makes sense. Speaker 1: So, I mean I don't know if it's--but, but you think it's coincidental? Speaker 2: I think it was. Speaker 1: Okay. It could be, but you know-- Speaker 2: Or so it was just like word-of-mouth, try the church out. Speaker 1: Now were they, were they CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] in Athens? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so dad attended the same church. Speaker 2: Early on, early on. Speaker 1: Did your father attend Pearl too? Speaker 2: No, he dropped out of school in eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so he was--he knew he had a trade as a contractor, right, is that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a masonry contractor. Kind of funny though, cause [unclear] was an avid reader, one of the best, best, best mathematicians you'll find around cause he had to figure jobs and, and make like bids and make profit. And, and quite an organizing manager. So a lot of the things he would have learned had he stayed in school, he learned by doing and was--became a, you know just a good exercise to watch him as he looked at blueprints for proposed jobs. And he'd figure out, you know, what he needed in terms of concrete, bricks, blocks, scaffolding, two by fours, whole nine yards. And he could figure out his whole job money-wise to make it work. And he loved reading paperback westerns. In his time there probably wasn't a western he hadn't read. Speaker 1: I take it he read all the Louis L'Amour books. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was a big Louis L'Amour-- Speaker 1: Zane Grey. Speaker 2: Connoisseur--Zane Grey, yeah. Speaker 1: Now so he attended St. Luke CME too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 95308 Speaker 1: Now is this--is there a story about how your parents met? Now they're at the same church. I take it they--that might be where they-- Speaker 2: That's where they met, yeah. Speaker 1: Is there a story about it? Speaker 2: If so, I don't recall it. But I know that when they met, they became fast friends early. She was I think 18 or 19 when they got married. And, and they stayed married for three or four decades. It was, it was a good union and no marriage is perfect, but this is good as it's gonna get. It was a lot of fun. And so they, they stayed with St. Luke [CME Christian Methodist Episcopal] their whole life. And, and the children did also when we were in Nashville. And that's our "home church". Now and so we--it kind of grow and ebb and ebb and flow and ebb and flow. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather--when St. Luke started, it was a small, one building, wooden frame building, right. And my grandfather helped build the next two "additions" of the church. Again, masonry contractor, so he did it as a, as a gift to the church, just the labor cost, he didn't make any money. And the church exists now--my grandfather and his crew built at no cost to the congregation. And so it, it, it sort of was something we did as part of the family doing stuff for our church. Story_ID: 95309 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now when you think about your parents' talents, their capacities, their dispositions, their--the way they look, they way they walk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: A little bit of both. My mother [Maxie Allen Stuart] was the writer in the family, she wrote all the time, she wrote all the time. My dad [William Stuart] was the businessman and, and so I've tried to emulate some of the things he did. And so you might say I'm a, a, a semi-decent blend of the best of both of them. He had a good sense of humor, a dry sense of humor. They both liked to cook and so I try to cook. So I think I got, I got the best of, of both worlds. Story_ID: 95310 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one brother, one sister. Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you fit in the lineup? Speaker 2: I'm the last. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: I was a, I was a distant third. Speaker 1: By how many years? Speaker 2: Seven. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so who came, who is the oldest? Speaker 2: My brother. Speaker 1: Okay, now he's a junior I take it, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's William Harris Stuart, Junior. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he was born in what year? Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942]. Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942]. Speaker 2: That sounds good. I think it was '42 [1942]. Speaker 1: Okay and your sister? Speaker 2: Three, four years later. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: I have to get my reference papers to give you the specifics. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and your sister's name is? Speaker 2: Cassandra, Cassandra Ann Stuart. And when she got married she became a Woods, Cassandra Ann Woods. Speaker 1: Okay, so the household when you were growing up consisted of your mother and your father and-- Speaker 2: Older brother, older sister. Speaker 1: And yourself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did your--any of your grandparents live with you or uncles and aunts and-- Speaker 2: My mother's uncle became grandfather--lived with us until he died. And nobody else did. Speaker 1: Okay so he was in the house when you were growing up for the most part? Speaker 2: For a couple of years, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather on my dad's side, they lived a block from us. And so he kept the house that he built when they moved to Alabama from Nashville. And we could easily walk to his house in about three minutes on a cold day, you know a minute on a, on a hot day. Just walk up the alley and one house and we were in his backyard. And so he didn't live with us cause he lived within the same neighborhood. My grandmother on my dad's side, his wife died when I was a kid. And, and then my grandmother, aunt on my mom's side died when I was a kid. And the uncle, grandfather died--living with us, died when I was a kid. I was probably no more than eleven or twelve. Story_ID: 95311 Speaker 1: Okay. Now sir do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah. Falling off a bicycle. It was a ragtag neighborhood bicycle. Falling off the back and, and the bicycle behind me rolling over my hand and just, you know left me sort of semi-mangled for a minute, you know. I thought I was dead for a second, right. You got your hand rolled over, that's all. Speaker 1: Okay, how old were you when that happened? Speaker 2: Probably six, seven or eight. Speaker 1: So that, that's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Well before that. I remember going to kindergarten, yeah. A little place called Miller's Kindergarten. I remember going to kindergarten. And that was a lot of fun. Teachers were nice. And the lady who drove us every morning was a nice person. I've forgotten her name. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That's about as early as we're gonna get. Story_ID: 95312 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you grow up in the same house the whole time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So can you describe the house for us? Speaker 2: It's a, a two story brick house. It was built by my grandfather. It was built as a wedding gift to my father and his new bride. And all they had to pay was the house note, but the construction work was no cost. It was a, a, a nice two story brick house. We had real plaster walls and, and hardwood floors and you know a nice back porch and a nice back yard. So it was like a neat place, yeah. Speaker 1: So your grandfather built this from scratch, he builds them a house as a wedding present. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's a--so your father was, was moving into a real, this is a real commitment here when you get married and you have a house built for you by your father. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they, they had to wait a little while to get the house because it took three or four months to get it built, right. And so they stayed somewhere nearby while the house was being built. But you know he--that was his son, he was gone do what he could for him, so he built him a house. That's what he knew how to do, build houses. Speaker 1: Okay. So now was the house built in a, in a neighborhood that had a name? Speaker 2: I don't think we had a name. We had a street name. Speaker 1: Okay, and what side of Nashville would you call it? Would, would it be-- Speaker 2: We were in north Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay, north Nashville. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're about three miles walking distance from downtown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we're in an area that I call the University District, I don't know what other people call it, because we're right in the, in the middle of three universities; Tennessee State, Fisk, and Meharry Medical College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So all the children born in Meharry Medical College, right. All the children went to Tennessee State. All the children went to Pearl High School. You know it was a pretty--not an airtight cage, was a, a close knit neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so if you were in Nashville, people just called it north Nashville? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Pretty much. Speaker 2: Nkay. Story_ID: 95313 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Think back to when you were growing up and describe the sights, sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Well the sounds were music. We had, had the fortunate--something was unfortunate. We had the fortunate situation of, of living off of a main street in which there were several clubs. And that attracted well known talent at the time. And we lived on a street that was one street over, behind us, from another club. And so they sort of took turns bringing in all the hot groups. And so if you opened the windows in the spring time and summer time, right, you had all this music, original music by the artists, free of charge. And since they played at night, you could just get serenaded to sleep listening to the likes of Bill Doggett and Brook Penton and Jackie Wilson and Clyde McPhatter and James Brown and Ruth Brown. They came through every weekend. In those days when I was a kid, right, there were, there were few places for black artists to perform. And so they were limited to this big club on the main street in north Nashville called Jefferson Street, or to the Recreation Center behind me called Maseo's Recreation Center. And so if you want to draw more than 100 people, you performed at one of those two places. You didn't perform downtown and everything else was a much smaller nightclub setting. So if you're gonna draw a crowd, you know you were there. And they were there you know, I was there for rehearsal in the afternoon, course we couldn't go to the club at night time. And listened to it at night time, see how it sounded, see if it came off the way they practiced it. Story_ID: 95314 Speaker 1: All right, now your parents [Maxie Allen Stuart and William Stuart] were married in 1939, that year, and your brother William was born in 1940 and your sister in 1941. Speaker 2: Right. That sounds better. Speaker 1: Okay, now seven years-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now one aspect of your father we didn't discuss was his Scrabble playing. Can you tell us about his Scrabble? Speaker 2: Well in addition to being a, a, a real avid reader and you know a mathematician, he was a wordsmith. And he wasn't the kind of writer the way, the way my mother was, but, but he understood words and understood language, and, and he polished his skill--one way he polished his skills, he'd play Scrabble. He had a Scrabble game and anyone who came to the house, right, he'd challenge them to a Scrabble game, right, and he'd send them out of the house you know, begging for mercy. He was, he was a very learned person for one who did not have a extended, formal education. Speaker 1: Now I heard that he beat a number of professors and such. Did, did he have-- Speaker 2: Everybody, yeah. Speaker 1: Did, did he have a lot of friends that were teachers and-- Speaker 2: Well we had a lot of people who were, who had, had gotten higher education because we lived in this university district, right. And so over the years we'd rent rooms to people who went to college, everybody in the, in the neighborhood did. You know we knew all the people at the colleges and, and the medical school, right, one way or another. And so they'd come by, we had a very open house. And people would come by, especially on the holidays, or just to drop in, and he'd challenge them to an hour of Scrabble. You got an extra hour and a half, come by and play a game of Scrabble. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had one cousin in particular who would come, come to town visiting and he always came around to play a game of Scrabble and he got beat every year consistently, no matter how he tried. Just got stomped. And, and my dad was a Scrabble king. Story_ID: 95315 Speaker 1: Okay now when we--at, at the break we were discussing music and you were talking about the venues on Jefferson Street. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, and you know where people like Ruth Brown, James Brown, Bill Doggett, Clyde McPhatter. Speaker 2: Jackie Wilson. Speaker 1: Jackie Wilson. Speaker 2: Brook Denton, Sims Twins, Sam Cooke, all, all the, the popular singers of that era came through town and in order to perform in Nashville, you're gonna perform at one of those two places cause they were the largest places that were handling black talent. Speaker 1: What were the names of the venues? Now what, what was the venue on Jefferson Street? Speaker 2: That was the Club Baron. Speaker 1: Club Baron, okay. Speaker 2: It was owned by a Meharry graduate named Jack Brown. I think Jack Brown finished the School of Pharmacy. And then the other place on Himan Street, H-I-M-A-N, Himan Street, was called Maseo's Recreation Center. That was built by a man who was a contractor and he built this big hall primarily for skating. But he expanded the portfolio and grew, you know, singing artists, recording artists on the weekend. You know so he'd have a remote, radio remote broadcast, skating parties in the afternoon and then at night time it would become a show hall. Now my one greatest achievement in running back and forth to all the restaurants and, and clubs, was at an early age before most of the world ever heard of Ike and Tina Turner, Ike and Tina Turner came through every six or eight months. You know it was a dollar twenty five [$1.25] in advance and a dollar and a half [$1.50] at the door, show how long ago, how far back it was. And I went down to the recreation center one afternoon, one Saturday afternoon as they were arriving to practice. And I had the distinct honor of carrying her bag into the hall. Man I was on cloud nine, right. You heard Ike and Tina Turner on the radio all the time. They were playing the records all the time. And so they were in our world at that time, right, top of the line. And, and they filled the hall that night, right. But I had the honor of having been ambitious enough to run down there and said you need some help unloading your truck, right? Cause they drove a big, long extended Chevrolet truck. I said I'll carry your bags for you. Said okay you can carry my bag. So it's only like carrying a bag, you know, 100 feet, it's like you know, you know a blessed 100 feet, right. It was a great experience. But, but you could--you're gonna see them into the hotels, rights, there was Brown's Hotel. Brown's Hotel was owned by Jack Brown who owned the Club Baron. And there was another hotel, forgot the name of it, right. And so if you were hanging around there, you could see all the artists. And so you'd see them eating breakfast or sitting around just talking. So I got a chance to meet Solomon Burke, the Sims Twins, and four or five other artists, Ted Taylor. Regional stars who were big at their time. And you had a chance to say okay, this is what music is all about, right. They sleep late, they get up in the morning, they eat, they go practice, rehearse, right. They stay up all night long. And they've got to dive when the gunshots start, pow, pow, pow, in the clubs, right. So--and you know that the shows were over every weekend because all the cars were, you know, rev up the engines, right, and you'd always hear some gunfire. There was always some, somebody get into a gun fight in these nightclub scenes. And so it was a routine every weekend, right, you know they, they'd come into town. They'd practice, rehearse. Show starts about eight or 9:00, right, goes to about midnight. You know all the cars crank up you know, blowing the horns on the way in, on the way out, right, and there was gunfire, and the evening was over. And you wait till next weekend, see who's coming to town. Listen to the radio during the week. Speaker 1: Now did people get hurt in this gunfire? Speaker 2: People got killed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they got hurt, yeah. They got the real hurt put on them, yeah they got killed. And so you had, you had your expected regular routine was somebody got shot or killed. But it wasn't, it wasn't unusual somebody--there was a shooting. And it was unusual that you know, and so somebody got killed. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Unfortunately. Story_ID: 95316 Speaker 1: So and you were describing I think before the break of actually being able to go into the clubs, at least to places during the day time when the rehearsals were going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: And actually be able to see the acts like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now what, what did you observe? I mean I've heard so many stories about James Brown directing his band and his being a hard task master. Speaker 2: Never saw that. Speaker 1: Never saw that? Speaker 2: Never saw that, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean other stories, did you--what stories come to mind when you think of those rehearsals? Speaker 2: Well that, that, that these people worked hard at what they did. And that there was a lot of gear to carry around and to set up for a show. Today we have these really, really complicated sets, you know extra baggage. But even in those days before we had, you know, visuals as part of performance and you have 25 dancers jumping around, right. Just the basic stuff you need to--the drums, the guitar sets, the microphones, and it was a lot of gear. So it was a lot of work involved in getting ready to work. And so I, I got an appreciation for that, that if you're gonna have fun, you got to work before you can have the fun. And, and I think from what I could tell they loved what they did. I mean these folks, they could sing, they didn't yell; they could sing. You could understand what they were saying, and they loved what they did. There was no--there were no machines to like do sound compression and, and make your voice stronger. Your voice was what it was. There were no synthesizers to synthesize your voice. Your voices were what they were. And so they, they worked extremely hard on harmony, and, and it was just like wow, I'm sitting right there. And these are guys I actually hear on the record and radio. They're right here. It's like it can't get any better than this, right. [Unclear] so it was real and it was fascinating. Story_ID: 95317 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about that within the context of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What were some of the others? Speaker 2: Those--the sounds was the music, right. The smells were barbecue. My dad [William Stuart, Sr.] was an avid barbecuer. He built a, a pit, first a small one, right. Then a much, much larger one. And we had a routine every Saturday, right. He'd get up around five or 6:00 on Saturday and go down to a yard about ten blocks from us, right. Man sold hickory wood for cooking. And we'd get a, a truckload of hickory wood, right, buy it. And then we'd drive down to city square to a meat market called Reg's Meat Market. And my dad would buy about 50 pounds of, of meat, right. And we'd be home by 6:30. And then he would start a fire in the, in the fireplace or the barbecue pit, right. And the trick is as you, you burn your wood down to ashes, then you take the hot ashes and then move them to the cooking area, the grill. And so while he's doing that, and with my infantile help. My mom [Maxie Allen Stuart] is cleaning the meat, getting it all ready and they're making their barbecue sauce. Cause we made our own barbecue sauce. And so by 7:30 or so at the latest, the meat is, is on the pit, right, on the grill. And we're barbecuing meat until about one, two in the afternoon, sometimes 3:00. And so the whole neighborhood was smoking, all right. All the smoke going up and you could, you could smell the meat. And it's slowly cooking all day long. And so every Saturday that was a routine. When we're done, people came by making barbecue sandwiches, right. Relatives come by, right. People work for my dad would come by, just checking in, right. They knew what time to just check in. Saturday afternoon, right. Cause they get a barbecue sandwich. And then one of my dad's brothers, one of my uncles, owned a variety store, right. And, and so we'd take some meat and make sandwiches he could sell at the store. And so we had to make a, a sandwich run about 5:00. And so if he made 20 sandwiches, we'd do homemade slaw, our own barbecue sauce, he cooked it. And if you get 20 sandwiches by 5:00, they'd be gone by six, people be there waiting on them, yeah. So it was like going just like click, click, click. So that was, that was the other sound. What was the other thing you asked for? Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells. Speaker 2: The sights. The sights were as a young man, right, all the pretty women going to schools. Because all of them lived on our street who rented rooms. The sights were my mom running our house. I mean she made it run like a, a well timed machine, right. She had laundry, she had meals cooked, she had to get us ready to go to school in the morning, right. And I was amazed at, at, at how, how she ran the place and kept it orderly, right. And, and kept everybody in order as best she could. And that was one of the sights. Story_ID: 95318 Speaker 1: The other thing was, was as I got older, was the sights of our dining room table in our dining room, right, which, which believe it or not, my mom and dad [William Stuart, Sr. and Maxie Allen Stuart] were, were accommodating enough to let me litter for two or three days a week to put out my little newspaper. Cause I'd get the paper printed, right. And I got someplace to put all these papers so I can assemble the newspaper. So I needed that dining room table, that was like essential. Speaker 2: So we're skipping over a part. Now the, the part that you created a newspaper when you were-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so how old were you when you did this? Speaker 1: Nine or ten. Speaker 2: Nine or ten, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah I published it for three years. It started out weekly and then later on became monthly. Speaker 2: Now what's the scope of it? I mean what, what did you cover? Speaker 1: The neighborhood. It was appropriately named The Neighborhood Times. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I covered the neighborhood. And so first we printed on what's called a hectograph. A hectograph is, is like a bowl of jello. And so you type up on this little carbon mat, right, and you put the mat on the jello. The ink comes off on the jello and you put clear paper on the jello and make copies. So it went from the hectograph to finding someone at the hospital who did printing on the side, and I found an aunt at the hospital who would type up the, the stencils for me and then we got them printed at the hospital. Speaker 2: So you printed it as a mimeograph like I said, blue-- Speaker 1: A multigraph, a multiple duplicator. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: An electric machine. Speaker 2: Was it blue ink or, or-- Speaker 1: No, blue ink is where I started, that was hectograph. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And then it went to black and white. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then it, and then it, it had to end at some point cause I had other things to do and I got sick so I couldn't do it anymore. Story_ID: 95319 Speaker 1: All right, so I don't want to go too much further right now, but I wanna go back to the beginning of school and then we'll bring you back up to this point when you're doing this. Cause we have to get some background as to how you had got this idea. So can you tell us about school I guess? What was your first school? Speaker 2: Miller's Kindergarten. Speaker 1: Miller's Kindergarten, okay. Could you read by the time you started school or-- Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew my alphabets, but I couldn't read. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're like, you're five years old in kindergarten? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right did you have--well kindergarten is pretty simple. So let's move on to I guess--did you, you learn how to read in kindergarten? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: It's--I know they didn't do that in the '50s [1950's] much. Speaker 2: No. You learned how to, how to--you learned alphabets and you learned how to sit down and, and pay attention. I didn't do good at that. Did a little of that and you learn how to meet other people and socialize and, and organize. Speaker 1: Okay, so now what about first grade? Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: Ford Green Elementary School. Speaker 1: It's called-- Speaker 2: Ford. Speaker 1: Ford Green. Speaker 2: G-R-E-E-N Elementary School. That was about a mile and a half from where I grew up. Speaker 1: Okay, Ford Green. Now was it named for a black educator named Ford Green, or-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Probably was, I think it was but I don't, I don't recall. Speaker 1: Okay, now all right. Now in elementary school, now you--this is where you learned to read and write. Were there any particular teachers here who stand out? Speaker 2: Well the one who stands out the--they all stand out. The one who stands out the most was my fourth grade teacher. A lady named Mary Hardy. Now Ms. Hardy in addition to having a generous supply of cosmetics on every day, right. Speaker 1: A generous, yeah. Speaker 2: Ms. Hardy was a wonderful teacher. And she was the first person to recognize that in order to, to keep me on track, right, she had to figure out something for me to do. Cause I was a busy young man. And so she made me the classroom weatherman. And that's when I really got the habit of reading the newspaper nailed down, and public speaking. Because I had to come to school every day prepared to give a like two minute weather forecast to the class. And so I learned how to find the weather page in the newspaper, how to figure out, organize my thoughts, what I wanted to say [unclear] a couple of minutes, and to get in front of the class and, and give them weather forecasts. Now why I didn't become a weatherman later in life, I have no idea. That said, Ms. Hardy launched the career that I, I pursued in information, communication, public speaking, networking with people. I was never afraid to talk to people, but she gave it focus. And, and, and made it, made it important for me to understand that when you have something to say, make sure you have something to say. And so giving people the weather was something important. And so she took care of that, that nervous energy that kids have at that age, and was able to harness it all and, and channel it. And so I was like on top of the world, I was the weatherman for the class in fourth grade. And, and she and I remained close to each other up until over mid 1990's just before she died. She was the best teacher in elementary school I ever had, and one of the best teachers I ever had, and I had good teachers all along. But she stood out because she, she made me do something special and I got it done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Gave me some room to sink or swim and I, I swam. I don't take on challenges to fail. Story_ID: 95320 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you started the paper you say when you were eleven I think it was. Speaker 2: About fifth or sixth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: That's ten or eleven, so she was your fourth grade teacher. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, so she kind of set the stage for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she set the stage for, for me doing stuff in a constructive way. And then by the time I got to the fifth or sixth grade, I had this crazy idea of putting out my own newspaper. I, I had known from early childhood somehow, that, that Nashville [Tennessee] was a, is a, was a newspaper town. It's very big on, on communicating. We had two very strong newspapers at that time. They both hated each other. And we had several community newspapers, and the black readers. And they came out weekly. And they were very informative. They told us things as community newspapers that the morning and afternoon daily did not tell us. And so there was a man named Leonard Thomlinson, T-H-O-M-L-I-N-S-O-N, who owned one of these small weeklies. And I used to catch him every, every week when he brought the paper by, and ask him about his newspaper. And pretty soon I had the bug, I wanted to start one of my own. So where his paper was a community paper, right, mine was like this--things tell about [unclear]. Mine was a micro-zone, hyper local, hyper local newspaper. I covered my street. I covered a street like [unclear]. So I wrote about--I got the lady who was the--who ran the restaurant at the Maseo's Recreation Center to do a cooking column for me. I got my aunt who worked at the hospital, to do like a secretarial tips column for me. I wrote the gossip column about all the people on the street who were dating. I wrote a music column. Speaker 1: That could be dangerous. I'm just saying. Speaker 2: Well you just used initials, right, so you can kind of guess all week long. [unclear] cause it was a small neighborhood. And so I, I had a music column and, and I'd go to hotels to interview these recording artists, right. And I'd have a Q and A every week with some recording artists. And then I have you know some general news story that I thought was newsworthy from the hospital or from the Fire Department or something, to round the paper out. And I would sell ads. And so I went around the neighborhood and sold ads because I needed a profit making venture. I was used to being in a profit making environment where people did stuff in business, they made a profit. My dad [William Stuart, Sr.] made a profit in his business, my granddad made a profit in his business, right, my uncles did who were in business. And so if I were to have a newspaper, I knew Mr. Thomlinson made a profit. I didn't understand the profit and loss concept yet, right, just that he was making money. And so I started a newspaper and I made money. Now granted I got discounts on everything, right. Cause it was this nice little kid doing nice stuff. And so I had artificial profit, probably right. Cause no one would charge me the real price. But I learned the idea of, of having a regular publication, of, of having to work hard to gather information, to get people to work with me. So I had these various columns I wanted, right, and give them space. And, and then went about my business, had a good time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 95321 Speaker 1: And so again we get back to the dining room table, right. Once all the papers printed, you get, you know, four or five reams of paper. You got three or 4,000 sheets of paper, you got them from somewhere. And you got to sort them out page, and page, and page. And you go around and collect them, right. And then you staple them, you know. You do 8 and a half by eleven sheets and, and you do 200 copies a week, right, or a month, whatever it was later on. And, and there you go. And so my newspapers was out there on the market too. And it cost initially five cents a copy, it went up to 20 cents and people still bought it. And when it became a national publication and I'll tell you know. Send copies to your relatives in other states. And then we became serving internationally, right. And so, so, so I asked my mom [Maxie Allen Stuart] could I send copies to my aunts in Chicago and, and our relatives in Alabama and you know, people we knew in North Carolina. And so I had a mail day, right, and had about 20 copies I'd pull out of the pile, right. And that would be the national circulation. And so you could maybe claim that your newspaper was distributed nationally. You had a national audience just by, by using the vehicles that you have, which was the extended family. Speaker 2: Okay. It sounds like how--so Speaker 1: Sound like a con job you say, what did you say? Speaker 2: No I didn't say, I didn't say that. Speaker 1: So did you have any help at all in terms of the writing and preparation? Speaker 2: Well I got a little help every now and then. But I didn't have any, any regular help. Speaker 1: No assistant editors, or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no, nobody--people didn't understand this, nor did I really. And so that's why I had to rely on, on people who had some expertise in what they did to write columns for me because that would help fill the book up. And I'd just get me a couple good news stories and write, write the Q and A's where people interviewed. And, and we're ready to go. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a cartoonist? Speaker 2: Yes. He's now a medical doctor in Omaha, Nebraska. He was, he was a student at Tennessee State and he rented a room from us, his name was Roy Holyfield. And I needed a cartoonist, and he could draw basic cartoons. And so some of these issues--cause I had an editorial page, right. So some of these issues had cartoons that he would draw and, and so I had an artist, a resident cartoonist, editorials, news stories. Everything you get in a newspaper. Speaker 1: You have photographs? You couldn't do-- Speaker 2: Later, very, very--you know later on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I hadn't figured out yet how to make it work. If I had figured out--if I knew how to make photographs work with what I was doing, I would have had them much earlier. Also, putting photographs in back in that time was expensive. And so my cost went way up because the printer had to send the artwork out to be put on a different kind of plate, a metal plate. And so then a metal plate, to get a metal plate burned, a photograph, would cost me like 12, I'm gonna say 12 dollars per page. And that just ate into my profit. And that was real money. And so I just couldn't do that. So you had to be literal to read this paper, you had to like to read. You had to like to read stuff written at the elementary school, junior high school level. Speaker 1: Before we leave the paper, can you think of--do you have a favorite story from the--your neighborhood times days? Speaker 2: No, they were all good. No. No, every issue that came out was, was for my age at that time, good. Wasn't good, didn't get in the paper. Story_ID: 95322 Speaker 1: Okay so it [his neighborhood newspaper] lasted about three years. So that puts us up to almost high school, right? Speaker 2: Seventh, ended in the seventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so beginning eighth grade, it's over with. Did you, did you feel a sense of failure? Speaker 2: No. I had, I had to quit. I was, I was, I was ill and, and the doctors decided that I was doing too much and that was, that was aggravating my illness. Speaker 1: So what happened to you physically? Speaker 2: I had, I was diagnosed with epilepsy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and so the doctor said you know let's cut out all this stuff that's putting extra strain on your system, right. And the paper's got to go. So the paper had to go. And away it went. Speaker 1: Okay now how did epilepsy manifest itself with you? I mean most of the cases I've read about, the people--there's a-- Speaker 2: I was having a terrible time at first. I was passing out around the house and getting seizure, having seizures, yeah. It was, it was like a real strange time cause nobody knew what was going on. And so we went to Meharry [Medical College] to see a pediatrician named Edward Caldwell And, and Dr. Caldwell did a couple of tests and it took him a week or two to figure out what it was. And, and then they told me this is what you can do, right. And, and so they put me on some medication to control the, the nerve part. And, and that worked. And about six, seven years I was like seizure free and the rest was history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But for a year or two it was, it was, it was touch and go. Cause you have your seizures in the middle of the night and you, you know they're just massive muscle, muscle convulsions. And my mom was always there and the doctor was always there. And so my mom and dad were very supportive when I was having a rough time. And the doctor knew what he was doing. He was good. One day I'll tell you, we went to the doctor's office and he was, he was chronically late all the time because when people went to see him, he would see anybody who came to see him. Like number one. And number two, people frequently had multiple issues. And so one day we were sitting in his waiting room cause his office is at the hospital. And he was seeing a, a lady and she had brought her son in about my age. And all of a sudden it was a big crash in the doctor's office, in his, in his council chamber. And my mom and I kind of looked up, we wondered what happened. So she said we'll ask when we go see him. So we're the next, next after this [unclear], right. And, and so my mom asked what happened. She says--and he said well, I just told her that her son has about six months to live. He'd been diagnosed with leukemia or something. And at that time they weren't giving you a long life span. And then he fainted in the office. And so I realized how lucky I was that I didn't have anything worse than, than this. He was not giving any predictions of life ending real soon. And that was cool. That was cool. But, but I got a real early introduction to young people dying and how your parents respond. It's devastating. Story_ID: 95323 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you--now when did you go to middle school, or, or junior high school? Speaker 2: Well I went to junior high school for two years. Yeah, and then I got-- Speaker 1: What was the name, name, name of the school? Speaker 2: Washington Junior High school. Speaker 1: Washington Junior High School. Speaker 2: Don't ask me who it's named after; I have no idea. Named after Mr. Washington, I know it wasn't a lady. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Washington Junior High School was a mile and three quarter from where I lived, it was a walk. We got a lot of exercise when I was a kid. Speaker 1: So this is like 1961 or six--I mean '60 [1960] to '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Now the reason why I was only in high school for--junior high school for two years is that, that I found out from a girl who lived down the street from me that you could skip the ninth grade if you went to summer school every summer and took your, your principle courses in the ninth grade. Your English, your math and your history, nine hours. So if you went after seventh grade summer, eighth grade summer, they let you skip the tenth grade and you come back the next summer and take the third ninth grade course. So lo and behold, I'm in a hurry to get where I don't know, right. So I said I'm gone do this. And so I, I went to seventh grade, went to summer school, took this course. Went to eighth grade, summer school, you know the second course. And immediately went to the tenth grade. So I left all my elementary and junior high school classmates and leaped up one. Well I get so excited about this thing, I found out you could do the same thing in high school. So I went to high school year round for three summers in high school. So I finished high school a year early. So I'm actually out of high school like, hold on. Yeah, ten, 11, 12. No I finished college, that's what it was. I finished, finished high school a year early cause I skipped the ninth grade. Speaker 1: So you finished when you were 17? Speaker 2: I was 16. Speaker 1: Sixteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, [unclear]. Speaker 1: All right, so this is the high school-- Speaker 2: Sixty five [1965]. Speaker 1: Sixty five [1965], all right. Speaker 2: And I should have been class of '66 [1966], but I finished in '65 [1965]. Now I'm up there with both classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now when I went to college, I did the same thing. One year out of three years, and left, left my freshman cohort and got through in three years. What I was in a hurry for, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't wanna get you in college yet. But Pearl High School, now what were your--some of your activities at Pearl? Speaker 2: I was busy. Speaker 1: Were you on the student newspaper there? Speaker 2: I was editor of the student newspaper. I was the statistician for the basketball team. I sold ads for the high school yearbook because price was too high so I was trying to help get the price down so everybody could afford to buy one. I was in a social club cause we didn't like the big social clubs. We-- Speaker 1: What, what did you call it? Speaker 2: It was the Criterion Civic and Social Club. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was all little square, nerdy boys. And so we were part of that, we started then. So I was a high school--I was the announcer at the football games. I was the announcer at the basketball games. And I got the principal with us do a morning news announcement thing on the PA [public address] system through the school. So we started WPHS, our on campus radio station. It came on once a week for five minutes. And we'd broadcast to all the classrooms, right. And basically read all, all the announcements of what's going on that week, and that was it. After that they'd say well turn it off, go back to class. And, and so high school was like a lot of fun and the teachers were really good people. We had teachers who, who demanded a lot out of us. But they also gave us a lot of inspiration to do things. And they would tell you in a minute whether you're being lazy, whether you're being trifling. You know they wouldn't hold back. But they did it in such a way that, that you knew they really cared. They didn't--we didn't know what was out there beyond high school, right, but they did. And they were getting us ready for it, and they did. Story_ID: 95324 Speaker 1: Now, now when you were in--I'm gonna ask you about some of these teachers before we leave high school. But you were in junior high school and high school during the times of the sit-in activists. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they were all around that Nashville [Tennessee] area. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: At Fisk [University] and-- Speaker 2: Tennessee State [University]. Speaker 1: Tennessee State and the Bible, what's the Bible school? Speaker 2: American Baptist, yeah. Speaker 1: American Baptist, ABT [American Baptist College] Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: James Lawson. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Lester McKinney.John Lewis, Diane Nash, I knew them all. Speaker 1: Right, James Bevel. Speaker 2: James Bevel. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Some I knew more than others, but I knew them all. Speaker 1: Who were the ones you knew the, the most, I mean the best? Speaker 2: [HM]John Lewis and Lester McKinney. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: John Lewis is now a member of Congress. They were all in school in Nashville. And, and they would organize marches downtown. We're like--the campuses are at a maximum three miles from the heart of downtown. You could walk downtown if you weren't lazy. And also Jefferson Street which I mentioned earlier, was the main route to get downtown from north Nashville. All the schools were close to Jefferson Street. And so Jefferson Street ended at Tennessee State campus. You go on the route from 28th Avenue to 18th Avenue you have Meharry [Medical College] and Fisk. You go down to Fifth Avenue, you're downtown. Take a little right turn, puts you right downtown. So when they organized marches, they would start at Tennessee State, go down Jefferson Street, past Meharry and Fisk, pick up some more critical mass, and keep marching downtown. There wasn't a kid in those neighborhoods, they were all well populated neighborhoods, who didn't want to help out and do something. So we all kind of like became hangers on, right. If your parents told you to get home and leave that stuff alone, right, you would. If your parents were willing to let you do something, you'd do what you could beg them to let you do. So I asked my mother if I could go down to the student organizing office and help staple the placards on the little short wooden sticks. I'd do that. And I wanted to march. So the deal was, and John Lewis and Lester McKinney came to the house to assure my mom I'd be okay. That was most important. The deal was I could march from 26th and Jefferson Street to 18th and Jefferson Street. And that would be the part I could play. But at that point, I had to come home. You talking about the proudest little marcher. I was in the march and doing my part at my little young age, right. Going up Jefferson with all the big kids when they would go downtown and make a difference. Later on after the, the major marches had stopped and we began to do picket signs and picket lines and, and boycotts in the neighborhoods at some of the restaurants that wouldn't desegregate and the places that wouldn't hire black people, right. I participated in those activities as well. And, and that was great. So I got a chance to, to do a picket line at a couple of restaurants, including the one where I later proposed to my wife to marry me. Did picket line there and got that restaurant to integrate and hire black people and let them come in and eat. I did a picket line at a drive-in market like little 7-11. If, if you were, if you were doing business in our neighborhood, the least you could do is let us work there and earn some of the money you're, you're earning, right. And it was, it was a, it was a simple concept of sharing the profit. So we, we set up picket lines there and it took a few months, but the owners finally surrendered. People wouldn't come in, they wouldn't cross the picket line. And they hired a black man there that was cashier. Wow, what a thought. Man that restaurant was full every day afterwards, right, until it closed. And it was real simple. You could still make money. If you want to make money in our neighborhood, just share it. Nobody's gonna break anything, nobody's gonna puncture any tires, wasn't gonna throw any rocks or anything. We're still nonviolent, right. But we were determined and we were focused to get some things done that made simple sense. Nothing major. Didn't wanna own the store, we had enough other little businesses in the neighborhood we owned. But the ones that were here that were not locally owned, show a little respect. You know let us share a part of the profits. And I had fun doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, this is while you're in middle school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And through--how long did they-- Speaker 2: Through tenth grade. Speaker 1: Through tenth, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Through, through, through tenth, eleventh grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 95325 Speaker 1: Do, do you remember--let's see-I've interviewed so many people that were students around there at that time. I know [HM] Nikki Giovanni was down there I think at some point, I don't know if she was there then. Speaker 2: She was there at some point, but I'm not sure when. She was there-- Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, early in the '60s [1960s], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who, who, who- Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So she, she got there late. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We did all the work for them. Speaker 1: All right, it was already done. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But then the Club Baron was about to close down and Maseo's Recreation Center, cause the area had been integrated, right. And so the groups cold book downtown, stay at the hotels downtown. People were, were--people were free to do things. The movies were integrated [unclear] '65 [1965]. But there was a, a very, very intense three or four years when people were really focused on opening that town up and making it be what we all thought it was; our city. Everybody's city. And that was a real shame to realize that it wasn't everybody's city. They really weren't free, it was insulting almost. And so we had to do what we had to do and do it peacefully to get it done, be persistent. Story_ID: 95326 Speaker 1: Okay. So well in high school, let's talk about some of your activities in high school dealing with the newspaper. Did you, you run for class office? Speaker 2: I was the Business Manager of the senior class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We didn't have much money and didn't have much business, but I was the Business Manager. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now did your teams do any good as--you were statistician, did you have to write down how many points they scored, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were city champion every year I was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Champion in, in-- Speaker 2: Basketball. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and a top team in football. We were the state champions in basketball. Basketball competition was more organized because in, in, in those years, as you have now, they had regions and, and basketball associations. But we also had something called the National High School Basketball Association. Whereas, whereas the state champs in every state in the south would play each other. And this was something concocted by Tennessee State as a recruiting tool. And so all the state champions, [unclear] High School in Mississippi, Parker High School in Alabama, and, and so on. They all came to Nashville for this big national high school championship, and we won that too, year after year after year. We, we had great players. We sent players to the pro ranks. Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that you sent? Speaker 2: Theodore McClain, Al McClain went to Louisville. We sent Henry Watkins up to college ball. Who else went to college ball? Ryan Lawson went to college ball. One of the two guys who won at Loyola went to Pearl High School. Speaker 1: When they won NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Vic Rouse or-- Speaker 2: Right, one of them went to Pearl High School. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so we had a long legacy of, of outstanding players. And so when I got there, you know I got lucky enough to get on the team of a machine that was, that was well oiled and well tuned and, and we'd win games by like 40 point margins. My high school team was the same way. The high--junior high school team. Junior high school team, we had a record of, of I think it was 63 to three. The, the coaches were good and so we were--Washington Junior High was a feeder school for Pearl High School. And, and you just had a, a winning mentality and a winning track record that went from junior high school to high school. And we didn't brag about it, we just did it. We didn't brag about winning, we just won. And it was, it was a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay, now yeah, also the track team, especially the women's track team at Tennessee State was national quality. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Wilma Rudolph, [unclear] Matias, and then we had Ralph Boston at Tennessee State. And so, and so the, the, the sense that you were among winners permeated north Nashville. We're outstanding doctors cause we had this hospital. Outstanding teachers cause we had good teachers in high school and college, right. Outstanding athletes. I mean what's wrong with you? Why, why can't you try to be a winner? It's all around you. Just, just smell the air, sense it all. Story_ID: 95327 Speaker 1: Now did you ever consider going to any other college other than Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: I didn't know you could. We knew--we, we all knew we were going to college. But growing up like we all knew you finish high school, you go to Tennessee State. The smart kids finished high school and went elsewhere, they go to Fisk. I know I couldn't go to Fisk [University]. That's for smart kids. And some kids went off to like Harvard [University] and these schools out of town. But, but I didn't know you could go to all those schools. I knew you could go to Tennessee State. And so, and my goal was to get out of high school soon as I could, so I could be at Tennessee State. Nobody mentioned there were schools in California. I didn't know there were schools in California. But I knew there was Tennessee State. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were already familiar with some of the students and activities over there and so it seems like a natural-- Speaker 2: I grew up there, yeah. Speaker 1: Now who, who was the president when you started at Tennessee State? Speaker 2: Walter Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. Now before we get you out of Pearl, now did you graduate with any honors or anything from Pearl? Speaker 2: In the high school yearbook, I was recognized as "Most in Need of a Hair Cut". Speaker 1: Really? So did you wear your hair long? Speaker 2: No. It was a baby picture. But I always needed a haircut. So, so they asked us to give baby pictures, right. And, and lo and behold, there I was [unclear] as a baby, like you know, six, seven months old. Hair all over my head. And so I was recognized on--in the Superlative Section as most in need of a haircut. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Otherwise, I graduated as a, a graduate. No outstanding this, that and the other. I got a couple of school letters for Speech and Drama Club and things like that, but no. Was I valedictorian or salutatorian? I could salute, nope, that was it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well you had, you had decent grades, enough to get into college and, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, if they winked, I could get in. Speaker 1: You were writing and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And editing and that sort of thing. So, so you go to Tennessee State. Did they give you any kind of a scholarship or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, just a regular old kid. But they were, they were looking for me because they knew I was the head of, of the Pearl High School paper, right. Which [unclear], right. But they had heard, you know when they were looking for me. And, and I didn't work on the school paper. Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: No. I had a totally different college experience. Back when I was in the tenth grade, going back to my music, right. I really wanted to be a DJ [disc jockey]. And so I had talked the local radio station after four or five months of going back and forth, into letting me do a half hour show every Saturday. And by the time I got to college, right, I was a full-fledged amateur DJ. And so I was playing music at dances on the weekend, things of that sort. And so that's how I started college. I did not want to do the paper, I wanted to do music. Story_ID: 95328 Speaker 1: And then by the time I was halfway through college, I ran into some other fellow students who wanted to start a band. And so the thing I could do best was manage the band, mold the band. I couldn't play an instrument, although I tried [unclear] school. I couldn't carry a tune, but I could sing in the shower, right. But I could manage a band. I can count your money, organize your money, find you a place to perform, right, and get you there on time. And get the clothes cleaned, all the back shop stuff. Speaker 2: Okay, so what was the name of your band, your band? Speaker 1: The Fabulous Nu-Tones. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: N-U hyphen, T-O-N-E-S. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the Nu-Tones, we did have two records I think. Found some guy that had sympathy on us and let us record, spend all his money making records that went nowhere. It was like two kids [unclear] Tennessee, one from [unclear] Florida, he's now a medical doctor in Michigan, and two of the others, and they formed this group called the Nu-Tones. And so I was their manager and, and amateur producer. So we had, we had fun. We, we, we learned how to get bookings at the smaller nightclubs and the clubs out in the country, or around the middle part of the state. And so we spent like the next year and a half running the chicken circuit of nightclubs and just breaking even. We finally got a chance to make money when we realized that the white fraternities on Vanderbilt campus pay good money, and somebody heard our band and liked it. In fact they paid very good money. So once we got hooked in with them, and that was like the like year we were organized, we were about to graduate from school, we made very good money. Long hours like ten to one, 10:30 to 1:30, but the trip was short. You get--borrow somebody's car, get all gear in the car and ride over there and give them five dollars. Much cheaper than having to rent a couple of cars, drive 70 miles down the highway to some place where we had to split the gate and nobody shows up. And so we're, we're in the tank. But we had fun. So, so the school newspaper went by the side. A lot of things I did in high school, statistician for half of the teams, by the side. Story_ID: 95329 Speaker 1: Everybody knew I was there and they were waiting on me to do something other than be a DJ. But I spent the whole three years in college DJ-ing, and I was a very good DJ. People liked that. If you know the music and you know what'll get them to dance, then you're doing well. Speaker 2: What--I have my theories. Now we, we're about the same age. But, but I had my theories about what makes people dance on the dance floor in those days. What, what did you find to be the most stimulating artists in terms of dancing, you know the more athletic dances, and then which ones were the better ones for the slow records? Speaker 1: Well for, for, for athletic dancing you had James Brown, Temptations, Supremes, Marvelettes, Martha and the Vandellas, Supremes, the Crystals, and slow songs you had Impressions, Jerry Butler, Aretha Franklin, Mitty Collier out of Alabama. Jan Bradley out of Chicago. The Radiants, a group called Maurice and the Radiants out of Chicago. Again Four Tops on some slow songs. Brenda Holloway out of Detroit, and Carla Thomas. Again, fast songs I missed Sammy Dave [unclear]. Speaker 2: So what, what's the--who's the artist that's guaranteed to make people get up out of their seats and dance? Speaker 1: James Brown. Speaker 2: All right, thank you. I've often argued this case. I didn't have to argue with anybody, though about it. Most people--they had to think about it, but that is the person-- Speaker 1: If the house, if the house is, is, is slowing down, right and getting boring, then you find a, an upbeat James Brown song to kind of you know, kick them back in gear. And you, you can ride off that song and play a couple of the fast tunes, and then slow it back down. And so ideally you're gonna play two or three fast songs and then play a slow one, right. And so maybe you do a, a, a James Brown, then you put a Temptations behind that, and someone else behind that. And you come back with a [HM] Jerry Butler or a Carla Thomas to slow it down. And everybody, you know, dance slow for a bit. And then you take them out of that and you rev them back up again. Everybody's happy. Story_ID: 95330 Speaker 1: Yeah we were talking about your DJ-ing and off camera we were just reminiscing about the LAC-- Speaker 2: [Unclear], yes. Speaker 1: Gallatin, Tennessee, right? Which is-- Speaker 2: Well the record shop, one of the record shops that advertised on the radio was in Gallatin. It was Randy Record Shop. There were three record shops; Randy's in Gallatin, and that was--their [unclear] and Jean Noble's. And there was a Buffy Record Shop in Nashville which was hosted by Hoss Allen, and an Ernie's Record Mart which was hosted by John R., John Richburg. I knew, I knew all them cause we used to hang around the radio station when I was a kid. I was always busy, like I said. Speaker 1: You were saying off camera these guys, I don't know if you even knew it, but they had almost a--they had a regional if not national scope. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In terms of their--late at night-- Speaker 2: Thirty six states at night time, 36 states. Speaker 1: What was the call letter? Speaker 2: WAC Radio 1510. Speaker 1: Fifteen ten. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean you could get it--I think you could get it in Columbus, Cincinnati, you know all over the South. Speaker 2: I met people over time who told me that, that they kept time by listening to WAC at night time. And they knew that if a certain show came on, they were past curfew. And if, if the Hoss Man came on, he came on at midnight, right. If he came on, they were in big trouble, they were way past curfew. Parents said be home by midnight and you're--Hoss Man come on and you're in big trouble. Speaker 1: So Hoss now and he's the Hoss Man, right? Speaker 2: The Hoss Man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: William T. Allen, III. Speaker 1: Okay now is he, he's the fellow that hosted the syndicated television show. We used to get it in Dayton called "Night Train". Speaker 2: That was, that was Noble Blackwell. Speaker 1: Noble Blackwell, okay. Speaker 2: Noble Blackwell and Bob Holmes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And also there'd be a guest on every now and then. Speaker 1: Right, cause he was on. I know I saw him on it. And one of the interesting figures on the show was a fellow called "Ironing Board Sam". I don't know if you remember him. Speaker 2: I remember him well. Speaker 1: He--tell us about him, just tell us about him. Speaker 2: Ironing Board Sam was this fella who played instruments, right, and, and everybody had to have something a little different that would, you know, get attention. And so this fellow had put a piano on top of an ironing board. And he glued it on there and got it hooked up some kind of way, and he, he could play and it was early, early mood organ almost. And he went to the Club Baron and other places, places up and down Jefferson street, right, playing his ironing board. And became Ironing Board Sam. Became an instant local hit, and he was helped out by "Night Train". And then went to I think New Orleans for a while, somewhere else, and became a, a, a greater regional hit. But it was a little too corny I think for a national audience. And so he was always kind of limited to the South. Story_ID: 95331 Speaker 1: Yeah there's a, there's a, there's a--some sort of a split between what a New York audience will buy and what the--the rest of the country. Speaker 2: Well we had, we had a lot of people who were, who were, who were big hits, Tina Turner for example, right. I knew Tina Turner, Ike and Tina Turner, in the, in the early '60's [1960's]. They were a big hit in the South then. One day I'm in New York reading my "Newsweek" magazine I think it is, right. And they were talking about this hot new artist, Tina Turner. I said wait a minute now. We're about 20 years late, guys. And said you are a national magazine and you're just figuring out who Tina Turner is, right. I know, I grew up on Tina Turner. But they hadn't burst out of that, that regional enclave yet. And, and New York is, is a very different market, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, New York has a--this connection to Georgia and South Carolina, and if it doesn't come out of the coast, you know, southern coast, it doesn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --penetrate as, as well, you know in New York. Speaker 2: And you had to be a hit in New York in order for them to discover you. It's, it's sort of funny but it is, but it is. Speaker 1: Okay, so as a DJ you had in--around--at Tennessee State you had a lot of work I guess and you said and you were managing--they hadn't gone over to Vanderbilt too and these other white colleges playing. Speaker 2: Yeah. So we played Tennessee State, Fisk, Meharry, we finally got into Vanderbilt, just by coincidence, happenstance. And we played the chitlin circuit all around the middle of Tennessee. And, and it helped supplement college money, which was sparse to say the least. Story_ID: 95332 Speaker 1: That's right, so anyway so what was your major in, in Tennessee [State University, Nashville, Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: Sociology. Speaker 1: Sociology, okay. Speaker 2: That means you get a job--my, my grandfather, my dad's father, gave me a humbling discussion about studying sociology. I was probably in my--going in my senior year. And one day he came by the house and asked me how was I doing. Fine. And he said you're in college, right? And I proudly said yes, yes, yes. He said what are you studying? I said sociology. He said sociology, and that's, that's studying how people get along with each other, right? I said yeah basically if you put it down as basic, yeah, it's how people get along with each other. He says you had to go to college to figure out how to get along with people? It was a very humbling experience. I said oh, we're spending all this money to go to college to learn how people get along with each other. He has a good point. And so it, it, it kept me quite humble about finishing college and what I was gonna do with that sociology degree. I was going to work with people and get along with each other, and it was a great experience. Story_ID: 95333 Speaker 1: Who were some of your professors at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] that you remember? Speaker 2: There were a--there was a history teacher, [unclear] names here, I'll get it in a second. I had one history teacher, she was very good. And I had a couple of history teachers. One was named Mingo Scott. Mingo Scott was a funny guy. He would teach you history in a way that would, would get you excited about it. He would tell you, you know, study Pages 20 to three, [unclear] tomorrow. So you come in class and he says okay, we're talking about, you know the war of 1812. He says now let's talk about what happened in the war of 1812, you know. This side, that side, he goes the whole story and he says I know, he says you wanna know how I know this happened? I was there. I was behind a building listening to the conversation as they were negotiating the terms of the treaty, right. And you stop and say wait a minute now, that guy couldn't have been here then, right. But it would make you listen. And so he had figured out a way to get his audience engaged if only for a minute, in finding history interesting. The lady was Lois McDougal. And Lois McDougal was a very, very precise, good historian. Dry sense of humor, right. But, but she was interesting. And there were two sisters who taught math, the Gassoway [ph.] twins. And I was a disaster in math in high school and college. And, and Cindy Gassoway was my math teacher. And, and she gave me a classic good reaming out one day and explained to me that it was not impossible for me to learn this stuff. And that I was just too lazy to put the time in to learn it. She said and I'm gone fail you if you don't study this stuff and get it nailed down. And she was serious as a heart attack. I did not fail the class. You know I got smart enough to, to learn at least enough to get out of the class. But the Gassoway twins--a geography teacher was very good, his name was Mr. Cotton, C-O-T-T-O-N. He's [unclear] Cotton, C-O-T-T-E-N. When we found out he was from Mississippi, we said his name is Cotton, not Cotton stuff. But he, he knew geography like the back of his hand and he made it fun. It was a Saturday morning class. Everybody was tired and sleepy but he, he made it exciting. I had a, a good roster of sociology teachers and I came to appreciate a lot you can learn just reading about the science of group interaction and, and what causes things to happen. Group interaction, how you manage those things, and that was good. And it, it taught you how to like settle down and, and measure things, right, and that's important in life. It becomes increasingly important the older you get and you realize it. And so that's what my sociology classes from 40 years ago still pay off today. Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the--did you have an advisor or mentor in sociology? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Lett, L-E-T-T. I can't remember her first name to save my life. Very nice lady. Thoughtful, and when she knew you wanted to take a class or get something done, she made sure she knew how to help you navigate the system and get what you wanted. Classes are closed, she helped you get the class. And so she taught you how to be persistent in a constructive way to get what you wanted done. And again, in order to get what you want, you have to be willing to invest the time and politeness and energy. And, and you can usually you know, find somebody who's receptive and on the same wavelength who will help you out. Story_ID: 95334 Speaker 1: Okay, so what you were saying that you, you were able to graduate in three years? Speaker 2: Yeah, high school three years, college in three years. Man I was goin' so fast, I didn't know where I was half the time. Speaker 1: So how, how old were you when you gradated from college? Speaker 2: Nineteen. Speaker 1: Nineteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a shame. So yeah I, I, I do in retrospect wonder how different would it have been if I'd stayed in high school the full four years, stayed in college the full four years, and I can wonder on that and think about that till the cows come home. It didn't happen. My life has been on a good course. I don't feel like I went too fast or went too slow. I just did and I've enjoyed what I've done. Speaker 1: Okay, so now you at some place along the line you got some sort of an internship at the Nashville Tennessee [unclear]. Speaker 2: I got hired. Speaker 1: Hired, okay. So you--it wasn't an internship or anything. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They just hired you. Speaker 2: In, in those days we didn't have resumes, if they did I didn't know it. In those days we didn't have internships, if we did, I didn't know it. We didn't have mentors the way they do now. Everybody was a mentor, we just didn't call them mentors. Just everybody was advising you, everybody was, was trying to guide you and give you advice. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1968. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Now this is--now you graduated--I guess this would be the same spring that Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was assassinated that Spring and Robert Kennedy was assassinated the first month I went to work. And they were at [unclear] was a good friend of Robert F. Kennedy. And, and everybody could tell it was a, it was a sad time at the paper just for--because somebody close to the leadership had died. And you could tell that. But I- Story_ID: 95335 Speaker 1: So the editor was John Seigenthaler, right? Speaker 2: John Seigenthaler, yeah. John was a, a, a Justice Department administrator in the early '60's [1960's] and he went to either Birmingham [Alabama] or Montgomery[Alabama], one or the other, on behalf of [President John F.] Kennedy to politely read them the riot act about stopping the Freedom Riders. And in the process, he got beaten up a little bit and had a concussion, had to have a little bounce back period. But he had, he had gone to the front line of the beast and, and didn't win in that battle, but he persevered over the long haul. Speaker 1: Now he was a, he was in the Justice Department doing the same kind of work that John Doar I guess was doing, going around the South, investigating the-- Speaker 2: Yeah John was, he wasn't an administrator in the Justice Department, he was close to it, though. And so they would dispatch him to hot spots and try to get--and he would try to reason with local officials on what they needed to do to diffuse things. Well the, the biggest hot iron in the fire in the South when John was with the Justice Department was the whole racial desegregation effort and the Freedom Riders. Now he came from Nashville. He knew the schools these Freedom Riders had gone to. His paper had written about them before he went to Washington. So he had a vested interest as a local kid going to Washington [D.C.] in what happened to these people. He, he saw them at an early age as human beings. And he, he was among the small cadre of, of journalists turned Washington operatives, right, who came from the South, who understood what the Civil Rights Movement was about and could embrace it. Most of these organizations in the South did not embrace desegregation. They were publicly and openly against it. If you go back and read editorial pages of the early '60s [1960s], they don't leave any doubt in the mind about it. John was one of those few people who had said this stuff's gonna happen. You know this stuff's gonna happen and we need to embrace it, be on top of it. And so he was, was royally disowned by a lot of his colleagues around the region because he went to work in Washington for this Massachusetts liberal, Kennedy. And then he came back south preaching all this integration stuff. So he was running way against the, the currents, running way against the tide. And he was way ahead of his time. Speaker 1: Now wasn't Al Gore's father like a, a Nashville person too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where did he stand in those days? Speaker 2: Al Gore's father voted for the Civil Rights legislation. He, he was, he was the only Democratic senator from the South I think to vote I think to vote for legislation. Most southern people in the House in the Senate, voted against it. So they go way back. And you had a, a cadre of people out of Nashville who, who seized the day and, and took the opportunity to help deliver the South to its future and not try to hold it back in its past. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you had Seigenthaler, you had a couple U.S. Attorneys who got appointed, it was a interesting group. Story_ID: 95336 Speaker 1: So how did the job come about? Now you're at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you're, you're not even doing any newspaper writing. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So how did, how did this come about? Speaker 2: Well a couple things happened I think. One is from my perspective, I couldn't find a job. And in the Tennessean was my fourth stop. I was just looking for a job. I couldn't find a job because my, my mom had sort of decided and I decided too, that I wasn't gonna go into town and look for a job. I applied for a job at the Department of Social Services in Connecticut, and I was waiting. I then thought of applying for a job with the Department of Welfare in New York City. I had a cousin who was a social worker in New York City. I wrote her and asked her, and told her what my intentions were. She wrote back and said don't do it. Social workers in New York City are on welfare. We can't help the people because we're not getting paid enough ourselves to not be poor. I said okay, time out. I'll stay at home. So I, I went to a local bank, they gave me some paperwork which I then threw away as soon as I left. I went to another bank and they were starting a new division coming that September, they were staffing in, in the Summer, called MasterCard. And it was the first time they gone have credit cards for common people. And so I said I wanna apply. And they said well we'll take your application, but we're not hiring anybody full time until this Fall. I said well you're working already. I said put me in that pile there. Well give me your paperwork. So I think they hit the trash can also. Then I went to a local insurance company and the fellow talked to me, he liked me. He says I'll tell you what my problem is. My budget for this, first time I heard about budgets, my budget for this year will not allow me to hire anybody, but I'm gonna ask if I can hire you at the first of the year and put you in my budget for next year. Because I like your stuff, blah, blah, blah. Well I said to myself I need a job now, though. Because my mom had told me she wants rent starting the month after I graduate. Now I was floored by that. But you know it was what it was, 50 bucks a month rent. And so I, I walked down to the newspaper. It's like 7:30 one night, the office had closed. And I asked to speak to the managing editor. Here's why. When I was a, a--when I had the Neighborhood Times, the Tennessean had written a story about me. There were two of us that had little newspapers. I had one on Scoble [ph.] Street. Another kid about my age had one at the opposite end near Eighth Avenue and Scoble Street, and I was at 26th. And we had them both read the paper the same day. They wrote a story about us, big feature story. So I asked--his name was Lenny that I remember from when I was there. I asked for him, he was there. He remembered me from my little newspaper, the Neighborhood Times. And so he said well Reginald, he says we don't have anything open right now. He says but fill out this application, if anything comes up I'm gone call you. So I filled out the application, they asked all these crazy questions on it, right. Which I don't know how to answer. And I give it to him and he says okay I'm gone call you. Believe it or not, he called me a week later. He says Reginald, I have a job for you. This is the week before I graduate, right. He said when do you graduate? I said I graduate like June 8th, something like that. He says well, can you start that following Monday? I said well look, I said I had planned--I been going to school year-round since high school. I had planned to take the summer off and get a little rest between going to school and working, and then start in September. He said Reginald if you don't come into work on that Monday, I won't have a job for you. I said I'll be there. And no question about it, and I was there. So I went to work like three or four days after I finished college, and I've been working ever since. Story_ID: 95337 Speaker 1: I had a wonderful time with that newspaper [Nashville Tennessean]. I knew nothing about what I was doing. It was so obvious that I hadn't worked on the college paper, I hadn't worked on anything that even resembled a newspaper. And they took me in and they kept me because I had spark and energy and I wasn't afraid of anything. I was too dumb to be afraid of anything. And they said okay if he's got those ingredients, we can teach him how to be a journalist. And so the first couple of weeks I was writing--I had little stories they'd give me and I'd go out and write 'em and bring 'em in. And one day my city editor, a guy named Herman Eskew [ph.], called me up to his desk and he said I have a question for you. I said yeah. I'm, you know. He says do you read this newspaper? I said I read it every morning, I love it. He said well how do the stories you write differ from the ones you see in the paper? So it's a learning moment, right, I said there's a trick question going in here somewhere. So I picked the paper up and I started reading it and I said well, I said first of all, I said your sentences are shorter than mine. I said your paragraphs are shorter than mine. He said yeah, anything else? I said yeah, you have quotes in the, in the paper. He said do you think you can do the same thing for your stories that you see in the paper? I'd been writing news columns position for three weeks and they'd had it. I had like three sentences in a paragraph, right. Like 50 words per sentence, no quotes. It was driving them crazy. But I had stories, I had stories. I had stories come out of the wazzoo, cause I was just out there really trying to get stuff. That was the first problem. The second problem was I did not know what beats were. And on newspapers, all assignments are like beats. Like in schools you have first grade, second grade, third grade, fourth grade, right, that was your beat, you teach this grade. In the news business, you have courts, cops, city council, mayor's office, Health Department, school board, and so on. I didn't know that. I came to work every morning and would just start calling people trying to find out what's going on. And so the best idea that came out of those phone calls, I'd go to the editor and say I got a story idea. Well this went on for about eight months and finally they called me in again and said listen, do you know everybody in this newsroom want you fired? I said no, why? He says because you're going across everybody's god damn beats. I said beats, what's a beat? So, so he, he didn't call me dumb as a box of rocks at that point, but he, he had a serious conversation. He says you have to understand how newsrooms work. Every--what does so-and-so do? I said well they go to the courthouse every day. What does so-and-so do? He goes to the [unclear]. These are called beats and you're trampling over their beats. You gotta find your own beat, all right, or they gone run you out of here. So what did I do? I found my own beat in Nashville, transportation and aviation. We had maybe 30 flights a day, a small airport. We don't have any big transportation problems, just traffic jams that everybody has, small town traffic jams. But I turned that beat into a very productive beat and they were impressed. Fortunately, American Alliance had a strike. So I was at the airport covering the strike, no air service at National, right. Good story. Fortunately, I talked to the Traffic Parking Commission members and they were about to change parking rates. And about to introduce one-way streets, heaven forbid. So I got to write all these stories and lo and behold, I'm in the paper you know two or three times a week. I'm not on anybody's beat. I'm writing stories. They have short paragraphs, they have quotes, I'm getting there. And that was my, my ride at Tennessean and it was a great ride. Story_ID: 95338 Speaker 1: It would seem like if I hired a person that never been a reporter, I'd give him some kind of orientation as to what he was expected of him and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's called put him to work, yeah. Put him to work and, and you learn by doing. Speaker 1: I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: And in those days they had enough people working in the newsroom, you could afford to do that. Nowadays, newsrooms are so short staffed, there are no rewrite people, there are no copy desk people. You don't have the, the infrastructure to take on talented people who don't know what they're doing and teach them how to do what you do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just no room anymore. Now they gotta come ready made, you know premixed, pre-packed, you know ready to put to work, just like that. So they'll take film, file online, whole nine yards. And in those days you took a raw talent and said okay, you know we know you don't know what we do, but you've got the stuff and we'll help you out. We'll give you a chance. If you mess up, you're gone. As long as you don't mess up, you're in good shape. Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually went a route that's quite different from most of the journalists we've interviewed. Most of them go to journalism school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then they have to serve an internship to prove they can have a full time job. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you didn't-- Speaker 2: And mine was take him, throw him in the deep water, see if he can swim, get out of there. Story_ID: 95339 Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, so you were at the, at the Nashville Tennessean until 19-- Speaker 2: October of '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: October '69 [1969], so that's just about a-- Speaker 2: Year and a half. Speaker 1: Year and a half, yeah. So, so what did you do next? Speaker 2: I got recruited by the local ABC TV station, ABC. They had a--it's a TV, radio, AM/FM radio station all in one, local. And they were trying to put together an A Team news crew. And so they, they got me from the morning paper, they got one of the city editors from the afternoon paper. They got an assigning editor from the NBC Station. They got a chief photographer from the CBS Station. And they put us all in the same room and said hey, make us a winner. The only problem with that we learned later, was that the station's signal was a weak signal. And so no matter how hard they tried, they could not reach the entire viewing audience that the other two stations could reach. The CBS station and NBC station. So our, our top viewership at night time was about 13,000 people. And for the NBC station it was 52,000 people. So we had a good audience of relatives, high school and college classmates, friends and neighbors, etc., no matter how good the story was. So what I did after realizing that, was I went back to the Tennesseean and made a proposal to them. I said what I want to do is this. If I have good stories, really good stories, I want to do this area on TV, come by the paper, write your version, and have you put it in the paper the next morning if you'll give us a credit for us. You know it was reported yesterday on so-and-so TV. They said great. So you know how to write. Wow, I know how to write. You know how to write, you write it right quick and made it on deadline and we'll give you credit for it. Money didn't matter. At that point I've forgotten if they even paid me. But at that point, the idea was to get a good story and get it exposed. You know there's no need to having good stories if nobody sees them or knows about them. And you can spend all your time reporting good stories, but not having the show for it. So lo and behold, 1970, 1970 and the first part of '71 [1971] was really the beginning of, of multi-media reporting that we see now. Everybody's talking about going across platforms and things like that, that's old stuff to me. They're doing it now out of, out of business advantage they think. And, and the reason they do that is because you want to get the product, get the story exposed. And so I had fun. It was a short drive, maybe ten minutes from the TV station to the newspaper. If I'm done by six, I get to the paper by 6:45, give them copy by 8:00, they can make their deadlines, and we're rock and rolling. So I had several really good stories that made a difference based on that combination of, of taking the story from a TV station that had few viewers, especially powerbrokers, and putting it in the newspaper that had thousands more viewers, right, all of them powerbrokers. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 95340 Speaker 1: So what were some of the stories that you-- Speaker 2: Well I had, had one case where a little lawyer was challenging a quirky law in the state that allowed creditors like credit stores, furniture stores, right, to garnishee your entire paycheck if you got delinquent on your bills. And so he called me about this and I said well let me find--no, no. Somebody in the hospital called me, Meharry Hospital called me about this when I was reporting. They said we got an employee here that's got, got a paycheck that has like 13 cents on it. She's worked all week long and she can't figure out why. So I called the hospital and they said well, garnishee--wages got garnisheed cause she owes Mort's Furniture Company like you know, $98 and she's like a month and a half behind. So they went, went to court and garnisheed their wages. Now the law, the law, old law, allow you to garnishee 100 percent. The amended law which had been passed two years prior to my doing the story, allowed you to keep 20 percent of your wages. So can buy food and pay water bill and things. So I found the lawmaker who got the 20 percent rule passed, interviewed him, and eventually I got the county sheriff who's responsible for issuing these wage garnishment things, to agree to start using a different form. He said I'll call the offender right now Reginald and I, I'll get some different forms printed, right. So, so then you know I had to go back and correct this, the newspaper, yeah. So then about a week after he said that, I called the printer. I said hey this is a, a store downtown calling, and can you check the supply for me please on these, these green sheet garnishment forms and see what I got on the white ones, new ones. And the person said oh yeah, says we're just printing 5,000 more of those green sheets, that was the old form. He said he got about 1,000 of the white sheets left, right. And so if he had just printed 5,000 sheets of the green form, he was still using the old law. Now let me go forward, that was the newspaper. Now at the TV station, I had a lawyer who came to me and was complaining about grand jury selection. And he had made a case in the county criminal court that the grand jury selection procedure was racially discriminatory, right. Sexually discriminatory and AIDS discriminatory, right. Here's why. Back in the early '50s [1950's], the county delegation or legislature, had gone to legislature and asked for a private act that allowed the trial judges in the county to hand pick grand jury members cause there were so few people available, they'd all gone to war. And so they had trouble picking grand jury members and so if you let the judges pick people to sit on the jury, you make sure you had a grand jury, a full jury that were having to sit and decide who would [unclear]. Well fast forward 20 years later, right. They'd been picking the same people over and over and over again. So they had like the same people every court, every court came together, right. And they'd been on the jury--you get like ten dollars for sitting a day. And it was like all white businessmen, downtown merchants, friends of the judges, right. And so they were deciding who was gonna be invited, who was gonna go to trial for, you know, bogus checks and, and shootings and robberies and thefts. There was a black person on the grand jury every now and then. Usually the same black person, right. There was a woman on the grand jury every now and then, usually the same woman. And so the whole, the whole idea of a jury of your peers, you can get tried by a jury of your peers, but you're gonna get indicted by a jury of selected people by the judges. So the poor--the, the lawyer had a complaint about this. I said okay, I got it, I'll pick it up. So I picked it up and I ran with it. It took me about two months, but I finally got a state senator to agree to sponsor another bill that would repeal the private act so that you had to have random selection of grand jury members the way you do for trial jury members. So you put the names in a big wheel and you pull them out, right. And so you get to names from voter registration rolls, from utility bills, put them all in a hopper and that's who you select for the jury. It boosted the likelihood that the jury would be more like your community than the old system when jury--the judges could handpick juries, grand juries. So the thing was to take stories like that and give them broad based exposure so you can really get some traction here and you're not working for nothing. And it worked. It really worked. But you gotta have good stories and you gotta have exposure. Story_ID: 95341 Speaker 1: Okay. So you, so what was the call letters of the station again? Speaker 2: WSIX TV. Speaker 1: WSIX, okay. Speaker 2: Now why WSIX was on channel eight, I have no idea. Speaker 1: That is--cause I, my mind immediately went to this is channel six. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not. WS--and so, so when they realized they were having this signal problem, they, they made a deal with the educational TV station to swap channels. So we went from channel eight to channel two; the signal was worse. So they're still down there struggling on how to reach everybody in their, their broadcast area. And so they're, they're like--they're [unclear] and permanently doomed to be a number three station. Speaker 1: Well what is it, the topography of the land that's messing them up or what? Speaker 2: Part of its topography of the land, and where your tower is. And so unless your tower has a clear beam all the way around the area, right, it'll hit something and the signal just gets bounced off. Speaker 1: Even in the age of digital now that we, that they started? Speaker 2: You can take cable. You can buy cable. But television was free. You buy a TV set, you got to see the news for free. Now you're gonna pay to see the news. And if I'm gone pay for it, I'm wanna see sports, I wanna see cooking show, I want to see a movie. The last I wanna do is pay to see the news. I'll go buy a newspaper, a lot cheaper. Story_ID: 95342 Speaker 1: Okay, well 1970, is that when you go to Columbia [University Graduate School of Journalism in New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Columbia. Speaker 1: Right, now how, how did you make that decision? You're already making money as a journalist, you're, you know--but-- Speaker 2: Well somebody told me, and I don't know who it was, and we really wanna have a discussion that dealt with the future. But two things. One the [Nashville] Tennessean had other people going to Columbia, or had gone to Boston to get a, a Nieman Fellowship. And so somebody said you know if you get a master's degree, that will enhance your ability to get a job teaching journalism. And so I said well you know I'm not gone be chasing fire trucks my whole life, so I'd better get this master's degree cause it may come in handy at some point. So I applied. I only applied to one graduate school. I got [unclear] for me. I got Nat Caldwell, Nat Caldwell was this, this rag-tag senior writer on the paper who had been a Pulitzer Prize winner and had been a Nieman Fellow. And Nat may have finished college on a, on a good day; I'm not sure he finished college. But he was a brilliant writer and he wrote about poverty in Appalachia, and it got him Pulitzer. He wrote a letter for me. He took his carbon paper out and starting [unclear] his typos and strike overs and ripped it out and put it in the mail, I surprise he even wrote it. But between, between [John] Segenthaler's lobbying and the lobbying of Nat Caldwell, I got in. Well I got in. Lo and behold who else is in New York? Half the people who went through college a decade earlier were in New York, and they had some connection. And so if the [Nashville] Tennessean wanted to get something done in New York City, call these people. They had Wally Westfelt who was in--who was here from DC News. And he had worked at Tennessean. Dave Havelseum [ph.] and Office Magazine, he had worked at the "New York Times" and the Tennessean. And the list went on and on and on. It was about a dozen people. And so as long as they could, could do their networking, then it was pretty sure I could get in unless I was really, really, really dumb. I wasn't really, really dumb, I just didn't know what I was doing. And so you know I put that application in there, and I wrote an application and showed it to a friend of mine. He said Mr. Reg, he said this not gone get you in high school. He had to write this thing over again. So I, I, I went, went back and wrote something very, very--that I thought sounded very, very academic, right. And so it used a lot of big words and, and, and talked about you know, this thing having to go back and examine this thing. And actually it's like writing in circles. And so my, my, my argument was something about you know in order to understand the media, you have to under--understand each medium in the media. And that way you can, can be a compelling force in the media utilizing each medium. And this went on for like you know, four, five, six paragraphs. And I said, I said this is bullshit. I said but does it work? He said yeah this might get you in. And so I, I sent that in and lo and behold between that, that useless letter that I wrote and my experience with the media, and other things I had going for me, I got in. And the country boy got sent to the city. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1970. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 95343 Speaker 1: So well what was Columbia U--University [Graduate School of Journalism in New York, New York] like? This is your first professional schooling in journalism. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I, I, I had a, I had a good group of teachers. They were all like seasoned professionals in the business. They could tell I was kind of raw and still learning and they were very helpful. And I, I learned a lot of things there. And the one thing I learned the most is, is not to anticipate and not let your prejudices show too much. Case in point. It's an election year, 1970. And, and we had something called Columbia News Service, CNS. And so they give a lot of students a chance to go cover the elections on November, don't remember what day it was that year. And so I raised my hand and said I want to go to Tennessee and cover the senate race. A very important senate race. Albert Gore, Senior is being challenged by a [unclear] named Bill Brock. And they're going heady-to-head over this school desegregation thing. And it would be a decisive moment for Gore and I want to cover that. So they said okay you can go. Somehow we get the plane fare and I go down to Nashville. It's election night. So I'm calling in to the Columbia News Service. It's a mock radio broadcast. So I am calling every hour, 7:04, 8:04, 9:04, 10:04 Central time. So my 7:04 call says this is Reggie Stuart in Nashville. Polls have just closed in east Tennessee and they're closing soon in middle Tennessee, they're still open in west Tennessee. Current indications are that Bill Brock is gonna pull an upset of Albert Gore. But the Gore people are insistent that they will come on strong once traditionally democratic in middle Tennessee and west Tennessee are counted. Eight oh four, this is Reggie Stuart in Nashville. Bill Brock maintains a small lead over Gore as results began to come in from middle Tennessee and west Tennessee, the Gore people are still confident they'll pull it off although it's close. Fast forward, 9:04. [Unclear] Tennessee, right. The polls have closed and the results are in from east Tennessee and middle Tennessee with Bill Brock holding onto his lead. The Gore people are confident that traditionally Democratic west Tennessee will save him and pull him out of the, out of the water. Faster forward, 10:04. [Unclear] Tennessee, right. The votes been counted. Albert Gore has suffered a stunning loss, right, as the ballots in west Tennessee narrowly cost him this election and, and Bill Brock is now US Senator. So okay, I fly back to New York and we have a class critique, right. Our teacher is a fellow named--what's Fred's last name? We'll come to it. But our class teacher is a former president of CBS News, right. He says okay let me play our tapes back for you, right. He says Reginald, your tape in particular he says, what is wrong with your tape? He said if you're going to campaign for Albert Gore's re-election, then you can't be a news reporter, right. But listen to all four of your feeds, right. None of them were down the middle. They were all biased toward Albert Gore. Fred Friendly, former president of CBS News. And so they played all the four segments of the tape together, and he was right. You could tell the reporter had a bias toward one candidate versus the other. And he said you cannot be a good reporter if you do that. You've got to play it down the middle. Speaker 1: So this is Fred Friendly actually telling, telling you this. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was my broadcast advisor. And, and so he didn't ream anybody out, he just told you, you know, you can't do this because it will show. And if, and if I set back and really listened to those tapes impartially, I was giving Albert Gore every inch of benefit of the doubt I could find, but it wasn't enough, right. The guy was losing, get used to the idea. He's a goner. And I knew Gore and Bill Brock, right. And, and--but I knew Bill Brock was a, a conservative guy with conservative issues, right, and Albert Gore had voted for the Civil Rights Bill, he was a liberal guy. And so in your, in your head basically a large understanding of what's going on, right. You're apt to tilt toward the one who tilted toward you. When you're doing news reporting, you have to eject yourself from that and call it as it's happening. And if the guy is losing, the guy is losing. In that case he was losing badly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I couldn't see it. Story_ID: 95344 Speaker 1: This is interesting, now this is Fred W. Friendly, one of the pioneer news people in CBS. Speaker 2: Yes, who-- Speaker 1: A studio at Columbia [University, New York, New York] is named after him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Fred W. Friendly Studio. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I'll tell you another Fred Friendly story. At the end of the school year, he was lining up jobs for all his students. And he had lined me up a job to work for Walter Cronkite as a desk writer. So he sent me down to Walter Cronkite's CBS studio down on 59th Street, 57th, 59th. This old warehouse. It looks like a warehouse outside, it's a wonderful studio inside. And so Mr. Cronkite is telling me what he's looking for. He wants someone to write his filler script. The script that goes between the stories. And so I needed to write five minutes of filler script per day. You gotta track the wires, call back and everything, prepare for everything [unclear], do the script writing. And that's stuff they can throw away if they start running overtime or lose track of time, right. And so you right filler script. So I wanted to be a reporter. I'd been a reporter for five years before I came there, I wanted to keep reporting. Not five years, three years. So I said listen, I said I like the idea, but tell me how long will I have to do this before I can get out in the field and be a reporter? He says well Reginald, he says usually it's gonna take about, about three to five years before you get out in the field. I said hold it, hold it, hold it. I said Mr. Cronkite in all due respect, I'm a reporter. I'll go crazy sitting at this desk, right. You want me to sit here for three to five years writing five minutes of script a day. I know it would be a honor, I know I'll learn a lot from you. I still have to get out here and be a reporter. So I'm going to respectfully decline the offer. He says okay young man, he says it's your choice. So I go back and get on the subway and go back to--up west side to Columbia campus, right, to tell Fred Friendly you know, I have turned his old boss down and I'm not gonna do it, right. So I know I'm immediately going to be thrown out the window. I'm told that's it, you can go back to Tennessee son, you just don't get it, right. He was the nicest guy. He said well Reginald, he says if that's your decision, fine. I can understand that. He says it's not for everybody. And then I realized that in the big leagues you're able to make those decisions that may seem as if they're stupid at the moment, but they're not life threatening decisions, and that people make those kinds of decisions all the time. And, and I had made one and slept with it. So always make decisions that I wanna stick with. You know I may not be doing something people think is the right thing to do, and not the best thing at this point in time, but in my heart of hearts, that's where I am right now. And, and I gotta live with it. I gotta live with the consequences of what I do. And so I know I would have been a great long time veteran at CBS making good money, being at a desk writer. But I wanted to be a reporter. And I had a great time as a reporter, a great time. Speaker 2: Okay now, now you caught Walter, Walter Cronkite right at the point I think when he was--he had started to criticize the war in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I mean this was like-- Speaker 2: [Unclear] best moment. Speaker 1: His best moment, and I had a chance to be there. And, and some of my classmates who did go to work for him are still there. And three or four of us got hired out of that class, and they're still there and enjoying it. But they wanted to be in broadcast, doing broadcast things. And that just wasn't what I wanted to do then. Story_ID: 95345 Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you returned to Nashville [Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Came back to Nashville. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you come back to the same positions? Speaker 2: Yeah, same. And so I stayed for a year and realized this wasn't gonna work. Got a chance to freelance, took it and ran for it and did the best I could. And it was a great decision, you know to quit and go freelance and travel around the region on somebody's dime. And I learned a whole lot more about the region, the south, and the country in those two years I was freelancing, than I gained every year I've been living since, before that. That was a great experience. Speaker 1: Well tell us about some of the things that you wrote about. Speaker 2: Well primarily what I did was I wrote about higher education in the south. And it was, it was the beginning of what I call the post-segregation era. And everybody was getting concerned then about whether segregation--desegregation of higher education was a mirror of what happened over in secondary schools. Where they simply closed all, all the historically black institutions, right. And, and merged everyone into historically white institutions. Or would there be some sort of co-mingling, some sort of mix. And so this group in New York called the John Hay Whitney Foundation, hired me to go around the region and do state reports on higher education, called "Black Perspectives in Higher Education." And it was, it was kind of a formula after I did the first one, right. We go in the state and, and write basically, basically explain this to people, read a few papers on higher education structure, how it's funded, what disparities are in the funding between the historically black schools and historically white schools, right. How the government's structure is staffed and appointed. And, and then printed [unclear] something up, right, and give them out around the state to politically savvy people civic activists. It was an educational program. And so I did one for Florida, Virginia, Mississippi, Tennessee, maybe Alabama, I'm trying to think. I think Alabama. And you did a series of reports that community groups could to use to try to fight for equity for blacks in higher education as the post-segregation era was marching on, it was coming. And so you know the, the onus on you was, was to try to make sure it's equitable. And then in between time, I write stories about groups in Mississippi that were challenging broadcast licenses at the stations and winning. How the floods in Mississippi were affecting the blacks on the Delta. I got all these like oddball stories I could write. But I had a good network, and, and it wasn't a lot of people, but it was the right people and they were reading these publications. Story_ID: 95346 Speaker 1: And that, that led me to New York Times. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah all right now New York Times is in 1974. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Did they--was it this accumulation of stories that led to this-- Speaker 1: I think there were a couple of things. I, I tried to explore and get those specifics. First thing I know is, is when I got a call from the New York Times, they said we never heard--we know who you are, right. We hear you good. Wanna talk to you. So that started a dialogue that lasted about six months. Went back and forth. In the meantime, I have a call from Johnson Publishing Company in Chicago [Illinois]. They wanna hire me. In the meantime, I have a call from "Time" Magazine, they wanna talk to me. Now nobody was calling me in almost two years. All of a sudden I had a windfall of calls. So what do I do? I, I talked to Johnson Publishing, "Ebony" Magazine, primarily them. And, and they don't offer me enough money I think to live in Chicago. They won't tell me what my title is after four or five months of asking. And I, and I have a philosophical difference with them over the kind of journalism they do versus what I do. You know they do feature stuff, I do hard news. So I talked to "Time" Magazine. They offer some really ridiculous offer and I, I declined. I told them with all due respects, you know, I may be green, but not that green. And, and that was it. "New York Times" meanwhile, they wanted me to come to Washington to cover agencies. I did not want to cover agencies. I wanted to be out and about reporting. So we agreed to stay in touch. In the end, which was like January, I take the "Ebony" offer. They upped the money a little bit and they say don't worry about it, we're gonna take care of it, blah, blah, blah. And we understand your concerns about us being overly fashion and, and features. So on the weekend, the week before I'm supposed to go to, to Chicago, guess who calls? The New York Times. They said Reginald, they says we got another idea. We want you to come to New York and talk to Abe Rosenthal. I said okay I--before you go any further, I have two questions. I said one, who is Abe Rosenthal? And secondly, does he have any authority to make decisions? Story_ID: 95347 Speaker 1: All right, Abe Rosenthal. Who is he? Speaker 2: Okay I get this call from the the New York Times, and they say we got a new idea. We want you to come to New York and talk to Abe Rosenthal. I say okay hold on a second. Two things. Who is Abe Rosenthal, and does he have any authority to make decisions? So the fella that called me at the time, he says well Abe Rosenthal is the Executive Editor of the newspaper, and I think he does have authority to make decisions. I said okay. I'm learning stuff, right. He's the boss. And I said okay, who pays the plane fare? They say we'll pay the plane fare cause I'm down in Louisiana working on, on a assignment. And so I said okay I'll be up there on Thursday night, let's talk Friday morning. I got Friday free. So I fly up Thursday night, go down to the New York Times on Friday morning and Abe Rosenthal is not there, he's out sick. They say we want you to stay over the weekend, he'll be in here Monday and he'll talk to you first thing Monday morning. I said guys I don't mean to be rude, I said but I have an obligation next week already and, and I don't want to go into detail about it, but are you sure he'll be here Monday and do you think it's worth my staying? So Abe's assistant says now I can't speak for Mr. Rosenthal, right. But I think it'd be worth your staying and he will be here first thing Monday morning. We'll pay your hotel to stay the weekend. Okay, fine. So I'm saying okay, I don't really like the Ebony Magazine offer to begin with, right. And it sounds like this The New York Times thing may work. And we were talking like four months, they wanna do something. Let me go talk to my friends at the foundation that I'm working for, right, and see what they think. So it's like a quarter to 12 I get by there. And they say we're all gonna go to lunch. You can use the phone if you want to, we'll be back. So they offered me zero help. I called my wife down in Nashville [Tennessee], all the things [unclear] Chicago. So she says we're going to Chicago [Illinois]? I said, I said look, we're not going to Chicago. I'm gonna call them and I'll withdraw. She says we're going to Washington [D.C.]? I said no. I said I don't know where we're going. I said just, just don't do anything, just sit tight, I'll call you back. So then I hang up the phone. I call the people in Chicago, and so it's--before I can get my message out, I talk to their--what's Charles' last name? He was Executive Editor of the magazine, of Ebony Magazine. And so I, I called him and I said how ya doin? He says fine. He says you got your plane ticket? I said I got my plane ticket. He says well, he says and you got your hotel reservations? I got hotel reservation, right. He said I'll be out of town on Monday, but I'd rather for you first to sign in with my assistant and she'll give it to you and show you your desk. I said hold on a second. I said I need to tell you something. He said what's that? I said I'm not coming. Long pause on the phone, about ten seconds. He says Mr. Johnson's not gonna like this. He's talking about John Johnson. And, and he says Mr. Johnson's not gone like this. I said I apologize profusely. I said but the issues are the same as they were several months ago. The money, I don't think I can live on this. Secondly, I don't know what my assignment's gonna be yet. You know I don't far up the ladder I can go, how far down I can go, right. And I still have this gut feeling that I don't like [unclear] that much to work for you full time. He said I can understand that. He said it's not everybody's piece of, piece of cake. He says I understand that. He said Mr. Johnson ain't gonna like this. So we're stuck on what Mr. Johnson's gone feel about this whole thing. So I agree to--I appreciate him being understandable and understanding, and, and that ends. So then I say okay here I am stuck in New York City, I don't know anybody here, right. I have a hotel, right, for the weekend. They gonna pay meals, right. I don't have a job really because the foundation work was gonna end in a couple of months. I really don't have a job. Now I've turned "Time" Magazine down. I ticked them off. I told "Ebony" goodbye, and I don't know what the New York Times is gonna do. So I spent that weekend eating food and walking around the streets trying to see what is New York City all about. I show up Monday morning. I have a one hour meeting with Abe Rosenthal, and the deal's done. Now here's what's peculiar about the deal. He's gonna hire me, he's gonna give me the money. I asked him could I have a few months to start, cause I wanted to finish the work I was doing. He says I don't care when you start. I just wanna make sure you're coming. I said good deal. He said you can start in six months if you want to, I don't care. I just wanna make sure you're gonna be here. I said I'll be there in two months, give me two months. Story_ID: 95348 Speaker 1: The second thing was after I'd taken an hour to denigrate and berate the newspaper for having too many stories that talked about what happened a century ago, dragging up to what's going on now, and he [Abe Rosenthal] doesn't throw me out. He says I'm gonna make you a business writer. I explained to him, I already told him I want to be a political writer, I wanna cover education, cover stuff like that. He says I'm gonna be a business writer. I said look, I said the only business reporting I've ever done has been when the business editor on the Tennessean was on vacation. I said and you have to know the business page was only one page, and two thirds of that was rewritten--was advertisements. And so he wrote maybe one story. I said granted I did a little bit better when he was gone, but I'm not a business writer. He says don't worry; you'll learn the jargon. And that was the end of the discussion. He gets on the phone, calls the business editor, says Tom come down I want you to meet your new reporter. I hadn't been through this vetting system everybody goes through now, right. It's been two days getting your head talked off by 100 people. He didn't make decisions by committee, he made decisions by leadership. That's why he was the editor. And so when I left there, I had an offer and they were gonna move me, take care of everything, and put me on the Business Desk covering real estate investment trusts. What do I know about real estate investment trusts? A lot in about a week. I was reading and, and I became a, an avid reader like my dad. And so I'm not reading westerns, I'm reading financial reports and, and Wall Street papers and, and what is this and what is that? You know what is a stock, what is a bond? I knew nothing about business writing. But I got up there and I fell in love with it, they liked it, and we're rocking and rolling. The only high hurdle we had was they did not like adjectives. And I liked adjectives. And so most of the stories I wrote first, Abe Munson was there, were adjective-free. You heard of sugar-free, taste kind of bad. I tried adjective-free story, facts. I mean the noun, the verb, the noun, the verb, the noun, the verb. But that's how they got my writing tighter by taking the adjectives out. Speaker 2: Okay, so how, how long did you stay as a business reporter? Speaker 1: That was--on the Business Desk in New York, it was two and a half years. When I went to the Detroit Bureau as a correspondent, we also had to cover the automobile industry. So that's part business. The Bureau Chief would be the Chief Automotive writer there, and the correspondent would be the regional correspondent, and also some automotive stuff. When he left, I moved to Bureau Chief and I do more of the business stuff. Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: Later on about utilities, coal companies, insurance companies, I may can talk to you about it, you know ad nauseum today if you ask me about coal burning fire plants and types of insurance companies, how insurance companies make money and how they don't make money. Story_ID: 95349 Speaker 1: And I'll tell you the, the funniest story. A whole lot of stories, but it was a funny story, is a--it was a crook story. In the early '70s [1970s], we had this--the convoluted energy crisis, and, and they were keeping gasoline and oil offshore, and that allowed the fuel shortages for power plants to run amok. And so coal prices went up because coal mines was still using coal. There were a lot of, there were a lot of get rich quick coal companies that came up overnight. And what they would do is they were just getting into work on strip mining and, and, and traditional mining, deep mining, you wanna mine on the ground [unclear]. Strip mining is gone on the side of the mountain, rake of the vegetation forestation over time and you get the surface coal. It's, it's a lower BTU [British thermal unit] content, it's cheaper. And so a couple of guys down in my old home state of Tennessee, right, got slick. And so what they would do is they would, would do something called layer loading. Layer loading is where you go out and dig up some dirt, right, put it in the bottom of the railcar and then top it off with some of this coal we just strip mined. Now the way you inspect coal in those days, right, you'd bring the railcar up to a utility yard, right. And they put a probe in the top of the car in different spots. The probe went down about, you know, eight, nine inches. And so it would always show coal, right. You accept the railcar and it's your, you just paid a thousand dollars for it, right. Then when you take the car to the next stop and you dump the car, you got a railcar full of dirt. And so these guys were, were getting away with about--ripping off about fifteen, twenty utilities around the country, sending layer loaded coal, rail coal cars. And so I wrote about that and, and that became one of the most hilarious stories, crook stories you could find of that time. Story_ID: 95350 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you went over to the National Desk I think as a correspondent, you for eight years you were a correspondent and Bureau Chief in Detroit [Michigan], Atlanta [Georgia] and Miami [Florida], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did, did something in Cleveland [Ohio], or was Cleveland in the area? Speaker 2: When I covered the Detroit Bureau, the Detroit Bureau included Michigan, Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky, west Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I covered at the same time the Cleveland Default, Financial Default, Municipal Default, and the Chrysler bailout. The Rust Belt was going broke at the same time. The whole Rust Belt was going broke. And so in the morning, I'd go by Chrysler and see what was going on with them, and I'd drive to the city airport in Detroit, and fly to, to lakefront airport in Cleveland, right. Because City Council was dealing with the financial crisis in the afternoon and the early evening. So I went to Cleveland, got a hotel room, rented it about a week, and took some clothes there and left them there, and just commuted back and forth from Detroit to Cleveland. That made me sick as a dog after about five weeks of going back and forth. But Cleveland got bailed out and so did Chrysler. Speaker 1: Yeah, Cleveland's mayor was Dennis-- Speaker 2: Dennis Kucinich-- Speaker 1: He's an Ohio Senator now. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Dennis just got defeated in the primary this year, and so this his last term in office. Speaker 1: He's a Congressman right now. Speaker 2: Congress, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Congressman, Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, funny guy, though. He's, he's a populist. He's very much a populist. He's been a, a crazy populist since Day One and you know I admired him for his, his ability to stand up to the establishment and fight and win. Speaker 1: Now he was very young as mayor of Cleveland. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They called him the "Boy Mayor" when he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Elected. Speaker 2: Yeah, but he, he was, he was just, he was a, a brash young guy and, and didn't fear anything. And, and that's what, what made him a winner. He's like Rocky the boxer in the movies, yeah. He just get in and, and no matter what was against him, he just keep fighting. Story_ID: 95351 Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan] you got another kind of a iconic figure, Lee Iacocca. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Chrysler. Speaker 2: I knew him, yeah. Lee Iacocca was a born salesman. And he understood the art of selling. That you gotta be a, a crowd worker, gotta do a lot of grip and grin in a crowd. Had to know how to make deals and cut deals. And, and, and I covered him when he, when he left Ford Motor Company. And, and I was part of the team that covered him. And what happened was he had been there, been at Ford Motor Company 20 years and he felt that he was, was in line to be CEO [Chief Executive Officer] when Henry Ford retired. Henry Ford had other ideas. He just basically didn't like Lee Iacocca. So one day he fired him as President. Kept him on as an employee [unclear] president. Gave him a little office in one of the warehouses out close to the Ford plant with nothing to do. And Lee didn't under--he said I don't understand this. I've done everything you've asked me to do, right. I've, you know, bring you top sales month, I brought the Mustang out, right. I brought the new Mustang out. What is the problem? And so Henry Ford answer was I just don't like you. Yeah. And boom. So the moral of the story is regardless of how hard you work, it boils down to chemistry. And if the boss just doesn't like you, they get rid of you. And so Henry Ford ended the, the whole thing with I just don't like you. Here's 20 years of working together, right, 20 years of making a lot of money together. And it ended on I just don't like you. And Iacocca was heartbroken, but, but Chrysler was smart. They bought him his contract and the Chairman of Chrysler, Ricardo, stepped down as Chairman and brought Lee in. And Lee took it for a dollar a year until they made money, cause he didn't make money. And sold people on this Chrysler K car to bring Chrysler back. And it was such a razzle-dazzle exercise, he succeeded and brought Chrysler back. And that was, that was a great success story for him. And he could stick his tongue out at Henry Ford and say "gotcha". Speaker 1: Yeah. The cars weren't great from what I under--remember. Speaker 2: No, no. But that's salesmanship. I mean everybody thought, everybody including the press corps, everybody thought the Chrysler K car was gonna be this, this phenomenal dream machine. I mean they had talked about it and talked about it and talked about it. If we can just get the K car out, you know, you know Chrysler will be saved. The world will be saved, right. And you gotta have that kind of belief in your product and that kind of salesman ship skill. Lee Iacocca was so good at it, right, you thought the K car was like a, a Cadillac or a Lincoln. It was gonna be fuel efficient, have all these things, but it was gonna be a Cadillac or a Lincoln, right. The K car was the most basic of cars because they didn't have any money to put anything lavish out. No luxurious car. They had enough money to put out a basic car, which is what they did. But they had done so much drum rolling and buildup, right, when it came out, everybody had to have one and they sold like hot cakes. Speaker 1: Now is he responsible for the minivan? Cause that, that was a good idea that-- Speaker 2: The minivan came toward the end of his reign. But the minivan was a good idea, and it did again, give them another bump. Chrysler's history though, is it has like ten year runs and it runs out of steam. And it, it goes down. And I wrote a book on Chrysler called "Bailout" and I went back and traced the history of the company. And every ten years like clockwork, they go up and down, up and down. And so I wasn't surprised that, that after the minivan sort of set itself in, that when the energy went down again, there goes Chrysler. But who was surprised [unclear]. Story_ID: 95352 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you covered the, the Haitian immigrant crisis in Miami [Florida] too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is--these are people desperate to get out of Haiti. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so they end up in Miami, but some believe because they're black immigrants coming to Miami, like the Cubans they were not welcome and-- Speaker 2: But remember the [unclear] Cubans were not welcome either. But that's, that's in, in shorthand, short explanation is they weren't like Cubans. The long explanation is they weren't, they weren't professionally trained Cubans. They weren't doctors, lawyers, teachers. They didn't have the, the formal education that the first two waves of Cubans had. And the Haitians were the same. They, they did not bring professional, formal training with them in most cases. And so they would become a, a burden on the people in Miami. When, when the Haitians came and the Marielitos came from Cuba, it was around the same time. The, the Catholic church had tried hard to embrace them the way it did with the first round of Cuban refugees from Castro in the early '60s [1960s], and again late '60s [1960s]. And, and when the Cubans landed then it was mostly middle class Cubans, merchants, teachers, people who were professionally trained. There was something for them to do. You didn't seem to have resettlement time for them. They created a whole community. When the people came in the '80s [1980s], it was very, very different. And so the Cubans who were there were hostile toward the first wave of Cubans. The Anglos who were there were not that welcoming, right. And so even the Catholic church with all of its efforts in Miami and its power in Miami, right, had a hard time getting people to embrace, embrace these refugees the way they had the first two waves. And it was a traumatic case. They, they--the, the refugees who came from Cuba early on, if you landed on the banks of the USA [United States of America], right, you could apply for asylum and they let you run free until you had an asylum hearing. And what happened with the Haitian refugees when they landed on the shore, they were immediately arrested and incarcerated in this place called the Krome Center up in north, northwest Miami, and they weren't, they weren't given the same open door, courteous embrace, warm embrace, loving embrace, that the refugees before them had. The entire immigration policy had turned its head by the early '80s [1980s] and, and people fleeing the Duvalier in Haiti and fleeing Castro in Cuba were totally unwelcome in the United States. It's fascinating. And, and what made it even more puzzling is that [Ronald] Reagan was President then. He came down for a visit, the Orange Bowl, and he wanted to drum up all the Cuban sport down there in Florida. And so he went to the Orange Bowl and, and talked about how bad things were in Cuba and, and that was more reason for you to be trying to leave there, right. And he gave this, this very, very great short liner that turned the house out. He talked maybe four, five minutes, all the Spanish he knew. He says "Cuba si, Castro, no". And it turned the house out, four words, right. Meanwhile you know, his immigration people on the, on the coast, rounded them up, put them somewhere, but don't let them in. And that was a, it was a bizarre contrast in, in public message versus what we were actually doing. Story_ID: 95353 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you covered the Atlanta [Georgia] child, the missing children and murdered children. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --case too. What do you make of that? Speaker 2: Well it was, it was a very traumatic, obviously, and tragic time in Atlanta's history. I'm among those who are still not sure they got the right person or persons. Speaker 1: Were you familiar with Wayne Williams as a person who--I mean but what I'm asking is, is he from what I understand was like a police groupie who followed the murders, was always on the scene and that sort of thing. Did you notice him early on before they accused him? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I had a long interview with him after he got picked up and questioned and released. Spent about an hour and a half talking to him and his, his father. And wrote this big piece called "Big Ideas, Small Achievements". And that was the story of Wayne Williams' life. The, the incident that led to his arrest haunts me whenever I think about it, right. There, there were three things. The police were, were guarding a, a bridge because a lot of bodies had been tossed over a bridge, problem one. Police were guarding a bridge. They heard a car approaching the bridge. It went across the bridge slowly. They heard a splash down below, below the bridge. And then the, the car went across and they stopped the car. Now based on the police report that we got, right. The car never stopped on the bridge. My question was how did you take a, a body if you're just one person in the car, Wayne Williams. How do you take a body, right, push it out of the car, over the railing of the bridge, right, in the water, and the car is still moving. If you answer that one for me, then I know you got the right guy. Because the car did stop on the other side of the bridge was Wayne Williams, right. Speaker 1: It seemed like it would take a tremendous athlete to accomplish this. Speaker 2: Phenomenal athlete, right. But, but, but based on that incident is where they stopped him and they arrested him, right, and they said a car was approaching the bridge, it slowed up. They heard a splash below the bridge in the water, and they--the car then proceeded on across the bridge, and that's when they pulled him over. Speaker 1: So they, they actually found a body down at the--did they find a body at the bottom of the-- Speaker 2: I think they found one. They didn't find one immediately, they found one a day or two later. And so if you heard a splash, you know you gotta say what you, what you found after the splash. And secondly, you gotta explain how the person did this without the car stopping, without wrecking the car or something like that. And so those are, are questions that still remain and, and, and I, I want to say that, that they probably know a lot more than they've disclosed, the police do. By the same token, they left a lot of holes in their story. And so I really don't know whether they got the right person, or they got all the right people. Story_ID: 95354 Speaker 1: Now was it, was the Chief [of Police] at that time Lee P. Brown? Speaker 2: Lee Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He's, he's got a decent reputation. Speaker 2: Yeah, all good, decent people. It's just that, that they apparently made an error early on by grouping all these, these killings into one group. And they had a Missing Murdered Children's Task Force. And apparently all these deaths could have been isolated out of the group and handled separately without creating all this, this flurry. And then again as they progressed along, there were all these questions that kept coming up that nobody could answer, or nobody would answer. So we, we kind of left that chapter and things calmed down and they stopped grouping them all together. I suspect you go down there again and now and spend a couple of months and, and find some pattern of some kids being killed, I don't know. But when I left it I was glad to be done with that story. It was a, it was a very gut wrenching story. Speaker 1: Kind of a quagmire. I remember Dick Gregory's attempts at trying to resolve it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With the Interferon and all that, you know. Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody thought they had the answer. They had psychics down there, they had everybody you can think of, right. It's, it's just some days are like you know, one day behind the other, you know and, and you, you couldn't get through a day without a report of a, another dead body being found. That was scary. Now granted it was all, all like on the south side of the city, sort of isolated, but still scary. Story_ID: 95355 Speaker 1: All right, we, we're ready. Okay, 1997 [sic 1987] you joined Knight Ridder newspapers as a National Affairs Correspondent for the Philadelphia Day--Daily News. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now why you want you to leave the New York Times? What, what happened? I know nothing lasts forever, but, but what-- Speaker 2: Well I'd been at the New York Times for thirteen years. I'd done five stops for them. I did have some aspirations of covering more politics at some point in time, cause politics are important to the newspaper. And there was a long, long line of people who wanted to do that. And the paper had already picked the people they wanted to do that for, for the foreseeable future. Especially short term being the '88 [1988] elections for President. A colleague of mine who had followed my work for a long time, we met at a dinner and he said if you ever wanna leave, call me, I got a job for you. And I was honored by that. And I said well the only reason why I leave is to cover the Presidential campaign of '88 [1988] because otherwise I won't have a chance to do that for The New York Times until '92 [1992] and I gotta wait in line again, see what other stars they hire between now and then. So I called him up and I said look, I said if I can cover the, the '88 [1988] Presidential campaign from start to finish, you know, you got me, I'm good to go. He said done. And so at the same time I was having a little personality meltdown at the the New York Times as Abe Rosenthal had retired and his successors were under orders to cut the budget and, and get rid of some people. So they had, they had developed a hit list of about twenty people in the Washington [D.C.] Bureau alone of the New York Times, they wanted to get rid of. And so they introduced performance reviews. New York Times didn't have performance reviews. You know, you just call you in and say you're doing a terrible job, you gotta go, right. So they put a Bureau Chief in the Washington Bureau who had been there four months, and then he writes these performance reviews. He is berating everybody on the hit list, right, all of us, right, were on the hit list, right. Your work is terrible, right. Pulitzer Prize winners, right, your work is terrible, right. You haven't done so-and-so and so-and-so, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And so we knew what was going on. And they gave you a choice. You can go back to New York, you can go to New Jersey, or you, or you can play your risk here and leave, right. I said okay, you want the paper back, fine, I'm gone. And so I, I called my colleague and said look, is the offer still good? He said yeah. I said put it in writing, when I get it in writing, same thing we talked about, you know I'll sign it and send it back to you, and you can announce it. And so I got his letter and it was good to go. So one afternoon I, I wrote a letter of resignation. I called my wife and said hey, today is the day. And she said I knew this was gonna happen at some point soon. I said yeah, today was the day. I gave them the letter of resignation about 2:00 and the meeting I'd been trying to have with the Bureau Chief for about two weeks, was suddenly immediately. And so he said what's the problem, why you wanna leave? He called New York. He got [unclear] on the phone and says Reginald, we should talk, we should talk. I said okay. I said what you wanna talk about? He said come up here tomorrow. I said well my air travel card is still good, I'll be there. And so I fly to New York the next day and we have a talk, a brief one, right. And, and one of the editors who I, I met when I first went to work there thirteen years earlier in New York and I passed his desk every day I was in New York, two and a half years. He says Reginald, it's such a shame we haven't had a chance to get to know each other better. I said no, I said no it's not a shame. I said you've just helped reinforce my reason for wanting to be gone right now. I said I passed by your desk every day I was in New York and said good morning to you every morning I was in New York. I said, you didn't say a word. I said, now you wanna get to know me better. I said I'm gone, I said I'm gone. I said I'll be gone by the end of the week. Story_ID: 95356 Speaker 1: And so I, I left and went to Philadelphia Daily News. Sure enough they made good on the, on the pledge. And in November, I'm in--in January I'm in Iowa freezing my ass off, right. Then I'm in New Hampshire freezing my ass off, right. This is what you wanted, pal. You wanted to cover the Presidential campaign. This is it. So I, I got a chance to really cover a great election year. It ended in the Spring time. [HM] Jesse Jackson got involved in the campaign, I covered him a couple of days. But I got a chance to cover every candidate running for President in both parties. Got a chance to go to all these states and write about politics in those states, and learn those states. And it's--it was an opportunity I would have not gotten at the The New York Times if I'd waited five more years or ten more years. Because the dye was set. I was one of Abe Rosenthal's minions, and Abe Rosenthal was gone. And so either the new guy likes you or you're toast. And so that's one of the things you learn about, about the, the politics of organizations is that you gotta be on the team that's running the place. If not, you know, you run a high risk game. And so I went to the Philadelphia Daily News and stayed in Washington [D.C.] as their Washington correspondent, and had a great run on the Presidential campaign. Story_ID: 95357 Speaker 1: Now, now I remember that campaign of '88 [1988] and there's a scene in my mind of a television debate, the Democratic debate. On the stage you got Al Gore, Richard Gephardt, you got Dukakis, you got, you got [HM] Jesse Jackson and you got George McGovern. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know who--and, and-- Speaker 2: And you got Paul, what's his name from Illinois. And that's why we're-- Speaker 1: Paul Simon. Speaker 2: The guy that wear the bow tie, yeah. Speaker 1: And these are all pretty sharp fellas up there. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they're having a discussion. There was something about Jesse Jackson's discourse. Jesse Jackson and McGovern seemed to stand to to me cause McGovern had better answers than anybody it seemed. But everybody knew they weren't gone vote for him, but he had better answers than anybody. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And Jesse could flip a phrase--he could handle any topic, you know, instant. Speaker 2: Yeah he, it was, it was a, it was a, it was a energized campaign on both sides. And it was a dynamic campaign. And everybody had a little something going for them. It took a while to seeing it work itself out. Speaker 1: But the emerging is Michael Dukakis. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: As the-- Speaker 2: And he flubbed it, he flubbed it. Speaker 1: Is it true, now is it true that the, the question about what would happen if someone raped your wife was the one that killed his campaign? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that killed-- Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well I think that he, he, he, he responded in an intellectual way, but he didn't respond in a, a, an ordinary guy way. And, and the thing for politicians, you know over the years, is that in order to be successful you have to be above them, but of them. And, and he didn't understand how to do that. You know to be above them, smarter, more politically savvy, whatever. But be like Joe Biden, be of them. You know, you know I would have taken the guy and, and knocked his chops off [unclear] to me, right. You know show some emotion somewhere. Speaker 1: Yeah, cause the question was you're against the death penalty, but suppose someone had raped and tortured and beaten your wife. Speaker 2: Right, what would you do? Speaker 1: What would you do? Speaker 2: Right, and he, and he gave a very, very intellectual, academic answer. And that was not the kind of answer the voting public wanted to hear then. You can be against the death penalty, also, right. But I wanna take that guy and I wanna beat his brains out. You know do something. You know show you got--this is your chance to show you have a little energy and emotion, right. Speaker 1: I think there was another scene they have in a tank with a suit and tie on, he had a helmet, but he had a suit and tie on. Speaker 2: He was in a Chrysler tank. It was a Chrysler plant trying to show he had the stuff and he looked like that kid in that "Lampoon" Magazine, just, just looked totally out of, out of character, out of place. And, and, and those things can, can grab politicians so quickly. Joe Ford got killed with one headline. Ford of New York dropped dead. When New York wanted the bail out money, it's like you know that killed Ford. They killed--it didn't matter what else he did, right. That headline stuck like glue. And, and so politicians can shoot themselves in the foot in a New York minute, and, and, and never realize what hit them. And in that case Dukakis was trying to answer the question intelligently, politely, right, and he missed his chance to show that he could be a slugger. Speaker 1: Now is this the election where Jesse Jackson was engaged in the Hymietown remark? Is this the one? Speaker 2: I think it was Hymietown, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was--and this was uncovered by a journalistic colleague I guess you could say, Milton Coleman. Speaker 2: At the Washington Post. Speaker 1: At the Washington Post. Speaker 2: Right. It was, it was an exciting year. Everything that could go wrong for everybody, went wrong. And, and then the Democratic convention was in Atlanta that year and Jesse Jackson had still not conceded. He didn't have enough votes to win but he hadn't conceded. And so they went to the convention debating on whether Jesse Jackson would be the--what he would get out of it, right, for throwing his support behind Dukakis. And I've forgotten exactly how it was, but there was just, just being there covering that story, right. It was the kind of drama and excitement you didn't wanna miss as a reporter. And, and if I had still been at the New York Times, I would have missed all of that. Yeah I was there, I was moving with the story, it was before we had 24-hour news cycles and, and you could still write something and it was still fresh for the next morning. And if you got the little nuances in your story, you're good to go. Story_ID: 95358 Speaker 1: Okay, now so what did you do after the election? Speaker 2: Got bored. No I, I started working on the 1990 Census and, and there were a lot of demographic changes that are still propelling in the last census here. And, and I think census data and what it uncovers is a very, very telling about what the country's going, where the country's been, and so I had a chance to do some good work, in my opinion, on the census. Then from that point, I did a volunteer stint with a group called the American Society of Newspaper Editors, ASN. And they, and they asked me if I wanted to be on the staff of their convention newspaper, which took college students in and talked of journalism, right, things I learned when I was getting started. And I said yes. And so they were so impressed with how well I had organized and managed this paper, that the organization's liaison to the paper was a publisher of a paper in Charlotte [North Carolina], and which was owned by Knight Ridder, my company. And he called and said we wanna do something with this guy, he's fantastic, right. Well you know, one minute wonder. So they, they, they immediately called and offered me a job on the news desk of Knight Ridder in Washington [D.C.] as an editor, right. And I was saying well, okay I'm done with the census, I'm done with the Presidential campaign, the guy that hired me is gone, once again, right, I'm out of favor. I better, I better leap while the--I better strike while the fire is hot. Sell when the stock is hot. And so I, I could move over from the Daily News and stay in Knight Ridder, right, and then employment would be seamless. And so I went on the desk as an editor in Washington. And during that time, I did everything but edit. And, and so after a while they got tired of that. During that time I, I did a lot of volunteer work with the Society of Professional Journalists, and that eventually led me to being elected National President. I volunteer with the National Press Club, and was chairman of their Speaker's Committee for two years. But I wasn't editing any copy. And, and then they even got me to be the Knight Ridder conventions manager in 2006. And that means constructing newsrooms and where the political [unclear] are, it's from scratch, build a newsroom from scratch. And I did that. I wasn't editing. And so they finally figured out I really don't like editing. I'm not good at editing. My--I don't like sitting down doing that line work and not being out in the street talking to people. And so it--and so I went through all these succession of good things going on and the at the same time the basic job I had was flaming out. And, and they said let's, let's--we gotta end this, this has gotta end. And so, and so I, I left the editing job and left the company. Was gone for two months, they called me back to be the corporate recruiter for Knight Ridder. And then that lasted for 13 years, almost 13 years, yeah. And then when Knight Ridder merged with McClatchy, they said you gotta keep this guy, he's the best recruiter in the country. As it turns out, I had evolved into one of the top newspaper recruiters in the country. I didn't know it. But the Knight Ridder had, had put so much emphasis on recruiting new talent, young talent, and they'd given me the money and the wherewithal to create all these development programs. I had a really big thing going on and didn't know it. I was one of the best in the industry. And so then became recognized for bringing in new talent, evolving talent. All the things I didn't get, that didn't exist when I started. I was able to do that for people in the generation behind me. Story_ID: 95359 Speaker 1: Now, now some of these, these activities at Knight Ridder include the Knight Ridder Scholars Program. Speaker 2: The Scholars Program, Rotating Internship Program, One Year Specialty Program, Ad Sales Delivering Program, Summer Internship Program. I had six programs in total. Speaker 1: Native American Internship Program. Speaker 2: Yeah, Native American Intern Program, yeah. And, and so all these things were aimed at, at bringing new voices into the newsroom and giving them a structured way to get in, and going out and finding them. You know [unclear] come up to you and say I want a job. A few of them will. But most of them, you gotta find them and say you ought to be in journalism; here's why. Because we're competing with other industries for talent. And the job market was tight. And so we had to make our case that you're on the college paper, you've done internship at so-and-so place, you ought to be in this business cause you really can make a difference. And, and it worked. And it worked phenomenally well. And so a lot of reporters across the country today that were, were minions of mine at some point early on when they came out of high school, they came out of college. And, and that's a good legacy. I did something right. He was a pretty good fellow, but he could have been better. Speaker 1: Favorite saying there, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But okay, so you, you were with the Knight Ridder and then it segued into McClatchy? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. When Knight Ridder merged with McClatchy, Knight Ridder said there are a few people you need to keep, you know because when McClatchy bought Knight Ridder, there were 120 people working for Knight Ridder corporate, and they, they kept four. I was one of the four. Everybody else got, you know, walking papers or golden parachutes, depends on how [unclear] were. And so they said okay, we wanna keep you on here. And so that was in, in 2005 and I'm still hanging around there now. And I was still doing not as much, but still some good things I think that work out and pay dividends. Story_ID: 95360 Speaker 1: Okay. Now in the meantime though, when you were doing these recruitment programs and training programs and you were still doing some writing. Speaker 2: Yeah I still write. Speaker 1: There was--now how did you get involved with the "Emerge" Magazine as a-- Speaker 2: Well a, a friend of mine named George Curry, a colleague who I knew when I was a correspondent, he left "Chicago Tribune" to take over "Emerge" Magazine. Speaker 1: Now this is about what year is this? Speaker 2: This would have been early '90's [1990's]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was looking for some writers. And I said I'll write something for you if I find something. So about a year later, I was at a high school, a Pearl High School reunion, right, and the luncheon speaker was a former teen football player who was at that point in time, a former federal prosecutor and defense lawyer in Richmond, Virginia. And he was railing and railing and railing about how our generation had let the generation behind us down, and you know we're letting Congress enact all these crazy drug sentencing laws and blah, blah, blah. We're throwing this whole generation to the wolves. So once he got through with his, his lecture and, and admonition and beratement of all his classmates, I said look, I said if you find me one real person who fits all the things you're talking about, I'll write about him. And his answer to me was how many do you want? I was stunned by that. And so he said let me go back to Richmond [Virginia], call some of my clients, and tell them what you wanna do, and I'll try to hook you up. So it took about a month, but I found Kemba Smith's family and I told them we'd meet. And so we met at Union Station in Washington [D.C.] as they were coming home one weekend in December from visiting their daughter in prison in Connecticut. And I, and I'd brought some samples of the magazine, brought some samples of my work. And I said look, I don't write cheerleader work, I don't write fan mail. I said I try to write stories that's straight down the middle. I said and if, if your daughter and you are willing to talk to me on the record, I won't use fictitious names. On the record and will tell me everything I ask, I'll write about you. I said I think overall the sentencing laws are a little stupid and a little overreaching. I said but I don't know what your daughter [unclear] in prison. And, and I won't know until I'm done writing. And even then, I can't say she should be freed. I can just write what her situation is. I said but if you've been trying for a year to get into a publication and nobody will do it, I'll write the story; I'll get it published. So they, they, they talked to their daughter Kemba about all these conditions I have, right. You know, no anonymous stuff. You gotta come clean, tell me what's going on, blah, blah, blah. And she said I'll do it. Nobody else will talk to me, I'll do it. Cause she was trying to get her story told and she had written all the leading black magazines first. And, and they had not responded. She'd written to other magazines, they had not responded. So nobody wanted to hear her story. You say drug dealer, right, doesn't matter if you were a peripheral player or not. You say drugs and in prison already, it's hard to get people's attention. You know they say where there's smoke, there's fire. And so her case was you know, she was the one on fire. And, and she was the one who got smoked. Story_ID: 95361 Speaker 1: But you had to sit down and talk to her for a couple of days to understand how she wound up in the situation, in order to understand that she belonged on the stupid farm, not in prison. And Congress belong on the stupid farm, not in Congress. A lot of people were doing stupid things--all this panic about what to do about this drug crisis. Fox News had just gotten their license, they wanna crank up the, the volume a little bit with cities under siege, things like that. And so we had created a whole paranoia, sense of paranoia across the country about cocaine trafficking. And so Congress in its wisdom, rushed to adopt these laws based on the weight of drugs, not on the quality of drugs, not on how the drugs are handled, but just the weight. How much did you have when you were arrested, right. One pound, two pounds, two ounces, eight kilos, what--and we're gonna based the sentencing on the amount of drugs you had. First time they'd ever done this. First time they'd ever done this, and did it in like three months. I covered the story. So they passed these laws and, and Kemba Smith would have gotten maybe 30 days had she been picked up two years earlier. Instead she got 24 and a half years. So one thing was the timing in history that this thing happens, and it was the paranoia in the country around drug violations. And thirdly it was the reluctance of anybody, Democrat, Republican, Independent, whatever, to do anything that would imply that they're being soft on crime. They didn't have the guts to do it, they didn't have the will to do it. So instead all these kids who, who are on the sideline, peripheral, right, go to jail eight, ten, twenty, thirty years. It was, it was one of the most shameful eras in my--and remains one of the most shameful eras in the country's history of what we've done--these young people get picked up on cocaine violations. They're all, they're not all hardened criminals. The hardened criminals are getting off with, you know, short time. Story_ID: 95362 Speaker 1: Kind of explain, go over the Kemba story just a, just a--you know, the details for us so that people would-- Speaker 2: Kemba was a, a, a naive college freshman who got gaga eyes over some guy hanging around the campus. Speaker 1: This was at Virginia State or-- Speaker 2: Hampton. Speaker 1: Hampton, okay, Hampton. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, and by the time she realized that, that the guy she was going gaga over, right, was a, a hardened criminal several years older than she was, and was engaged in a, in a major traffic ring moving drugs from Harlem down to Norfolk and the shipyards. She was, she was semi in love with him and afraid to leave him. Speaker 1: Now the fear part I remember from the article. He was a pretty dangerous-- Speaker 2: Pretty dangerous guy, yeah. Speaker 1: Once she got close to him, she found out how dangerous. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. He beat her a couple of times, and he got her attention. And, and, and he, he--she was so vulnerable herself, that she figured that if she did anything crazy, right, he would go crazy and find her, maybe hurt her, maybe hurt her parents. Speaker 1: Now, now this is a girl that had never been in trouble before, right? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Parents almost like model parents. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: [Unclear] we think, and more than we think. And, and, and so when I wrote this first story-- Speaker 1: Now what was she busted doing before, before we go on? Speaker 2: She was arrested for being--we have a federal law called the RICO Statute, R-I-C-O [Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations ]. And that's an organized crime statute. And it allows the authorities to charge any person involved in a drug organization with all the crimes committed by anyone in the organization. So her, her "boyfriend" right, the drug leader right, he was charged with moving like you know, 22 pounds of cocaine, murder, assault, fleeing officers, blah, blah, blah. So she gets charged with the same thing. Cause everybody in the organization can be charged with everything that anybody's charged with. And so if you then plead or you're convicted, she pled, they just look at the chart and say okay, well [unclear] for cocaine, a weapon in use, right, murder, blah, blah, blah. This all adds up. And so the judge says I'm looking at the chart because the legislation takes discretion out of the hands of judges, I'm looking at the chart. And so he gives you a little leeway, 24 and a half years, goodbye. Now what happened was her lawyer was on this understanding that if she told them what she knew, that she could get a little leeway in sentencing, right. Well by the time she came to her senses and told them what she knew, the boyfriend was dead. He'd gotten killed. And so she's sitting in prison pondering back and forth, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. Do I tell them what I know, do I tell them what I know, right. This dude's dead when she calls and says okay, I wanna come clean, right. They said we don't need it now, he's dead. So the charges stand, no deal. Story_ID: 95363 Speaker 1: The, the, the Kemba story just, just got more and more complicated the more you got into it. And so in the end, this story was supposed to be 2,500 words. And I promised to stay within my limit. I, I had a reputation for over-writing. So when I got to 5,000 words of writing, I called the magazine and said I have a small problem. No when I got to 7,000 words. I said I have a small problem. And they said what's the problem? I said I'm running a little over. They said how much? I said about, about 4,000 words. They said we can take care of that, no problem. So in the end I sent them a 10,000 word story. And I was writing this based on the fact that this was such a compelling story she had told me and it all was true. I didn't make anything up. So I, I called George Curry the editor, and said George I'm sending you this story. I said it's a little problem, it's, it's 10,000 words long. So it's there was a long pause like the Mr. Johnson pause. He said well I can take care of it. He says I have to go to New York in the morning on the train and I'll read it on the train and I'll cut it on the way up there. I said okay. The story's dead, right, because I'd written the story in a way that requires it to be as long as it is. There's no air in this story. And so he gets to New York, he calls me up from the train station. He says I have a problem with your story. I said what's the problem with the story? He says it ain't long enough. He said I need you to fill in some holes here. So we wound up with a story that' 12,000 words long. And so we break off part of it and make it a second part called "The Sentencing Game". But basically in the end what he did was he took the entire feature section of the magazine issue, and took an unknown character which is unheard in the magazine world. Put her on the cover and gave this one story the entire feature section. And so we ran a 12,000 word, two part take called "Kemba's Nightmare". It was the third best selling issue of the magazine. It got hundreds of letters in response, people writing letters saying I know about this, there's somebody in my family. Or I been involved in this, I'm gone stop. And just the outpouring. And then from that point, you know lawmakers signed on and, and civil rights people signed on, teachers signing on. The students started reading the magazine and, and writing in and saying what can they do. And it was just, just a surprising response because we'd hit a real nerve in, in the country at that point in time. People knew that engaging in illegal drug activity was wrong, but they also had a strong sense that excessive punishment was wrong. And there was nothing that would serve society well by putting this lady in jail for 24 and a half years. She'd be 40-something years old before she got out of prison. And would have missed her son's growing up, probably would have missed the death of a couple of parents. She'd still be in prison today. She'd have four or five more years to go, like 20, 18, 20, 17, something like that. And so anybody who understood the story in total and understood how the government arrived at its decision to impose these kinds of sentences, they would say this is crazy. What she did was crazy. What Congress did was crazy. We need to call time out, tell everybody to step back a few, and give this thing some rational, reasonable, reasonable examination and resolution. And so that, that's Kemba's story. Story_ID: 95364 Speaker 1: I was--my reaction to it when I read it was fairly strong and I shared it with Vista volunteers I was training [unclear] crime and safety project. I was surprised I guess at a couple of--I don't know how long of [unclear] and if there was a follow up story about students from Dayton, Ohio's Colonel White High School raised money for Kemba's defense. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And their picture was in the, the "Emerge" and it was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah the, the--we thought it was a, was a, was a great one time story, and it turned out we wound up writing three stories over three years about it because it was a story that wouldn't die. And, and finally they got enough support. Maxine Waters, a Congresswoman from California, held a rally or two on Capitol Hill, and, and Bobby Scott, the Congressman from down in Norfolk [Virginia] held rallies. And so you know the Kemba [unclear] became a, a sort of national issue that had to be dealt with, couldn't be avoided. And so did mandatory minimum sentences in tandem with Kemba Smith. She was the poster child for what was wrong with those sentences. And so you had--we have high school kids in Dayton, Ohio getting deeply involved in a, in a political issue in Washington, D.C.. You say to yourself if you're one of these Washington politicians, well if it can move people there, it can move people anywhere, so we need to look at this thing. And I think that, that helped the groundswell. When the defense fund got involved, helped the groundswell. We could go to Clinton and say this sentence needs to be at least commuted to time served, which is what he did, if not pardoned. So he couldn't pardon her, all right. But he at least commuted her sentence to time served, and then got her out of there. And, and recently she, she--her probation time expired I think, so she's pretty much a free person now. She's still can't vote because she's covered by the laws in Virginia. I think she has to try again, has to ask to vote. But a lot of things that, that she missed, you know like all while she was peripheral person of this thing, and in the end a victim of this thing, right. She paid a dear, dear price for it for a long time. And a lot of kids are. You know she's not by herself. You know she just got lucky enough to find a, a reporter that said okay, what's the--what is this really about? And it all started at the high school reunion where the classmate was reaming the classmates out, you know, for losing the generation behind us. If we had all this, this love and admiration for our generation, right, why aren't we showing that for the generation behind us? Why are we just throwing these kids to the wolves? And it was a good, a good call to action and everything worked out in the end. Story_ID: 95365 Speaker 1: Now this is--in community organizing which they, they say [HM] Barack Obama is an old community organizer. In community organizing there's such a thing as cutting an issue. You know many things are wrong, but they're not explained in a way that causes people to act. And so what you did was a masterpiece of cutting an issue. Speaker 2: Thank you. I tried. I tried. It, it--the, the more I explored it, the, the more I--there were two things going on. One, I was, was, was writing and saying how could one person do so many stupid things? And, and in the process I had to keep telling myself you're young. When you're young, you do stupid things. You know why didn't she leave? Cause she was young and she didn't know any better. And at--on the other hand I was saying how could these intelligent lawmakers do such stupid things? You know how can you hold and adopt a law with no hearings, right, no expert testimony, and you're trying to adopt intelligent, enlightening world. And so I had both things going at the same time. I'm trying to explain everybody's position, make sure everybody has their say. I'm not trying to indict anybody or call anybody stupid. I'm just saying here's what you did, and let the reader decide, right. And as long as I, I did what Fred Friendly said, right, don't be judgmental, just report the facts. As long as you just support the facts, you have no problem there, the reader will reach their own judgment. And, and that's why that story came out and [unclear] is he for the girl or not? You know he, he made her look so stupid. No, I didn't make her look stupid, she made herself look stupid, I just wrote about it. And so, so it took a while for her folks to understand what I was doing and it didn't take her any time at all to understand, right. I mean she knew in retrospect that she had gotten sucked into this, this thing and had lost control. And, and she just said over and over again, you know I blame no one but myself for what I did, right. But, but I wanna make sure that I get a chance to get it right. And she's done pretty well so far. I stay in touch with her about once every six months and see how she's doing. I don't wanna read a, a Kemba four story. So probably I'll carry her to my grave, trying to make sure she's you know, still on the right track. Story_ID: 95366 Speaker 1: Okay. So now this is--would you--I mean is, is there another story that you've written that's had the resonance of this story? Speaker 2: That's been the best story I've ever written, yeah. I've written a lot of stories, have had impact and I've gotten things changed in society. But I think the Kemba Smith story was like the best thing I, I've done. I've written about you know the grand jury selection laws and the garnishments and the floods and, and Katrina and Louisiana, you know, shootings at elementary schools in Michigan. This one story though, it beat them all. If I had to pick one. Speaker 1: Now you have received numerous awards. Speaker 2: They had to give them to somebody. Speaker 1: Yeah, no Pulitzer Prize though, for a story like that. Speaker 2: I did not-- Speaker 1: This was in "Emerge" Magazine. Speaker 2: I only got one award for the Kemba Smith story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was reminded don't write to get an award because I know that story was top quality. I did get recognized in a book called "Muck Raking" as the Kemba Smith story being one of the best 100 series written in the past century. And so, and so I haven't gotten any awards [unclear], a lot of compliments on that. But I got a lot awards, they had to give them somebody. And if everybody's doing what they should be doing, everybody gets an award. I was doing what I should be doing. Speaker 1: Yeah I'm not trying to cheapen the Pulitzer Prize, but a lot of them have--you know we've interviewed quite a few Pulitzer Prize winners, and, and I don't think any one of them has had a story that's you know, that's known in the community. I mean I don't think they really--the people really still remember and know about. Speaker 2: Well you got, you got to go with what you got. I went with what I had. And if I didn't get a Pulitzer, I don't worry about it. You know my life may have been different if I had gotten it, but I couldn't get a--I didn't get a book, didn't get a movie, didn't get a Pulitzer Prize, but I did get the satisfaction of knowing I wrote a good story. Speaker 1: I am sort of surprised that no one stepped forward to do a TV movie or something, you know, some kind of a theatrical project Speaker 2: I think initially everybody was waiting to see what would happen. And then people were waiting to see how'd the life come out. Well you know the wait broke the camel's back. And so the camel's back is broken now. Everybody's just waited, and waited and waited so long that it's an old story now. So you know I lost to the wait game of time. Story_ID: 95367 Speaker 1: Okay. Well all right so--but you've--now you're still with McClatchy? Speaker 2: I still recruit for them. Speaker 1: Recruit, all right. And, and have--do you have any--what, what are your plans for--do you have any recruitment plans or, or anything we haven't discussed or any--in terms of that job? Speaker 2: Well I hope the economy gets better so I can go back in full gear again. We've been, we've been in low gear for--since 19--since 2008. And trying to wait on this economy to bounce back so we can really hire some people and really do some things. And so I, I'm kind of hoping that the economy bounces back and we will do things again like we used to before it's, it's, again, you know the, the wait game and I'm gone. But we'll see, we'll see. Story_ID: 95368 Speaker 1: The one thing you didn't ask me about is, is the National Press Club. And if you got a minute, I'll tell you about that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The National Press Club has these luncheons you see on TV all the time. And, and that has somebody to organize, and it's a Speaker's Committee. And so I have the good fortune of being Chairman of the Speaker's Committee for two years. And it was the first year of Bill Clinton being in office. So we had all the cabinet members. Speaker 2: So this is '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: In '92 [1992], yeah. Speaker 2: And, and the second year was you know the, the Middle East was still hot, it's hot all the time. And Russia was still--was on its way out the door. Maggie Thatcher was hot then. And I had all these people here, I got a chance to meet them all. Margaret Thatcher, [Mikhail] Gorbachev interviewed on a book he wrote, Yasser Arafat, Rachel Robinson, the widow of Jackie Robinson. I got a chance to--and Julia Child. Julia Child came and spoke about cooking. So the format of the Press Club lunch is we have it from 12 to 2:00. Twelve to 12:30 is a little private reception for our speaker and Press Club guests. And then 12:30 to 1:00 you get a chance to eat, and one to two we have the Press Club speaking part. About ten minutes to two, Julia Child's down to the Q and A part. And she asks in the middle of a Q and A, asks the audience is there a dentist in the room? She said I think my bridge has come out. So everybody laughs and jokes and so she's still taking questions. She has--has to a part and says I'm serious, I think I've lost my bridge. So the, the fortunate thing is she kept going. The unfortunate thing is we had to get her to a hospital as soon as this thing was over. Had to take her to go to a dentist to get her bridge put back in. And so it's, it's, it's wonderful moments like that that made the--that hard job enjoyable. Again it's a lot of hard work before you get to have fun. Yasser Arafat came and, and we have a, a no weapons policy in the Press Club Building. But he always carry a weapon on him, right. And so you know I had the responsibility of saying look, I said are you packing heat? He says I'll never tell you. He just smiles and says I'll never tell you. And we had to go on in, right. I can't kick him out, right. But--and then we had the former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela. He came for a visit to the states, we had him to speak. And so we knew that he had--was a boxer at one time in his life. And we knew that he was going to New York when he left Washington for another visit. We didn't know the details. So the last question was Mr. Mandela, you know you were a boxer at one time in your career, says you know what you think about boxing now? So he says well while I'm in New York I'm going to go see Muhammad Ali. And then he says and I'm gone tell him, he said you know I can move like a butterfly and sting like a bee. And, and he started going through the motions, right, and just turned the house out. It was like phenomenal. He was just like off the cuff, nobody knew what his response was gonna be. And, and he seized the moment to capture the crowd, and did a great job. Rachel Robinson was like phenomenal. Hank Aaron came and spoke. He has a contract and he can't autograph baseballs and stuff. All the kids in the room, you know, he used to autograph baseballs. He said I can't turn these kids down. He said I'm sorry, and so he just autographing balls, nice person, nice person. And then we had the prosecutor in the OJ Simpson trial from California. She was there, and was very, very upset that we're asking the tough questions. I said I'm sorry, but you're at the Press Club. This is the Press Club, we ask tough questions, that's our job. Speaker 1: Marcia [Clark]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Marcia, yeah. And so she was, was livid and said she'd never come back again. And I said I'm sorry you feel that way, but, but this is the Press Club, right. And, and we can't--we don't, we don't do softball questions to people that have been tough like that. Story_ID: 95369 Speaker 1: Probably the most disappointing speaker we had was Sharon Stone. And Sharon Stone got there late, so she missed the reception. She missed most of the lunch and then she said she had to leave as soon as she had been speaking. And so she didn't stay afterward to mingle with the crowd. Just came in, did her a little ditty and left. And so, so we learned a lot about people. There was one gentleman who came early on. He was the Chairman of the--what's the European, European forces, joint European forces, and he had cancer. And so he brought his pills with him, right. And he was on a, a pill diet, pill regiment. And so I asked him during, during the lunch I said, I said how--just out of curiosity, I said how many, being bold, how many pills a day do you take? He said I take 120 pills a day. And, and he was hoping that all these vitamins and, and this, this nontraditional treatment would give him time. And he was dead about six months later. But I learned that, that even the most important people quote/unquote in the world, right, they all have problems like ordinary people have. And they do what they think is best to address their problems. And he was doing what he thought was best. And--but when your number falls, your number falls. His number fell, he was gone. But the Press Club, the chance to be a Press Club's Speaker's Committee Chair is a, is a, a great opportunity. I recommend it to anybody. It consumes a lot of your time. But it has great rewards in what you're able to do and bring people in. And it helps you learn a lot about the people you cover. We had Ron Brown, we had, had you know you name it, we had them there. And it was a great time to be there. The only person who wouldn't come was Bill Clinton, yeah. And he was the first President to not show since I think Roosevelt. Every President had been there at least once. And he came there when he was campaigning, but he didn't come to the Press Club while he was President. Gerald Ford, and, and you couldn't get rid of him. Even after he was out of office, he called and said he wanted to establish a Gerald Ford Environmental Reporting Award, right. So I think even to this day, the Press Club still gives the President Gerald Ford Environmental Reporting Award, and they have one lunch donated to him, dedicated to him. So some people came and when they come once, you can't get them to stay away. Speaker 2: Well I, I listen to it on public radio when I can, you know. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: There's some interesting presentations on National Press Club. I'm always surprised. Story_ID: 95370 Speaker 1: So, well tell us about--now, now you're involved in a Society for Professional-- Speaker 2: Society for Professional Journalists. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got involved with them in 1984 when I got moved to New York, and we moved to Washington by the "New York Times". And a former desk mate of mine in Nashville, at the "Tennessean", was elected president. And so he, he knew I was a, a pretty [unclear] guy and, and not a negative sense, had a lot of spark. And so he wanted me to, to chair his [unclear] Affairs Committee at SPJ, US Presidency. I said I'll do it, but you can't be ham stringing me or anything. I said I need your support when I'm doing it. He said you got it. So I, I went there, I did that for a year, liked it, and got deeper and deeper, more deeply involved with SPJ and what it was doing. And before you knew it, they wanted me to run for Chair of the Legal Defense Fund. Well it's a plant, it's a plant post. So I just said okay I'll do it. And so again I'm, I'm thrust into some new area I don't know, but I have a lot of interest in, which is freedom of the press. And so the Legal Defense Fund's job is to go out and find instances of people being reigned in. Newspapers being barred from public beings and things like that, and work with them. So I enjoyed that. Then everybody said well you know what? You need to, you need to be on the ladder, a leadership ladder of this group, nationally. And so sucker that I am, [unclear] went up for secretary/treasurer. Nobody wants to oppose me, they know they can't beat me. I'm not, I'm not popular in the group, right. So I get that job. And I realized they don't have any money, they're broke. So I go into my fundraising mode. And I call all the people I know and tell them we're broke. And believe it or not, I'm able to raise enough money to keep our doors open until I can negotiate some loans so we can keep our doors open longer, right. Water. Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: So I realized the organization has no money and, and I, I go back to what I told Abe Rosenthal years earlier. I don't take jobs to fail. And so I, I made up a list. I figured out how much money we needed to raise to stay in business for the short term, next two or three months. I needed 50 grand a month. And so I was able to raise enough money to keep us going until our fiscal year ended. And then I was able to, to dissect the proposed budget for the next year and figure out where the holes were in the budget and explain why that we're still going broke. Because the budgeting wasn't good. And so I got them to rewrite the budget and, and negotiate some loans at favorable interest rates. And, and got SPJ back in business again. And so I've stuck with them since then. My, my achievements and the legend of my achievements have grown and grown and grown and grown and grown. It's like the snowball going down the side of the slope of the hill. So--and now in some circles I'm larger than life, right, because of what I did. But I just did what a leader is supposed to do, and that's make sure the place sustains and survives. And it's better in the future than it was when I found it. At least as clean, at least as clean as it was when I found it if not cleaner. And that's what I did. Story_ID: 95371 Speaker 1: Okay, now you're a member of the, of NABJ too, right? The National Association of Black Journalists? Speaker 2: No, I'm an on and off member. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If, if I'm feeling good about what they're doing, I'm a member. If I'm not feeling good about what they're doing, I don't rejoin. Speaker 1: Well what would turn you off about the NABJ? Speaker 2: Sometimes they make leadership decisions that, that don't resonate well. And--or they, they splurge on things that I really disagree with. It--we're a group of journalists, right. We're not the Urban League, we're not the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we're not Rainbow PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] Coalition, and we're journalists. And so journalists are, are a little more, should be a little more humble, a little more frugal on what to do with people's money, and, and impartial. You know the, the core of our credibility is our ability to remain impartial. And so when you start jumping on all those, those very narrow lanes are defined for credibility in journalism, right, then I get a little, little worked up. And I'll, I'll vote with my money. I just give it to somebody else. Story_ID: 95372 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That I survived all this stuff. Seriously. I have done a lot of things and had a lot of opportunities. I've missed a lot of opportunities. I've survived it all. Life is a, is a tough road to hoe and I've been unusually lucky and, and I, I know it. And I feel good about that. I didn't get here by myself. I got here with the help of a lot of people. And you know I don't think I've failed most of them. I think I've made most of them happy. You can't make everybody happy. But I, I survived and persevered, and that's the legacy. He was a pretty good fellow, but he could have been better. Story_ID: 95400 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Concerns are that we seem to be losing most of the gains we made in my generation. We may be, maybe we're not, maybe we're just getting things in different ways. But I get this sense that, that we're really not making a lot of headway. And this economy since 2008, hasn't helped. If you look at all the statistics, black people were poor before the economy went down the tubes. And now we, we're poorer because a lot of the middle class people who made it big and made it great in the last two decades, are now among the new poor. So economically, we're not making any headway; we lost headway made. Politically and socially, I don't, I don't see the, the, the sense of momentum and, and focus that we had coming out of the '60's [1960's]. Coming out of the '60's [1960's] it was, it was almost like a, a team effort to achieve. And I don't sense the team effort anymore. It's like we don't know where we're headed now. And we don't know how to collectively get there. I learned something years ago writing about Sun Microsystems, a computer company that's now gone. The thing they kept Sun Microsystems focused was they had an enemy, they were focused. And so they kept growing based on that. And when they lost their enemy, they lost a sense of direction. Our enemy was racial segregation and racism and since segregation has visibly disappeared by and large, and racism is hard to detect by and large, we don't have a target right now. We don't have a target. And so in the sense of what do we do with our target, it's like how you won a football game and you don't know where the goal post is. Because you know the goal post is, is sort of disappeared and nobody knows exactly what's going on right now. So that's, that's the concern, that, that we don't--we're not exhibiting especially among our young en masse, we're not exhibiting the same kind of enthusiasm and drive and pitch that we had in the '60s [1960s] and the early '70s [1970s]. The hope is that I'm wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Really wrong. I'd love to be really wrong. Cause I want the next generation to have the opportunities that I had. I want them to, to, to see what the possibilities are just by being there and by having some energy and spark and curiosity about things. And so the hope is that I'm wrong. Story_ID: 95401 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us something about your family now. You, you have children, right and, and you're married, you have a wife here. Speaker 2: I have three children and I have a wife. Speaker 1: Okay. How did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I met her at a, at a dinner. I--she was in school and I had an off day, a Sunday, I wasn't working that Sunday. And got a call from a mutual friend who was--said he and his wife were having dinner and were inviting someone from the campus to come to dinner and did I wanna join them if I wasn't working. And so I had the day off, not doing anything, I, I'm game. And so they brought this beautiful young lady to dinner and we had a lovely dinner, just the four of us, right. And then after dinner we were having dessert. And those days we're all poor, so dessert was like, you know, what's the latest ice cream from the grocery store. And so we're scooping ice cream out and I said are you fixing a bowl for me? And her response was in essence I hadn't planned to, but I will. And I said well, well, well blow my pants off, deflate that little whatever it was. And so from that point on, I said I like her, you know. She ain't what I like, she not a southern girl, right. Cause southern girl would have said sure, what kind do you want? You want chocolate or vanilla? And, and her thing was I hadn't planned to, but I will. I don't want to, but I will. And I said that's different. And, and so I, I got focused and, and two months later I asked her to marry me with one condition. That if she said yes to the question I was gonna ask her, that we do something about it within a month. So she said okay, what's the question. I said would you marry me? And she said yes. And so we got married sure enough, within a month. Everybody must have thought we were crazy. Her folks thought she was crazy. Mine thought I was crazy, right. But we got married and we're married more than 40 years. And she hasn't kicked me out yet. And she hadn't kicked me out by now, I think I'm in pretty good shape. You know I watch my p's and q's and every day. I think I'm in pretty good shape. As for me, I feel I got really lucky and I found somebody who will deal with me as crazy as I am. And, and she'll take the, the dog, fleas and all. And she likes the dog, she likes the fleas. And, and I appreciate that about her. I, I had a chance I think to marry a lot of different women, and, and I didn't. And I don't have any regrets about that. And the only, only regret I have is I didn't meet my current wife sooner. And that would have spared me some other agony I had before I met her. So yeah, I think I made the right choice. You only get a chance in life to make a few major choices in your lifetime. And, and that's one of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what about children? Speaker 2: I have two sons and a daughter. The males the oldest, the daughter's youngest. He's a scuba diver, the oldest one is. The middle one's an investment banker, we call him Daddy Warbucks. The youngest one is a film maker and a jazz singer. They all, they all--I, I--at one point in time I, I wondered would they go into journalism. I wanted gonna like insist on it, right. Or try real hard to, you know, steer them in that direction. But they all went in their own direction and, and they all had pretty much decided what they want to do with their lives. And, and the one thing you always realize as you're older, that you change directions. If you don't like what you're doing, if you got enough inner strength and inner confidence, you will do something else. And so I, I feel that, that in the case of my daughter and both sons, right, they have enough knowledge of self that if they put their minds to it, they can do what they wanna do. And you know they, they have their up days and down days, but there are more up days than there are down days. And so I, I think I've done my work. If I haven't you know it's too late now. I'm out of money and out of ideas. Story_ID: 95402 Speaker 1: All right, well is there anything I have not asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Let me think. No, I think you--well there's one thing, and that's my radio career, short lived as it was. The radio, the radio, the [unclear] about tenth grade I think it was, on the radio. That set the stage for a lot of things also. Because again it, it gave me an opportunity to, to meet people and, and to realize how nice people could be, and realize how, how rude people could be. It taught me more about counting money. It taught me more about how to do basic things. And it, it taught you more about how to endear yourself to people. You know if you're in the limelight and there are a couple of places you can come off being in the limelight. You can be rude to people or you can be like you were before you got in the limelight. I prefer to be as humble as I can. And in spite of all those spurts of, of, of many level popularity and notoriety I've had, I always like just kind of like being me. You know I, I wondered a lot of times you know had I gotten some of these breaks along the way would I still be true to me because the outside pressures on a person who's you know, a real high profile personality. And it's always important to, to be true to yourself. Fred Friendly told us in journalism school if you're thinking about selling a story or, or fudging on a story or, or plagiarizing a story or whatever, right, he said what's the main thing you have to ask yourself? You know, who would know? And the answer is I'd know, that's who'd know. And so whatever you do, you have to live with yourself. And so I feel like the career path I chose and the things I've done, it ain't got me the, the highest level I probably could have attained, but I'm happy about it and I have no regrets about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the radio station disc jockeying, the newspaper, the television, the whole nine yards. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what you just gave us was your journalistic philosophy in a lot of ways I guess. Speaker 2: Did I? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 95403 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a pretty good fellow, but he could have done better. Speaker 1: Okay, it's consistent. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 95404 Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of me taken during the heydays of my career. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, so when? Speaker 1: This was early 1990's and I was on a road trip down in South Carolina. Speaker 2: That's my dad. What year was that taken? What year, what do you think? Probably 1950's. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: That's William Stuart Senior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is my mom, Maxie Stuart, 19--what does that year say on there, '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Reginald Stuart, the aspiring DJ when he's in the tenth grade in Nashville at a local radio station, WVOL. Speaker 1: Now if you can tell me what other young talent came to that radio station, I'll give you a dollar, a cash prize. Speaker 2: That's Reginald Stuart and to his right Lewis Miller. They were both editors and publishers of a neighborhood newspaper in Nashville. And they were competing editors per se. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay that's your picture from the-- Speaker 2: You get a dollar. Speaker 1: I get a dollar? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is, this me in the early, 1969, '70 [1970] when I was working at the TV station, WSIX TV, and I was interviewing a couple visiting the United States from Europe. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: And is that previous one, that was the picture that appeared in the newspaper, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that was in the National Tennessean. Speaker 1: And that was in the station that Oprah Winfrey used to-- Speaker 2: This is me in, in my newsroom at WSIX TV in Nashville, 1970. Speaker 1: And that's one of my few pictures form days at the "New York Times". Speaker 2: And that's me and in 1980 autographing my book "Bail Out" about the government's bail out of Chrysler Corporation. Speaker 1: And that's me interviewing Henry Ford, II, who was then Chairman of Ford Motor Company. That was 1970's. Speaker 2: And that's me during a, a brief moment in the Detroit Bureau of the "New York Times" in 1979. Speaker 1: And that's me again from "Chrysler Kudzu, Good luck in Atlanta, the Motor City will miss you". That was a little farewell party when I was leaving Detroit going to Atlanta for the "New York Times". Speaker 2: That's me on the campaign trail in 1988, we're in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, boarding a, a boat on the Jesse Jackson campaign. Speaker 1: And that's me in my work cubicle in Washington for the "Philadelphia Daily News", and my favorite Peanuts tie. Speaker 2: That's me in the early 1990's at the National Press Club with Rachel Robinson, the widow of Jackie Robinson, and baseball player's name, sportswriter's name? Speaker 1: Not Red Barker. Speaker 2: No, no, no. We had his name written down somewhere too, I don't know where it is. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: I can tell you. Speaker 2: We'll tell you in a minute. Yeah, but he was a legendary baseball writer and he was one of the people who, who wrote the stories that got the major leagues integrated. Speaker 1: That's me in the early 1990's at the National Press Club with the late Ron Brown who was then Secretary of Commerce. Speaker 2: And that's me at the Knight Ridder Bureau in Washington in the Clinton era with Vice President Gore and some of my news colleagues in the news room. Speaker 1: This is me at the Press Cub again with Yasser Arafat who was our luncheon guest. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE] Speaker 1: Yeah his digits. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE] Speaker 1: This is an audience I had at the Press Club with former Russian President [Mikhail] Gorbachev talking about a, a new book he had just written and published. Speaker 2: And that's me at the 1994, '95 [1995] SPJ convention waving my gavel as President. Speaker 1: This is Kemba Smith talking to me. We're at the Federal Corrections Prison in Connecticut, Danbury, Connecticut, Danbury Federal Prison. And that's her telling me her story. Speaker 2: And that's Kemba Smith years later when she gets released from prison and I meet her at the airport, at Dulles Airport in Washington. And she's got her sentence commuted to time serve, seven and a half years. Speaker 1: That's a then Senator from Louisiana, and I met her--Ann Duplessis. I met her and she took me through the storm devastated areas of New Orleans that she represented in the state senate after Hurricane Katrina. Speaker 2: And that young man is Bill Cosby. We met while I was on a trip to San Jose, we stayed in the same place. And the hotel people wanted one of us to be somebody popular, didn't know how it was. Speaker 1: And that's my long time colleague Helen Thomas. She was White House Correspondent for decades. I think she covered eight Presidents, and she's a wonderful journalist. Speaker 2: That's me and my mom and a author named John Egerton. John has been instrumental in supporting my career over the years, and he's a fellow journalist and local author in Nashville. Speaker 1: And I'm honored to be standing beside Mr. Ray Boone, the editor and publisher of the Richmond, Virginia "Free Press", as he's receiving an award for outstanding leadership in the community in which-- Speaker 2: That rough looking guy is actually me in Biloxi, Mississippi. I went down to Biloxi to work with the paper there on restoring housing and service to their employees after Hurricane Katrina swept the Biloxi area, Gulf Port area. Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we, were down there doing a Knight Ridder project when it started. Speaker 2: And that's me in a moment of solitude on the road in California. Speaker 1: And that's a lady who was smart enough to marry me early on before I got snapped up, and who I've been lucky enough to have as my wife for more than 40 years. Speaker 2: That's the crew back when the crew was the crew. That's Reginald, the tall one on the corner, and that's Daddy Warbucks Nicholas with a little semi-suit on. And that's Andrea, the cinematographer and jazz singer. In the middle is the beautiful woman I call my wife. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: You should name her actually. Speaker 2: Daryl. What? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Somebody's gonna to listen to this and actually type up a caption from it. Speaker 2: So that's, that's top row standing is Reginald Stuart, Daryl Stuart and Reginald Stuart, II. Front row standing, the shorter people are Nicholas and Andrea Stuart. And that's the Stuarts, Stuart family. Speaker 1: And that's a good picture of Andrea, Nicholas and Reginald Stuart. Nicholas, the one in the middle of course is the investment banker before he knew he was gonna be an investment banker. Speaker 2: That's some guy who squeezes into the picture thing. I don't know who he is. Looks familiar. Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: Your second favorite Peanuts tie? Speaker 2: That's the second favorite Peanuts tie, yeah. I have about ten of them...