 Story_ID: 19822 Speaker 1: And Scott Stearns is the videographer and I want to have you start out sir, by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: Reverend Al Sharpton, S-H-A-R-P-T-O-N. Speaker 1: And I want to have your birth date. Speaker 2: October 3, 1954. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: March 4, 2002. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're at the headquarters of National Action Network, House of Justice Auditorium 1941 Madison Avenue in Harlem, New York. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: I'm a minister and the president of National Action Network. Story_ID: 19823 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Fried chicken Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: I don't really go on vacation. I don't know. That's hard. Probably the Caribbean [Sea]. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Adam Powell's [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] saying, "Keep the faith, baby." Story_ID: 19824 Speaker 1: I wanted to talk to you first about your mother and her background. I know her name was Ada Richards. And I just want you to talk about her, you know, where she was raised and where she came from, and just her background. Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama, in the Dothan, Alabama area. Grew up there, married young. Had two children. Separated from her first husband, moved to New York, divorced. Married my father, had two other children. Was a seamstress, then a housewife and then after their separation raised us on welfare, and became a domestic worker. Ended up going back south in the late '80s [1980s] and basically still remains there in the Dothan, Alabama area. Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother's style? What type of person? Speaker 2: Very religious, very family oriented, very committed to her children. Soft-spoken, kind of easy going. But more than anything else, a very religious person. Her religion and religious practices is the center of her life. Speaker 1: Okay. And are there things, you know, attributes that you think you've gotten from her? And what are they? Speaker 2: Probably the religious side of her, the way of looking at everything first from a religious spin on it. "What does this mean in terms of your faith?" She's very determined. She's not as vocal as I am, or as demonstrative, but very determined. When she would decide to embark upon something, nothing would turn her around. And she's very compassionate. She believes in helping people and believes in standing with people no matter what anyone else may think of them. If she's committed to being someone's friend or supporter, she stays with them. I think those are the traits I got from her. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she share anything that sticks with you about her growing up at all in Alabama? Speaker 2: Well, I know a lot about she grew up in times of segregation and it denied her basic human rights. Couldn't vote 'til she was grown. Schools were inferior based on the resources and other things that they gave it. So a lot of her having grown up in a state of being denied the full dignity of other citizens in the country, I learned from her. And I probably internalized it and probably resent it. Speaker 1: And your father. You're named after your father. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And will you just talk about his background and where he came from? Speaker 2: He was born in the Wabasso, Florida area. Raised there, Wabasso, Vero Beach [Florida], was always an entrepreneur. He was in his youth a boxer, sparing partner for some professionals. He said he fought professionally. That, I was never able to confirm. But he was always an entrepreneur. I don't remember him working for anyone. When I became old enough to remember, four or five years old, he always worked for himself, always owned the house he lived in, always had a pretty much late model car. Very independent and very self-assured. And that's how I will always remember him. Story_ID: 19825 Speaker 1: Talk about some of your earliest memories growing up. Speaker 2: Well, I grew up first in the East New York section of Brooklyn [New York], in a house my parents owned, a four family home. Regular working-class neighborhood, middle class, working class. I remember my chore was to walk the dog, keep the front stoop clean. We'd go to church a lot. My mother took us to church young. That's why I started preaching very young. Then we moved to an even more middle-class environment in Queens: Hollis, Queens [New York]. And it was more of the same, just only more grander, but a working-class, middleclass family, with middleclass values. Speaker 1: And your neighbors, weren't they Italian? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In Brooklyn, they were Italian neighbors and Jewish neighbors, and black. In Queens, it was mostly middle to upper class blacks and whites. Went to school in a very integrated atmosphere in Queens, from early ages. Yeah. Speaker 1: You spent a lot of time going to church, right? Talk about how you had actually came to start preaching. Speaker 2: I went to Washington Temple Church of God in Christ [Brooklyn, New York], which was a Pentecostal church. It was the largest black Pentecostal church in the city in that time, somewhere around 5,000 members. A couple thousand would come every Sunday. It was pastored by Bishop F. D. Washington, who the church was named after. And Bishop Washington was a very charismatic, gifted preacher. And for a Pentecostal preacher, black, well read, graduate of the Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. At that time, most black Pentecostal preachers were not trained like that. In fact, they were just considered holy roller preachers. And Washington was unique in that he was a little more well-read and a lot more refined, and even associated with what was considered more refined then at that time the Baptist and Methodist ministers. I began imitating him. I would come home from church on Sunday and I would set my sister's dolls up as the congregation. And I would put on one of my mother's robes or take one of the sheets off the bed, and that would be my robe. And I would preach to the dolls the sermon that Bishop Washington preached to the congregation that day. And that's how I started preaching. My father used to get annoyed and say, "Stop him from doing that." But my mother [Ada Richards] liked it. My mother said, "No, don't stop him. Maybe he's developing something." And to the point where when I was four going on five, in the summer of 1959, I was a member of the Junior Usher Board. Junior ushers sat people and passed the collection plate around like the older ushers. And they would have an anniversary program to celebrate every year whoever the junior ushers were. And when the adult adviser asked me what I wanted to do, I said I wanted to preach. And everybody laughed. She told them, "Don't laugh. Bishop Washington started preaching young." She took me to him and he said, "Well, maybe he's being called. Let's see what happens." And they let me preach at the Junior Usher Board anniversary. It was about 900 people there that afternoon. And they had to stand me on a box 'cause I was too short to be seen from behind the rostrum. And I've been preaching ever since. That's how I started preaching. Speaker 1: Do you know what fascinated you about preaching? Do you think it was the whole--? That you were sort of fascinated as a child and that's why you took the dolls out and played with them? Speaker 2: Some of it was fascination. But some of it was just natural. At four years old, three years old, you can't know what drives you. You can't really understand your instincts. A lot of it has got to just be you, just you identifying with something that you feel is you. And that's how I felt. And I was in an environment that my mother and my pastor encouraged, rather than discouraged me. I often thought about had they discouraged me, how life might have turned out a lot different for me. Story_ID: 19826 Speaker 1: For people who don't understand the Pentecostal faith, how would you say it differs from the other traditional religions? Speaker 2: Very emotional, very demonstrative. We say, "Amen." We jump up and shout as they call it, or dance, as they say. Very much the opposite of a quiet sedate type of service and didn't believe in anything worldly. When I was growing up, women couldn't wear pants, couldn't wear lipstick, couldn't smoke, couldn't drink alcohol, men or women. Couldn't swear, very strict. As I got older, it changed a little. Women could wear pants and a little makeup now, but still can't swear, can't lie, you know. Follow the basic tenents of the Bible very closely and absolutely. Speaker 1: Did you speak in tongues? Speaker 2: Yeah, I've done that. And that was part of the Pentecostal faith where you speak in unknown tongues. Where you're inspired and you speak in tongues that you're not even familiar with the language yourself. It's supposed to be an utterance from you to God. Story_ID: 19827 Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of that early time? You know, you said 'My chore was to walk the dog.' Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I remember walking the dog and cleaning the stoop and things of that nature. But mostly just going to school, homework and those were my house chores. My sister was three years older than me and she was in charge more of dishes and all. My father was a stickler though for manners. You'd have to say good morning every morning. And he had this thing that if you got up and went to the restroom without saying good morning, he'd make you walk back and forward twenty-five, fifty times from your room there saying, "Good morning." Go back, "Good morning." Go back, "Good morning." He was a stickler for manners. He believed that you had to be mannerable at all times. Speaker 1: So it was a pretty idyllic existence in those early years. Speaker 2: As ideal as a young black could be. Speaker 1: You talk about your relationship with your father, that it has been a rocky one. And that at age nine, nine and a half that something shook you, shook the whole family and I wanted you to address that. Speaker 2: Well, when I was about four or five, my mother's [Ada Richards] two older children from a previous marriage moved from Alabama to New York. And when I was nine and a half, I was told that my father had an incestual relationship with my sister and they bore a child together, which tore the family up. My parents separated. We had to deal with the shame of that. He abandoned us. We lived in the ten room house in Queens [New York] he had bought. After a while, couldn't pay the bills. So finally, we lived for months with no lights, no gas, no transportation, until my mother just finally had to abandon it and move to the projects in Brooklyn [New York] and go on welfare. So it was very traumatic, in terms of not only the public shame, but the readjusting to a different lifestyle, the leaving of your friends and loved ones, just being totally uprooted and being put in a total different, hostile environment almost overnight. Speaker 1: And during this time, you're still going to the same church? How was that handling--? Were people kind or were they unkind? Did you feel you experienced that? Speaker 2: Bishop [F. D.] Washington and most of the church [Washington Temple Church of God in Christ, Brooklyn, New York] leadership were very kind. By then, I was preaching at other churches. Most of the ministers were very kind but then other people would be mean. You'd hear people whispering. You'd see people pointing and you kind of knew that everybody knew your business. And it was a time of real challenge to become tough skinned and endure gossip and talk and finger-pointing. And you found refuge in the kindness of some of the ministers. But you're still a kid. You're still nine. You're still ten. You're still eleven. You're still watching your mother having to endure all kind of castigation. And it makes you very young have to bear a lot of hits and attacks, that a young person is just not old enough to prepare for. So it kind of makes you grow up quick, young, fast. Because I was already a preacher and then I had to develop a thick skin young, it's like I never had a childhood. I never had time to learn how to grow up. I had to grow up quick. I had to grow up fast, not out of desire, out of necessity. I had no choice. Speaker 1: And that was a combination even with you preaching and then this experience, too? Speaker 2: The combination of me preaching, because I was not doing what other kids did. In fact, other kids' parents would come hear me preach. So it was kind of awkward. But what hastened it was the other experience. Because you tend when you go through something like that, to not want to go around a lot of people. You tend to withdraw. And you tend to kind of try to make it on your own. So it was that combination that developed in me young, a kind of loner spirit, a kind of tough exterior, kind of being able to dig in and go through whatever. Story_ID: 19828 Speaker 1: How would you have described yourself as a young person? Obviously you were gregarious, at least you were gregarious when you got in front of a crowd. But I'm wondering, were you more introspective? I would assume you were well-mannered. How would you describe yourself as a--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was always outgoing. Always verbose, always, even young, kind of the center of attention, 'cause you're an oddity; you're a boy preacher. But I was always very sensitive, a lot more sensitive than I would show, a lot more. I learned young how to remember what people said and did. And I guess I developed that older. But I never forgot when people said something unkind to my mother [Ada Richards], or my sister, or me. I wasn't as much as a vengeful person, as I was one that, "I'm gonna file that. I'm gonna remember that." More to protect myself and my family, 'cause you must remember now, I'm ten years old. I'm the man of the house now. My little collection, whether it was $20, $30 helped compensate for what we didn't have at home. So I'm bringing in money. Meager money, but money and I'm the only man there. So I felt in my own little way that I was protecting my mother, and protecting my sister, and myself. So on the quiet side, I had to build up a lot of strength and a lot of reservoir of being able to engage people because I felt I had to take care of them. In many ways, the father that seemed invulnerable and seemed totally beyond defeat, I had to become. Because that's who I saw him as and he wasn't there any more. Story_ID: 19829 Speaker 1: You're preaching but where are you getting your material from? You know, and what is (unclear)? Speaker 2: A couple of ways I got my sermon materials. One, I was always like a sponge. I could hear other speakers and absorb and internalize and then preach back their sermons. And I would always listen to everybody. Even if I wasn't in church, I would listen to preachers on the radio, preachers on television. And then I'd developed very young a voracious reading appetite. Bishop [F.D.] Washington used to read a lot. I used to sit in his office after services and he'd just read and underline passages in a book. And I remember developing that habit. Even before I could read well, I'd sit with a book and just underline and try to look like Bishop Washington. And between my own reading and my own listening and then putting my version of sermons I preached, I developed my own sermons and my own material, as you would say. Speaker 1: And what would adults say? Were they just like overwhelmed, because you had these great, you know, speaking abilities? Or did they think you were an oddity? Or I mean what--? Speaker 2: Probably both. Some were overwhelmed. Some considered me an oddity, something strange. Others probably just dismissed me. Others were very religious and felt this was an expression of God's ability to do unusual or other than normal things. Probably because of the trauma in my personal life, I didn't really concentrate too much on people's reaction. Because by now, I'm thick skinned enough that I'm self motivated and really geared toward my purpose. So I really didn't let other's opinion--. I noted them, I knew them, but I never was influenced by them 'cause I had to build this big wall early to kind of protect and insulate myself. Speaker 1: So who was booking you at the different churches? Was it through Bishop Washington? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They would call Bishop Washington. Speaker 1: Bishop Washington. Okay. Speaker 2: And my mother would agree and usually take me. I can go places even now in Connecticut, New Jersey, and think about how thirty, forty years ago my mother and I used to ride the subway to the Port Authority [of New York and New Jersey] and get a bus out to Toms River, New Jersey, for me to preach, or Bloomington, New Jersey, and Connecticut, places that were just far remote from New York. They heard that I was this boy preacher, and they wanted me to come and my mother would take me. Speaker 1: And what do you think Bishop Washington saw in you 'cause he became really like a father figure. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think he saw himself. He was a boy preacher and he saw, I think, some of himself. I think he, in his own way, thought I would grow up and probably inherit the church or at least a church. So he saw a combination of himself, a protégé, a student, and he was very encouraging. He became my surrogate father for my early years. Speaker 1: And as a surrogate father, what lessons was he teaching you along the way, things that are still with you today? Speaker 2: He taught me how to preach with passion but also study what you were preaching. He believed that the tendency in our denomination of just having emotion and passion without any context, without really knowing the scriptures, was wrong. He was definitely against that. He encouraged me to read. But he also felt that just being studious and being just refined to the point of detachment would not work. So it was a balance of how you could emotionally inspire your audience, but also give them some basic information. I learned that and kept it to today. He was a masterful pulpiteer and he believed in giving people his best, even when I've seen him sick, in pain. He'd get up and preach and you'd never know he was sick. You'd never know he was in pain. And he taught me that people came to you to be ministered to, and it's not fair to let your own personal feeling, shortcomings, crises situation interfere with you providing for them what they need. Speaker 1: What about the cadence, the whole thing that black ministers are known for? 'Cause I wonder some times, you know, people seem to have a natural gift and then I think some people are trained in that. And I'm just wondering what--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think that even with a natural gift, you gotta work at it and pick it up from others. And I think that he definitely helped me with that. I probably started with some natural skills, but he certainly helped me to develop them and to be able to put the emphasis in the right places. 'Cause here's a man that was pastoring thousands of people, literally. And Washington Temple [Church of God in Christ, Brooklyn, New York] used to be one of the Loew's Wonder Theaters and to fill that place up every Sunday for hours and Friday night took a certain amount of people skills as well as pulpit skills. And I learned that from him. I was too young to understand what I was learning, but he knew what I was learning. And that's why some of it today is more instinctive than instructive. But I still learned it; it isn't just all natural, because I was being mentored. Speaker 1: So would he say, "This is how you start a sermon and you sort of move this way and this is how you close."? Speaker 2: He would more let me do it and then help correct it. He wouldn't sit down and say, "Go from A to B to C." He'd let me do it. And then he say, "Now you know, A really is here, not there," and sort of rearrange what you would do. So it didn't appear that he was being hard on you because he would basically readjust what you had done rather than tell you, "this is how you do it." Speaker 1: And you could feel, I'm sure, whether you had your congregation with you. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yes. Speaker 1: You could feel it? Speaker 2: You automatically know when you connect or not connect. And I grew up knowing that. Story_ID: 19830 Speaker 1: Now, I would like you to take yourself back to your childhood. And I'd like to ask you a question about what sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights, [pause] subways. I spent a lot of time riding back and forth to school, riding back and forth to church. Any time I would get on a subway, I think about being a little boy. I was always going somewhere. I guess in some ways getting away from someone. [pause] The smell of fried chicken reminds me of, I used to love to go down stairs in the cafeteria at church, Washington Temple [Church of God in Christ, Brooklyn, New York], and eat fried chicken after Sunday morning. That probably was the best meal in the world to me. And now to this day, if I walk in a place and smell that, it automatically brings me back to my childhood. Those are the things that quickly come to mind. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, that's fair enough. So here you are, you're preaching. But you move to Hollis [Queens, New York] for a while? But then you moved into the projects, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Now, was that a difficult period for you? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I was ten years old. I had never lived in a apartment that we didn't own. I mean let's start there. I never knew what a landlord was 'til then. I never knew what a multi dwelling was. We had a four family house until I was four and there was nobody in the house but us after that. I never knew how it was not to have a front stoop. Later in Queens, our own front yard, a basement. I had always a basement to play in for my toys. We're now in an apartment, where everything was in the apartment. And then the neighborhood, they didn't pick the garbage up every day. You would call emergency room for an ambulance, and they'd come eleven hours later. Police came when they wanted if there was a problem. I never had that experience. So it was a total different world. It was almost culture shock. So you're dealing with the trauma what happened to your family, father gone, shamed in the community and the church, and your whole environment just flipped on its head, all at one time and you're ten years old, in the third or fourth grade. Speaker 1: You know, some families break apart when they have too many things like that happen but your mother [Ada Richards], she helped a lot, right? Speaker 2: My mother probably kept us from breaking and religion probably kept her from breaking. And I used to say when I got older why would God let you go through all this? And then later in life as I dealt with controversies, I said, maybe God was getting me strong enough to bear a lot of more weight than most people would have to bear. Story_ID: 19831 Speaker 1: You had gotten the book. Was it Marcus Garvey? Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell [Jr]. Speaker 1: Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. But you read in there about Marcus Garvey. And I thought the story so cute about you traveling--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, yeah. What happened was during the time that I would like kind of be off by myself, there was a black history bookstore or a black book oriented bookstore even at that time on Hollis Avenue [Queens, New York] around the corner from where I was going to elementary school. We were still living in the house in Hollis during that time. We couldn't pay the utility bill so I used to walk off by myself. You know, all of the youngsters would go in the schoolyard during lunchtime, you know, after lunch. I really didn't wanna hang out with the other kids 'cause everybody, you know, knew what I was going through and all. So I went wandering. And one day, I came up on this bookstore. So I used to go in there almost every day. Didn't have any money, so you'd kind of like just look at books on the shelves. And whoever the owners were didn't really bother the kids. And I saw this book. On the cover was this picture of this guy with a clergymen's collar. So being I was a preacher, I was attracted to it. Frankly, I thought it was a white guy. And later I found out Adam Clayton Powell [Jr] was not white. And I saved up my little money from preaching and I bought the book. And in the book I read about Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] and I started seeing him on TV. Then we couldn't watch TV 'cause we didn't have lights. But then my mother always would let us get little newspapers and I'd clip out things. And he became my hero. In him becoming my hero, his hero became of interest to me. So I read in his book, his hero was Marcus Garvey, aside from his father. So I started reading about Marcus Garvey. When I was eleven, ten and a half, eleven, Bishop [F. D.] Washington did a Caribbean tour where he was going to the Caribbean and preach in Haiti, Jamaica, Trinidad, Barbados, Puerto Rico, maybe one other island. And he took us with him, his daughter, me, about seven to ten members of the church. And I did a little warm-up sermons and he would preach. And I remember we got to Kingston, Jamaica, and we were gonna do four or five nights at the Ward Theatre, downtown Kingston. And Bishop [F. D.] Washington ended up getting sick on the trip, so I had to do all the preaching. And I was excited about being in Kingston. And we stayed--I'll never forget it--in the Kingston Sheraton Hotel. And the first day I ventured that I was gonna go find Marcus Garvey's family and talk to them about Marcus Garvey, the hero of my hero: Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. And I found out, I don't remember how, but I remember the address. I remember that Mrs. Garvey lived at 12 Mona Road, M-O-N-A Road. And I was able to convince a cabdriver to drive this little kid, 'cause I had a little money, to 12 Mona Road. And I went and I knocked on the door, rung the bell, whatever it was. And Mrs. Garvey came and looked out. And she didn't see anybody. 'Cause I'm short, she couldn't see me through the peephole. So she apparently went back and sat down. After a little while, I knocked again. Nobody. The third time, she came back, she opened the door, like somebody was playing a joke on her. She looks down and sees this kid. And she said, "Can I help you?" I said, "Yes. I'm a young minister from the States. My name is Reverend Alfred Sharpton and I wanna meet Mrs. Garvey." And she kind of laughed and she invited me in for tea. And she sat there all afternoon telling me stories about her husband. She seemed to be flattered and happy to see a person so young, interested in Garvey. She had a bust of Garvey and different little memorabilia. And I remember one time she looked at me. She says, "Garvey had a big head. You have a big head. Maybe you'll be like Garvey." And I never got her to laugh. And I used to write her and she used to write me back. And for many years, I treasured letters from Mrs. Garvey, to a young kid that she took time for. As the years went by, I got to know her sons Marcus Garvey Jr., who's a professor and Dr. Julius Garvey who's a professor. And I like to tell the story about how nice their mother was to me. Speaker 1: That's a pretty amazing story when you think about it. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It is. Speaker 1: Just the whole thing. I mean even it says a lot about you as a kid, too. Speaker 2: It also says to me why I always felt that as much as I felt one side of my life was so catastrophic, I also felt another side of my life was something beyond my control. 'Cause for Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], and Mrs. Garvey, and Bishop Washington, and then later [Rev.] Jesse Jackson, and others to take time with who was a kid--I mean we're talking preteen age years-- was almost unthinkable. But it happened and it was so natural to me. I never even thought that they shouldn't. It was almost like, "Of course they'll talk to me. Of course they'll share and spend time with me. Of course they wanna help a young kid out." I guess it was many years, I got much older that I understood how unusual that was. Story_ID: 19832 Speaker 1: Now, also talk about your meeting with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. How you met him. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Because of the book and because I started following him in the media, I wanted to go meet him. So I convinced my mother to let my sister bring me to Harlem [New York]. In those days, people in Brooklyn [New York] thought coming to Harlem was dangerous. People in Harlem thought going to Brooklyn was dangerous. So it took this major convincing to have my mother [Ada Richards] let my sister and I get on the Number 2 train. At that time, the Number 2 New Lots Avenue train [Canarsie Line] rode from Brownsville, where we were living then Brownsville section of Brooklyn, to Harlem. We rode up on to 135th Street, get off in front of the Harlem Hospital, walk up three blocks, turn left. And you go down the block to this great neo-Gothic structure, the Abyssinian Baptist Church. First time I went there, Powell didn't show up. I was very disappointed and I don't know if I was more disappointed or more afraid that my mother was not gonna let me do this again. But two or three months later, I convinced her and she let me try again. And my sister, who really didn't understand what I was fascinated about with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] and his big Baptist church 'cause we were not Baptist, we were Pentecostals, she went with me. And I'll never forget, when the side door--. There was a door off from the pulpit--it's a semicircular marble pulpit with stairs--and off to the side is this door that the pastor can come in and just mount the stairs and sit there. and then go to the rostrum when it's time to preach. When that door opened and Adam Powell [Jr.] walked out, I never had a feeling like that before or after. I felt a rush like I had seen God. I mean just something about him really energized me, really fascinated me. And he preached that morning about love. I'll never forget it. After service, I had been in enough churches now, six or seven years of preaching myself, and I maneuvered and navigated my way to the pastor's study. And the pastor's secretary had a door that the top would open and the bottom wouldn't. And I would barely be seen over the top. And she looked over and said, "Yes? Can I help you?" And I said, "I'd like to see Reverend Powell." She said, "Pardon me?" I said, "I'd like to see Reverend Powell." She said, "Well, who should I say is calling?" I said, "Reverend Al Sharpton." She says, "Pardon me?" And I told her. She kind of went on about her business and ignored me. So when I realized I was being ignored, I knocked again. And she came back again. And I repeated the request. This time she disappeared. And she came back moments later with a stunned look on her face. And she opened the bottom of that door and she says, "Follow me." Like she was as surprised as I guess someone would be. And she walked me toward a door. And the door opened. And in that room stood Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. I remember he had on nothing, no shirt or undershirt. And he had his arm around some of the elderly patrons of the church talking to them and comforting them. And he looked down at me. Before I could say anything-- and my sister's there--and he says, "Alfred Sharpton. Boy preacher from [Bishop] F. D. Washington's church in Brooklyn." And I looked over. I said, "You know me?" "Of course I know you. F. D. and I are friends. I listen to his radio broadcast. You preach on the broadcast. Have a seat." So now I'm swept off my feet. Not only have I heard my hero preach and seeing him in the flesh and met him, he actually knows me! And I sat there. And he took care of his little business, comforting the parishioners and chatting with the deacon. And then he said, by now he's dressed, "Come on. We're going down to the Red Rooster," which was a restaurant bar across Seventh Avenue on the corner from the church. He says, "We'll go over to the Red Rooster and have a drink." I said, "A drink! I can't drink. I'm eleven years old." He said, "Have a Coca-Cola." And I went down and that started a whole thing of watching Adam [Clayton] Powell [Jr.] come to Harlem and hold court in the Red Rooster. And over the next couple of years, every time I heard he was in town, I'd go up there. And I'd see some of the most powerful people on television pull up to that bar or pull up to that restaurant and go in the back and sit down and "kiss the ring" as they would say at that time and pay homage or get favors or seek endorsements or do business with Adam [Clayton] Powell [Jr.]. It was heady wine for a little boy who wasn't even a teenager yet, to see a man--black man--wield that kind of power and respect. It probably shaped my life, in terms of how to deal and not deal with those in power and influence. Speaker 1: Now, Reverend Sharpton, do you have a favorite Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] story? You know, something else that happened during those few years? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I mean though, probably a lot of stories. Probably though the one that's the most memorable was the last time I saw him. He was defeated by Congressman [Charles] Rangel, 1970. I was about fourteen, I guess fifteen and he was dying of cancer. And I remember we had called for a recount. And I went to the church. One of the guys kind of looked out for me when I was around him was a guy named Odell Clark, who was an assistant to him and his congressional staff and a deacon at the church. And I said, "Deacon Clark, we're gonna fight 'em, right? We're gonna win this back." He said, "Kid, he's talking about retiring to Bimini [Bahamas]." He said, "Why don't you talk to him kid. Maybe you can talk to him." I said, "Retiring?" And I remember he was getting ready to leave that day. And his last wife was with him, Darlene Expose [Hine], and I barged in the office. I said, "Reverend Powell! Reverend Powell! We gotta fight 'em. You're not gonna give up, are you?" He looked at me kind of in a resigned way, he's obviously suffering from cancer. He said, "Kid, you gotta know that I've done all I can do." And he started getting up. He was very tall and started walking down the hallway to go outside. He turned around and looked at me. He said, "Kid, one day, you're gonna grow up and be a big man. Don't stop 'til you become a big man." He said, "But always remember, there's a time to hit, and there's a time to quit. And when it's time to quit, don't let them have to take you off the stage or take you out," or something like that. He said, "Just quit. And know you did all you can do. For me, it's quitting time." And I looked at him. I had tears in my eyes. I said, "Well, what are we gonna do with you gone?" And he said, "I don't know what you're gonna do. But I'm going fishing." And he turned around. He walked down the stairs. He got in Jack Packard's station wagon. That was the last time I saw him alive. The next time I saw him, he was in a casket at that same church. And I never forgot that. I never forgot that. Speaker 1: He was a larger than life character. Speaker 2: Oh, much larger than life. And in many ways unfairly maligned, never given the credit he was due. And in many ways, he was to my social, political life as Bishop Washington was to my ministry. I learned by imitating and then emulating Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. Speaker 1: It was interesting about your observations about him in the book because he was very brash. I mean he behaved in many ways like a white man, you know, not like a black man [Laughing] typically behaved and with the powers that be. And you said that it was mainly because of how he had been treated, his family had been treated in that at one point he maybe had tried to pass for white, and they found out in a way. Speaker 2: I think his defiance and his sense of not caring what they thought was a rebellion against being rejected. His mother was rumored to have been a slave child of Colonel Jacob Schaefer, the Schaefer brewery family. He himself had passed for white. And when in Colgate University [Hamilton, New York] when they found out what he was, he was totally rejected. And I think that built this defiance. This, "I'll get even" type of attitude. That was unusual for a black man to first have and then to be able to accumulate enough power to really execute, and do something about it. And I remember one night I went with him. He went to little theater on 44th Street, in Times Square [New York, New York] where they used to tape 'The David Frost Show'. David Frost had a big syndicated show at that time. I remember David Frost asked him, he says, "How would Adam Clayton Powell define Adam Clayton Powell? What would you say about yourself?" And he looked at him, he said, "I'm the only man in America, black or white that doesn't give a damn. I don't care what y'all think about me." And man! I thought that was amazing. Nobody, nobody, certainly no blacks and very few whites talked like that. And I'm eleven or twelve years old. Hard to grow up under that and years later start self-effacing type politics. That's why many years later, I would always say, "It's hard for me to look up to midgets when I grew up under giants." Speaker 1: [Laughing] That's a great saying, okay. Story_ID: 19833 Speaker 1: Now what else is forming you, like in school and all of that? Because there was this whole thing where your father really was against you preaching. I mean that went back earlier but, you know, he was really against you preaching. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] When they separated and finally went into court, he even asked the judge to stop me from preaching. I mean he never wanted me to preach. And I think because my mother [Ada Richards] was so connected to it in those traumatic years, he found that was one way of hurting her. And in school, I had teachers that pretty much were good to me. I talk about in elementary school Mr. and Mrs. Greenberg, in high school Mr. Salow. We had a black teacher named Gertrude Cromwell. They spent as much time with me dealing with my personal self-concept and self-esteem as they did with whatever I was learning. And Bishop [F.D.] Washington was always there, even when I started getting more into social, political, secular stuff. Bishop Washington was always there. And then in my teen years, right around the time that Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.] went fishing [retired], I met a young, kind of self-assured preacher that was almost like Adam, named [Rev.] Jesse Jackson. And it was like I said, it's so unusual that these people fell in my life one right after another, til I always felt it was more than what met the eye that kind of guided my path. Story_ID: 19834 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your meeting with [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson], you know, Reverend Jackson. Well, that actually happened because you got involved with Operation Breadbasket? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well, he had heard me preach as a boy, but I didn't know him. He told me later, he heard me preach when I was eleven, twelve years old, in one of his trips through New York. But in '68 [April 4, 1968], Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] got killed. I was thirteen. I had joined Operation Breadbasket, which was a division of his organization, in New York. Wasn't really that active. But I had met Dr. King a couple of times, and everybody was impressed. My mother [Ada Richards] adored him. When he got killed, it just shook up everybody. And I remember a few months after his assassination they came out with a documentary called 'King: from Montgomery to Memphis' [sic, 'King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis'] and my mother wanted to go see it. And we went to Flatbush Avenue in Brooklyn [New York], at that time, it was an all white area, Loew's Kings Theater, and we watched this documentary. And I remember like it was yesterday. At the end of the documentary, Nina Simone sung this song, "What are you gonna do now the king of love is dead?" And part of the lyrics was "Turn the other cheek he'd plead. Love your neighbor was his creed." And she kept going back to this course, "What we gonna do now the king of love is dead?" and I'm sitting there all of maybe now fourteen feeling guilty, like I had let Dr. King down 'cause I was a member of the organization, but really wasn't doing everything I could. And I left there and went back to the Breadbasket office, '69 [1969]. And Reverend William [Augustus] Jones the Pastor of Bethany Baptist Church [Brooklyn, New York], was the New York chairman; Reverend John Scott was executive director. And I got active. And I started organizing young people in their churches to be the youth division of Operation Breadbasket at fourteen. And they made me the youth director. And they got ready to have the opening of the office on Fulton Street over the black-owned bank at the time, Carver [Federal] Savings Bank. [Rev.] Gardner Taylor was the premiere preacher, came and cut the ribbon. And they brought me upstairs before the ceremony. I met this young minister who was the national head of Breadbasket. Didn't wear a suit and tie. Had a big afro and thick sideburns, wore a medallion and a vest. And they said, "This is the national director named Reverend Jesse Jackson.' And they said, "This is Al Sharpton. He's our youth director and he wants to have your advice. You're the national leader." And Jesse kind of half looked at me. He said, "Well, do your research, choose your targets carefully and kick ass." And he reminded me a little of Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.]. And I fell in love with him instantly. Went over to the service. Mahalia Jackson was there that night and I had known her from Washington Temple [Church of God in Christ, Brooklyn, New York], she'd come through singing. And I became mesmerized by Jesse Jackson and became a protégé of his. He replaced Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.] for me. He had the same kind of charisma, same kind of his own man. I never saw him wear a necktie until about 1972. He wouldn't dress like other preachers. He wouldn't act like others. In fact, he used to call himself the country preacher. And he hung out with entertainers and stars and he was as known in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] as he was in Harlem [New York]. This was Adam dipped in afro kind of style. And so I switched right in gear. I started wearing a medallion and grew a big afro. I used to wear a vest. And they used to call me 'Little Jesse'. And when in 1971, there was some dispute in the organization and he left SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Breadbasket and formed Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], I left and formed National Youth Movement 'cause I wasn't gonna stay in an organization that Jesse wasn't. And that began a thirty-five year relationship. We've had our bumps but he's still my mentor. Speaker 1: You know what, it's interesting, a lot of times, when you don't know someone's life and you see it from afar and you realize, like when I was reading your book, you realize how people are successful. It's not by accident. You know, and that they really work hard, you know. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] You know, a lot of people in the media to this day talk about my wearing the medallion never knowing that that is what everybody wore in the movement in those days. I got that from Jesse. I didn't start that. But you couldn't tell some of these expert media men. "That was a Sharpton trademark." And I just laugh. Story_ID: 19835 Speaker 1: Now the other thing I'm curious about and maybe actually you were young at the time, so I'm not sure what your take would be on this. But there is the whole thing of social activism and, you know, and the black church. And I'm wondering, because, you know, both through Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] and then through [Rev.] Jesse Jackson, not so much through Bishop [F. D.] Washington, but the other two, that you were starting to see that played out. And I'm just wondering--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think it was a couple of things happening. Because social activism was not big at all in the Pentecostal church, I think because I grew up preaching and by the time I was a teenager, it no longer fascinated me to preach to hundreds and thousands of people, it became a different challenge in ministry. 'Cause I preached at the [1964] World's Fair [Queens, New York] when I was nine years old, thousands of people. So you're not gonna give me a bigger hall to preach in. But wait a minute. This is a whole 'nother area. You mean we can change the policies of the country? We can change who holds office? We can decide to help the downtrodden? So I think the fact that a lot of the fascination with big preacher stuff I got over in my preteen years. By the time I met Powell, and then Jesse, it opened another area of ministry, which I felt I was inclined and called to do. And Bishop [F. D.] Washington, who was not in that himself, he supported it from afar. He almost was ready to settle on me doing that 'cause he was so afraid I was gonna be in one of the [Black] Panther [Party] groups or the revolutionary groups. 'Cause you gotta remember at this time everybody was political in that era. Everybody was in something. He just didn't want me to go to jail for blowing up the high school. So I was gonna at least be with preachers. Fine, if I had to be socially involved, at least do it with the preachers. And [Operation] Breadbasket was that. Story_ID: 19836 Speaker 1: The National Youth Movement, what was your motivation? What did you wanna do with that, 'cause that was your idea, right? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, I wanted to build a youth version of what [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson] was doing with [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], I was a teenager, I was sixteen when we started, and I wanted to organize young people into consumer market, hit corporations, demand equity and parity, training programs, youth jobs. And that's what I did. Voter registration, it was around that time they lowered the voting age from twenty-one to eighteen. I was approaching that, so I was organizing my peers. So just about whatever Jesse was doing nationally, I was doing in New York [New York] in a youth version. And that's how I sold myself. Speaker 1: And was he giving much guidance? At this point and time you could sort of be on your own? Speaker 2: I talked to him a lot. I used to bug him all the time. I used to call him all the time. And even though Jesse has a sense of an imperial distance about him, he took time with me. He'd talk. I think the thing that always bothered me about Jesse--and it did at the same time--is he never would say what I wanted to hear. It was almost like I sometimes used to think he just finds some way to beat up on me. "Boy, stay in school." I'd call, "Reverend Jackson, a cop just killed a kid. How should I handle it? What do you think?" "First of all, Al, how's your grades in school?" "What are you talking about grades in school?" "Al, have you done your homework?" I mean and I would say "He's putting me down, treating me like a kid." He ended up being right. And he would spend time with me. He would always, in his own way, spend time with me, without placating me. So when he'd come to New York, he'd have Sinclair Booker who used to travel with him, or Richard Thomas: "Call the kid." And I'd kind of hang around like I did with Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr], though I'm two or three years older now. But he never would let me feel like the patrons in the church, "Isn't he cute. He's young and doing all this." He'd always challenged me to do more. So, whereas other people would, just 'cause you're doing it at sixteen, it's cute. But him: "What's the last book you read Al? What were the three main points of the book?" It was like, "ain't he ever satisfied?" But I think that's how he disciplined himself. Because more than Bishop [F. D.] Washington, more than Powell, his childhood was similar to mine. He grew up with family breakdown, grew up having to deal with poverty as I did after my parents' separation. So he like me, didn't have a daddy to pass him a name, and didn't have somebody to give him a church. He didn't inherit nothing. He had to build it himself. And in many ways, he was the missing piece to Adam. I got the defiance and the savvy from Adam. But Jesse gave me the determination, that you gotta be self-made. 'Cause unlike Adam, didn't no daddy hand me nothing. Speaker 1: So what were some of the things that you did with the National Youth Movement that you're--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Voter registration. Speaker 1: But by this time you're eighteen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Voter registration. But even before that we would do voter--. Kids from twenty-five down were members of my group. We did a lot of voter registration, particularly in the churches and in the schools. We did a lot of the corporations' youth job programs. And we fought the city a lot to demand youth programs, 'cause at that time, they were trying to start cutting summer job employment training programs, manpower training development, Neighborhood Youth Corps. We did a lot of that. And even then there was some police brutality. I remember when I was nineteen, the first police brutality case I fought was a kid named Claude Reese, who was killed in Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York]. So we would deal with a multiplicity of issues. But our centerpiece was voter registration and job development for young blacks. Speaker 1: Did you have an office? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had an office in Brooklyn. Speaker 1: So, with your office, were you raising money at this point? Or were you--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No. We had no money. Speaker 1: --was it all volunteer? Speaker 2: A cultural theater in Brownsville, named Brownsville Laboratory Theatre headed by a woman named Lubaba Lateef gave us office space. She liked what I was doing. And then Brooklyn Hospital [Center] donated us office space. Around '74 [1974], when I was nineteen, I met James Brown and he taught me how to raise money and did benefits. And that's when I started hiring staff and traveling. But 'til then, I had an office full of people. They were all volunteers. We didn't think about money. We were kids. We lived at home with our mothers. We didn't have to worry about money. Money for what? You know, we lived at home. Story_ID: 19837 Speaker 1: My sister got in trouble, was the opposite of that. And my mother [Ada Richards] kind of like felt that I was the one that would try to be something. Part of my motive was to be something for her. I think that's one of the things I initially loved about Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, when he used to do that refrain "I am somebody." I remember many years later a friend of mine, who was very critical of Reverend Jackson said, "That's very weak and self-effacing to stand up and tell people: 'Repeat after me, I am somebody.'" I said, "Maybe to you. But maybe you never had to tell yourself that. But I grew up where you needed somebody to tell you that. You needed somebody to teach you self-affirmation. So maybe you came out of the kind of family environment where that wasn't important. But it was important to me." Story_ID: 19838 Speaker 1: The other question I have for you, in this whole thing, I know you had these very positive role models, very prominent people who took an interest, and even with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson encouraging you in his way, were you ever able to shed tears? You know, as a young person, did you ever in a way that is a nurturing, I know men don't typically get that in society, but I'm just wondering, because here everything was so much adult and it was work and it was, you know, heady stuff. Speaker 2: You know, I probably never allowed myself to stop and even think about it, much less cry until I was much older. Because, again, you learn young--too young--to build that tough skin, 'til you're more preoccupied with watching it bounce off and keep going than you are even weighing how much it hurt when it hit you. Story_ID: 19839 Speaker 1: James Brown, he actually heard about your activity--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] His son had been involved in my youth movement. His son was an aspiring young lawyer my age, wanting to graduate and go to law school, Teddy Brown. And he got killed in a car accident. James Brown said he wanted to do something for young people in Teddy's name. He loved Teddy; Teddy was his favorite son. And a disc jockey in New York at the time, Hank Spann, told James Brown, "You know what you could do? Why don't you do it for the youth group your son liked? It's headed by a young preacher." And Mr. Brown said, "All right. Bring him. Let me talk to him." And they brought me out to Symphony Hall in Newark [sic, Newark Symphony Hall, Newark, New Jersey] one night to see James Brown. James Brown, no one else in the world--I mean I couldn't believe it. And they brought me in the dressing room and we talked. And he told me if I listened to him, he'd make me big. And you have to go after the whole hog. Half the stuff, I didn't know what he was talking about. And he came to Brooklyn [New York] and did two shows for me at the R. K. O. Albee Theatre, now the Albee [Square] Mall there. Miles Davis was there that night, came with him. Didn't perform, just came with him. And then he started liking me, took me under his wing. And he used to take me on the road with him some times just to introduce me to audiences and introduce me to disk jockeys and say, "Y'all build a [National] Youth Movement chapter in this town." Get me on 'Soul Train' when I was nineteen. It was the biggest show in black America at the time. And, you know, a lot of biographers say I was his manager or road manager, or something like that. I was none of that. I was like his surrogate son. I never was on a payroll, never had a title. But when I was around, I was just in charge 'cause I was like his son. And everybody kind of deferred, "Oh, that's Mr. Brown's preacher." And he'd say, "Rev, go get the guy to pay the money. Rev, tell the band this." I was like his son. Still am. I went to see him a couple of weeks ago and that's our relationship. Speaker 1: So he was a different type of teacher in some ways. Would you consider James Brown as sort of a street fighter, but a businessman? Speaker 2: Street fighter and a businessman. The first nonclergy, nonreligious mentor I had. What I learned from Bishop [F.D.] Washington, the church world and Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] in the political world and [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson] in the social arena, I learned street life and regular life from James Brown 'cause now I'm in halls and venues with people that maybe never go to church at all. How do you excite that crowd? Well, the master of exciting any crowd was James Brown. So it's a whole 'nother dynamic of stage charisma and lifestyle. And in many, many ways, I never could bring myself to admit it 'til many years later, but James Brown was probably like I imagined my father to be. Both of them had processed hair, both of them strong entrepreneurs, both of them had been boxers. And the only pleasurable memories I had of my father, he used to take me to see James Brown at the Apollo Theater in Harlem [New York]. So I guess some of it was a subliminal rediscovering of my father and in some ways, I think I was Teddy [Brown] for him. Speaker 1: I understand. And your father loved James Brown, didn't he? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Loved him [chuckle]. Still does. Speaker 1: It's just amazing. [Laughing]. Speaker 2: Still wears his hair that way. Speaker 1: [Laughing] Okay. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In fact, I often laugh now and say that James Brown and my father and I are some of the few blacks that still wear a process. And when James Brown got out of jail years later, when he got in that little trouble and got out of jail, I said, "Well, at least now there's another guy out that wears his hair right. I've been trying to figure out what's wrong with everybody else." And we laughed. Speaker 1: Tell the story about how you even came to wear your hair like that. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '81 [1981], I had went down in '80 [1980], in '79 [1979] to Augusta, Georgia where he lived. He wanted to cut a rap/gospel record, me preach, him singing. He never had done a gospel record. And he sung a chord, a lyric, and then I'd preach. And then he'd sing the next and I'd preach. It was 'God Has Smiled On Me.' He'd sing, "God has smiled on me," and then I'd do a little sermon of what God had done for me. And then he'd come in on the next line and then I'd preach. While we were recording, it took, you know, several sessions, his manager at the time had a heart attack. So Brown said, "Why don't you stay a few months with me. I'll take care of your Youth Movement. I just need somebody around I trust to handle my business with Mr. [Al] Gardner gone." Ended up living down there with him for a year and a half. That's where I met my wife and married her. In '81 [1981], I was always trying to get him more socially involved. But he always helped causes, that wasn't one of his preoccupations. He was an entertainer and a businessman, [clapping hands]. I said, "You know, Stevie Wonder and Reverend [Jesse] Jackson is gonna march on the White House [Washington, D.C.] to get Dr. King's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] holiday made a federal holiday. Why don't we go and see if we could help." He said, "I don't have to march. I know the President. I know Mr. Reagan [Ronald Reagan]," 'cause he had supported [Richard] Nixon. I said, "That's even better. Why don't we go talk to him and Vice President [George H. W.] Bush?" "Set it up." So I called the White House and sure enough, they agreed to see James Brown. And on January 15, 1981, Ronald Reagan and George Bush, separate, in the White House met with James Brown and his preacher. No one knew who I was at the time, other than those in the church. And we're getting ready to leave for Washington and I remember Mr. Brown said, "You know Rev, when they put you on camera with me going in the White House I want everybody to know you're my son. I'm gonna take you to Mary." Mary used to style his hair in Augusta. "I want her to do your hair like mine. So they see you, they see me." I said, "All right". So we went, styled my hair and half way through, he said, "Now I want you to promise me you'll keep your hair like that as long as I live." And I said, "All right." And so far, I've kept that promise. But that's the way it started, in '81 [1981] when we were on our way to the White House to lobby to make Dr. King's holiday a federal holiday. Speaker 1: You know what is even amazing about this relationship, you traveled with him during this time, I mean you had traveled with Bishop Washington too. It was a close relationship, you were observing, you were [unclear]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh, I was there night and day. The band always lived in another hotel. I stayed with him and his immediate entourage. I flew in his private jet. I knew him better than anybody at that time. And he knew me. And I had traveled with Bishop [F. D.] Washington. I traveled even more with Jesse Jackson. But it wasn't nothing like get doing one nighters. James Brown worked all but ten days a year. So that was when I learned the world. They used to say among other titles, you know, 'Godfather of Soul', 'King of Soul'. And they used to call him 'the hardest working man in show business' 'cause he would work all but ten days a year, literally. And so 350-something days a year we were on the road. My whole life when I was with him was airport, limousine, hotel, gig, airport, hotel, limousine. And many ways years later, when I started running--I do like five or six cities a week now--and people will say, "Wow! How do you work like that?" And I'm thinking the days with James Brown, I'm still nowhere working like he did. He'd do a different city a night, two and three shows a night. And never stopped, I'm talking about year in and year out. Speaker 1: And you think about that [Laughing] I'm just--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yeah. Speaker 1: He's slowed down now, though. Speaker 2: He still works a lot. He doesn't do it every night. But I still think he probably works more than most artists. Story_ID: 19840 Speaker 1: Now how did you meet Don King? Was it through that? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Through knowing [James] Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Describe that. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In '74 [1974], Don King had got out of jail and was trying to promote a fight. And he wanted to start big. He'd done a little charity thing in Cleveland [Ohio]. He knew [Muhammad] Ali. He came with an idea that he wanted to get a fight that would knock the whole industry off its feet. He had no real stature. And that would have been the fight with George Foreman, who was then the champion and Ali. He went all over the world, couldn't get no money 'cause he promised them more money than any fighters had ever been guaranteed. Finally he got a connection to Mobutu [Sese Seko] in Zaire [Democratic Republic of the Congo]. And Mobutu would put up these millions if he could make Zaire well known. And he said in the negotiations, "You need to bring music here. I've heard of James Brown." So Don felt this would help turn the deal. He went to Lloyd Price, who was his friend, and been with him for years. And Lloyd Price is an old legend, a rock and roll legend. He said, "How do we get James Brown? Mobutu knows of James Brown. That's how he know who Ali is." And Lloyd had called a couple of times, couldn't go through all the red tape. And he said, "I know this preacher, a young kid that James looks to as a son. Let's go to him. He could bring us right to Brown." And they did. I used to go almost every day to the Stage Deli on 7th Avenue and eat lunch. Lloyd came in. And I met this big tall guy with hair on his head. It was all black then. Don King quoted Socrates and Plato. And I helped get him to James Brown. And James Brown did the concert before the fight. And Don and I've been close ever since. Speaker 1: And he had to deliver on a large amount of cash? Speaker 2: Oh, $10 million in '74 [1974], is like unheard of money. But he did and he never looked back. And I admired him and respected him. Here was this guy who lifted himself up from the street and took an industry, boxing. And through all his controversies and all mine, we kind of stuck together. And I've known Don since '74 [1974] and that'll be thirty years soon. So that's a long time. Speaker 1: It's a long time. See, that's what's amazing about you, is that you started so early [Laughing]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I started early. And even though I'm not fifty years old now, I've known and dealt with a lot of these people two and three decades. That's why a lot of people don't understand it takes more than a news article or a bad story to separate people that been together twenty, thirty years. Story_ID: 19841 Speaker 1: Around that time also, you got involved with the Victory Tour? Speaker 2: In '84 [1984], I had started working with black concert promoters. In many ways, the way I would do with [Don] King, saying, "How come we're not controlling more sports? Why we're not controlling more entertainment?" And the biggest tour planned at that time was the Victory Tour, the Jacksons. I had jumped on Lionel Richie for not using black concert promoters and we got him to do that, Whitney Houston, but the Jacksons was the biggest tour. So we jumped on them. And Don was involved in the tour with the parents of Michael [Jackson]. Finally, they negotiated that we'd have a community relations team to do the tour and the concert promotion would be part of that team, and we'd make sure kids in the community that couldn't afford to go got free tickets. And it would help some things. And Michael said to me, "But the way I'm gonna do this, is I want you to head the team. You go yourself 'cause at least I know all your life that's what you fought for. You'll be sincere and not just make money." So that's how I ended up being the head of the community relations team on the Jacksons' tour. We did the whole--. I think it was forty-three cities. Biggest tour of its kind at that time. And Michael was also a huge fan of James Brown so a lot of what we were talking about on the road was James Brown. Speaker 1: Well how was he, 'cause you said, "He was playing with balloons on the floor. And then--." Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] In the business meeting, he was laying on the floor with balloons flying up in the air. But don't let his playing with balloons and animals fool you because he's a very sharp, very alert person. And he cut right to the chase in the middle of the meeting and then get on up and go to where he was doing. Story_ID: 19842 Speaker 1: The National Youth Movement was really trying to focus on blacks in the entertainment industry. What were some of the successes that you had? Speaker 2: We were able to get the major concert tours to include blacks. We were able to able to get blacks executive positions in some record companies. We were able to get Polydor [Records] and then RCA [Records] to do training programs for young people--never had them--industry training programs to train young people in the community how to be business executives, marketing executives, promotions executives. We were able to get advertising contracts in black media, with 'Jet' magazine and others. We would have a standard advertising schedule, like others did. Speaker 1: At that time, people were trying to investigate you also for--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] What happened was they were investigating [Don] King and others, so that investigation overlapped into whether or not we were doing things to try and help them. I remember Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] investigation, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr]. It's expected. It didn't bother us any. Speaker 1: When was the Victory Tour? You said in 198--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: '84 [1984]. So you're thirty. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I'm twenty-nine going on thirty. Speaker 1: Thirty years old. Okay. And what is your next step at that point? Speaker 2: When I came home from the Victory Tour Bernard Goetz happened . I'm still doing my Youth Movement and I thought it was an atrocity to make it legal that someone could shoot young people in the name of vigilantism. And I got involved in Goetz, defending those kids. And by the time that stopped we started the movement against crack [cocaine]. A lot of our young people started telling us about crack. And Len Bias, the basketball player, died of crack. And we started the movement against crack. In the middle of the crack movement, Howard Beach [Chicago, Illinois] happened. And we started fighting racial violence. And we still are. Speaker 1: And then there was the Tawana Brawley. Speaker 2: That was in '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I wanna talk some about that case just because that was a test. That was a difficult period for you and I want you to talk about why. Speaker 2: We had done Howard Beach, which had been celebrated by everyone. Tawana Brawley, a sixteen year old [sic, fifteen year old] young lady went to the same lawyers involved in Howard Beach, her family. Fifteen years old, had been raped and kidnapped. And after a while, no one wanted to believe her story. Bill Cosby and others came out and supported her. And it was the first case that the whole establishment turned on us, threatened to destroy us. And it was a test on whether or not I was gonna bow to the pressure. In many ways, I think the Brawley case was when I found out whether the toughening of my skin when I was a kid was really what I thought it was. Terrible, wicked cartoons, everyday, castigating you. Editorials, every day. One article after another. Every TV station. Some of my best friends told me, "Just say she lied. Say you were duped." I said, "But I don't believe that." That was a real test. And even to this day, you got some people that dislike me for Brawley. But it made me know that if I believe in something, I will stand, no matter what. And I'm glad I stood. Speaker 1: And you still believe she tell--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I believe something happened to Tawana. I don't believe Tawana probably made all that up. Speaker 1: But after that, a lot of people were wanting to distance themselves from you. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And a lot of people said, "You have no credibility." And it's funny to me 'cause I never knew when they felt we did. They doubted us in most cases 'til you won them. And credibility to who? I learned long time ago, you gotta first be true to yourself and then you worry about everybody else. So all that I learned from Adam [Clayton Powell, Jr.] and all I learned from others that mentored me, that you have to march to the beat of your own drum and you gotta be willing to stand against the entire establishment coming down on you, I had to use that and more in Brawley. And then at first it was threatening and almost frightening. But then I started thinking about the hills and mountains I had to climb and the people I learned from. And I said maybe all of this was to prepare me for such a time as this. Speaker 1: And you at that time also ended up getting a judgment against you. Speaker 2: Later, I was sued by the guy [Steven Pagones]. And to my surprise, they only fined me $65,000. He asked for millions. And the jurors that said they didn't believe her claims said but they did think that was I was doing a great service and hoped that I kept fighting. One of the strangest things in the world, to see a jury say well we find him liable, but by the way, Reverend Al, we admire you and respect you. It's kind of one of those ironies happens in the movies. [Note: Tape picks up in new place]. You had the issue with the lawsuit, but also a tax indictment that was filed against you. Speaker 2: That was earlier though. Speaker 1: That was earlier. Okay. Speaker 2: That was right around the Brawley time, by the same prosecutor, that we felt was vindictive. And then I was acquitted on all charges. So the jury, I assume, felt it was vindictive, too. And again it made me go back to my raising. Dr. King went through a tax case, Adam Powell went through a tax case. So I don't think I'm on their level but I think it's always been a weapon to try and discredit anyone that was out front. So I thought it was just more of the same. Story_ID: 19843 Speaker 1: Now what about when the Bensonhurst [Brooklyn, New York] stabbing occurred? You said that that was one of two very pivotal moments in your life and I--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I marched twenty-nine weeks in Bensonhurst, because a young man, Yusef Hawkins, was killed for being in a white neighborhood. And on the 29th of March [sic, January 12, 1991], a young white man ran through the crowd, stabbed me two inches from my heart. All your life you talk about you'll die for a cause. You never really, really know, 'til you're laying there, and don't know if you're gonna live or die. And when I laid there and had no regrets and said to myself, "If I don't make it, it's all right with me." I knew that in my own heart it doesn't matter who believes what about me. I knew that I was really very sincere and that I was willing to die for this. I also said, "If I make it, I'm gonna be even more deliberate and careful to make sure that everything I do counts maximum 'cause every time out could be the last time." So that was a pivotal turn for me. It was sobering but in no way did it make me turn or change. It just made me want to do it better and more careful, with more impact in mind. Speaker 1: And when you say, "More careful." I think in the book you refer to the fact that you distanced yourself from some of the very left. You know the pan--you--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well, I don't think distance. I think I clarified more the difference in my views and some others. I would let people just sort of do and say whatever they wanted and never say, "Well I don't necessarily adhere to that." I wanted to be clear what I was saying, what I was not saying. And those that disagree, disagree. I stopped just letting things go. And that lead to me forming National Action Network, which was more clearly around civil rights and political empowerment issues. It didn't mean that I didn't work with people on the left or in the nationalist community. It just meant that my major was in what I grew up being. Story_ID: 19844 Speaker 1: Reverend Sharpton, a lot of people come to you. Do you have a method where you really check people out ahead of time? Speaker 2: Yeah, as best we can. We have a crisis department. They're lawyers. They check. Well, even prosecutors sometimes end up with cases that don't reach what they thought it would. We're a lot more deliberate. But we're not gonna not be involved. It's a question of being cautious, but not paranoid. Speaker 1: But there has been an interesting shift, I would say. And maybe it occurred when you ran for senate. But when would you say was the pivotal time that you start getting more establishment people? Speaker 2: I think when I ran for [U.S.] Senate what people saw, with all of the castigation, that I got that kind of vote: 15 percent of the State of New York, over two thirds of blacks in the state. You're talking about in the rural counties upstate. They saw and said, wait a minute. This is no fly by night. This is no baseless movement. And it kept building, kept building. I ran for Senate again. I ran for Mayor [of New York City]. So I think that's when people started saying that you gotta take it seriously. I always knew we had the support. I think we proved it with the Senate race. Speaker 1: You now count a lot of the New York establishment on your side, who are clearly behind you, right now. Speaker 2: I count a lot of what you would call national establishment behind us. But then some of them always were. They just are more public with it. Speaker 1: And do you think that the [Amadou] Diallo case that that was when people--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Diallo case is when everybody came out front. See, millionaire businessmen and former mayors and members of congress would go to jail with me. Even I had never envisioned that. And I think that was where we showed diversity, race, religion, everybody came out. And that to me a huge moment. The Diallo movement showed a coming of age of the civil disobedience movement in the North. Story_ID: 19845 Speaker 1: There's talk now of you running for president and Cornel West actually--I don't know if he is still talking about it-was going to--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] He heads the exploratory committee. Speaker 1: Right, the committee. Speaker 2: What are your thoughts about that? Because I had also read at one point you said maybe you wouldn't be a politician, a political leader. You would more be interested in electing, making sure you were the power that elect--. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] But sometimes, you have to be the one to run the race to open the door. Doug Wilder was the first black governor of Virginia. He ran for president, didn't get out the first primary. Others ran, didn't do well. It was a guy who never held office that did the best race a black ever ran, named [Rev.] Jesse Jackson. He kind of trained me. And maybe I kind of need to do what he did in my generation, to help not only win the office, but win other offices. 'Cause when Reverend Jackson ran, that's how Doug Wilder won in Virginia. That's how we won black mayors. A lot of that we've lost. When you shoot high, you may not win the top but you can win everything in between. When you shoot low, you can't get anything 'cause you weren't after anything. So if I do it, it will be in the tradition of those that trained me. And maybe they trained me, hoping I would learn the lesson, execute it, and teach it to somebody else. Story_ID: 19846 Speaker 1: I can tell you that I get the sense this has all been preparation for things to come. That's why one gets the sense that you're poising yourself for a lot of--. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I always had the sense that no matter what good things or big things I've done, it will not equal the things I'm gonna do, which is why I don't sleep late, 'cause I'm excited about what I'm gonna do that day. Speaker 1: So what are some of the things that you do wanna accomplish? And what--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I wanna concretize a national movement that can respond to the social justice issues at any time in 100 cities, and can deal with economic inequities, and deal with the imbalance in the criminal justice system. If I can lead a national movement with a 100 cities strong, I'll feel that I've vindicated the investment my mentors gave. Speaker 1: Now how does that differ from other national movements? There is still a perception in the black community that we need a new black leadership in some respects. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They always felt that way. If you read any point in black history they always wanted new black leadership. What you need is new commitments. There's nothing wrong with the wheels we got. It's just a matter of new people making them turn. And what new black leadership? Every generation is new. The question is are we wise enough to use what has worked in the past, improve it, eliminate what didn't work and keep moving on. Story_ID: 19847 Speaker 1: My fear is they are not grounded in struggle, that they must know that the things they enjoy did not happen automatically and that even though we have new technology, even though it's one global community now, you still must struggle. That power concedes nothing without a demand,never has and never will. Frederick Douglass said in the nineteenth century, it is also true in the twenty-first century. Speaker 2: How do you teach people who've never struggled to know how to--? Speaker 1: You must show them the history of what they enjoyed, where it came from. So when I speak at an Ivy League school, they must know in that very school people didn't allow people of color in. They must know that that very building they live in, that first class in an airplane, was barred to us. So you teach them from where they're at and bring them to where they need to be. Story_ID: 19848 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I wanna be part of a continuous, generational evolution toward social justice and human rights. We sing a song in church, 'Will the Chain Be Unbroken?' I want when they go from the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] era to the [Rev. Jesse] Jackson era to my generation they could say I helped keep the chain from being unbroken. That no matter how big the foe, how strong the adversary, how difficult the fight, that I was one of those that was in the army that fought. And even if we die on the battlefield, we did not ever fear coming out to fight...