 Story_ID: 525054 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Bryan Allen Stevenson [HistoryMaker Bryan Stevenson], B-R-Y-A-N-, A-L-L-E-N, S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born on November 14, 1959 in Milton, Delaware. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an attorney. Speaker 1: Okay, and all right, you're more than just an attorney to me, I would think (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm attorney, I'm an author, I'm a writer, I'm a law professor. I think of myself as an advocate and an activist as well. Speaker 1: Right, that's right, and you are the person who established the Equal Justice Initiative [Montgomery, Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Yes, the Equal Justice Initiative was organized in 1989, we've been representing the poor and the condemned for twenty-seven years. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September 30, 2016, is that right (laughter)? Speaker 1: And where are we right now? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Today we are in Montgomery, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and we're in your offices, right? Speaker 2: That's correct, we are at the Equal Justice Initiative in downtown Montgomery, 122 Commerce Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 525055 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food would be hot and sour soup. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Don't really have a favorite color. Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I--my favorite time of the year is summer. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Don't really have a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 1: Okay, well the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I love saying to people that: "The opposite of poverty is not wealth, but the opposite of poverty is justice." Story_ID: 525056 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And your father's [Howard Stevenson] side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll ask about your mother's side first. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us her full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's name was Alice Gertrude Golden Stevenson [Alice Golden Stevenson]. She was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in August of 1929. Speaker 1: Okay, and, well what is there anything unusual about that spelling 'cause you didn't spell it, but it's spelled the way we normally spell this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right G-O-L-D-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what can you tell us about the history of your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Speaker 1: Are there any, any significant stories (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, well I can tell you a good bit about my, my mother's side of the family. My grandmother was a woman named Victoria Baylor Golden, and she was born in 1889. Her father John Baylor was born into slavery in Bowling Green, Virginia, Caroline County, Virginia in the 1840s and because her parents were both enslaved when they were born, she knew a lot about the experience of enslaved people in this country. My great-grandfather was someone who actually learned to read as a child, even though he would likely have been sold or maybe even punished severely had the people who owned the enslaved people there known that he could read, but he learned to read because he was so curious about the world outside of the plantation and when emancipation came because he could read, he became fairly influential and enslaved, formerly enslaved people around him, because he could help interpret things, and my grandmother would talk about how people would come to their home whenever there was some big event and he would read the newspaper, sometimes for thirty or forty people, and she was so proud of the fact that he could read so well, and of course he was absolutely persuaded that learning to read had changed his life. It was the most important thing that could happen. And so even though there weren't schools, he taught my grandmother to read and he taught her the power of learning, of education. Story_ID: 525057 Speaker 1: They lived in a part of Virginia where there had been a history of racial violence. There were lynchings; there was terror; and so when my [maternal] grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden] got old enough she joined the mass migration, the great migration north and went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with a young man that also had come from that area whose name was Clarence Golden and they got married, and they had ten children, and my mom [Alice Golden Stevenson] was the youngest of her ten kids, but my grandmother was an enormously influential force for me, because she, she connected to me to this history of slavery and talked me through this era of terrorism and--. Speaker 2: Was there a story, a specific story about lynching in Virginia? Speaker 1: Well, you know there were, there were lynchings all the time and we've actually done research on lynchings and so we've documented dozens of these and she would talk about how it wasn't avoiding a crime that was hard. I mean because she said, you know, "We weren't going to rob anybody, we weren't gonna shoot anybody, we weren't going to commit a criminal act against anyone." It was the lynchings for these social transgressions that were harder to avoid, and when you heard about lynchings because somebody bumped into someone as they were trying to get onto the train, or you heard about lynchings because they didn't get off the sidewalk quick enough or they called someone by their first name or laughed when they weren't allowed to laugh, or they gave somebody a look because they did something. She said that those were the kind of lynchings that made everybody feel terrified all the time, because you didn't know what you had to do to be completely safe from that kind of violence. Speaker 2: It's a--even this, even resonates now with the Freddie Gray case (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 2: He actually-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --looked at a police officer--that was the-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --initial reason why he was stopped. He looked at a-- Speaker 1: You know this idea that you have to make yourself invisible when you're around people who are white in the South, you have to make yourself into something that is insignificant, not threatening, not important, marginal, even as you're standing in the middle of something. That was the real challenge of surviving this era of racial terror, because if you're human you sometimes react humanly. You, you may frown when somebody says something offensive; you may scowl when somebody mistreats you. You may look frustrated or angry when someone does something disrespectful and, and it was that kind of control that was so impossible, and, and she talked about that being most of the motivation for fleeing, because it became just inconsistent with being a full human being to live in a space where you had to submit yourself to racial insubordination, to, to white supremacy and she didn't want that, and neither did my grandfather, and so they fled. And they got to Philadelphia where things were not great, but they were certainly less oppressive than they were in rural Virginia. Story_ID: 525058 Speaker 1: Now your [maternal] grandfather's [Clarence Golden] last name was Golden? Speaker 2: Golden. Speaker 1: And is there a story behind that name? I've heard it before but I'm just wondering (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well I mean both of my grandparents were the children of, of people who were sharecropper and tenant farmers and Baylor is the name of the white family that owned my great, great--my [maternal] great-grandfather [John Baylor]. It was actually a British family that had come over in the 17th century and very well-to-do and had bought a lot of land in that region and so that's how my grandmother's [Victoria Baylor Golden] name Baylor came about and Golden was similarly, a name passed on by a white family to my grandfather's folks who had owned people in that part of the state as well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so, so they inherited the name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --so to speak, and it's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 525059 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Alice Golden Stevenson] get a chance to go to school in--? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah my mother--my [maternal] grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden] was really committed to her kids going to school and so my mother actually went to Girls' High [Philadelphia High School for Girls] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] which was you know considered to be a really strong school. It was, it wasn't easy for young black girls to get into that school, but she was really smart, she was really talented, she was really capable and she went to Girls' High and graduated from Girls' High, desperately wanted to go to college, but couldn't, and so she started working in Philadelphia after she finished high school, and several years after that, that's where she met my, my dad [Howard Stevenson]. Speaker 1: So, okay, so she had--all right, she was married to Mr. Golden first, right? Is that--is that what happened? Speaker 2: So, so my grandmother-- Speaker 1: Oh, your grandmother made--married a Golden? So that was her maiden name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right, my, my grandmother was a Baylor who married a Golden and so my mom's maiden name was Golden, as were, you know her, her nine siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my grandmother's father's name was Baylor [John Baylor]; that was my grandmother's maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay, so they, you know, the family lived in Philadelphia, right? Speaker 2: My grand- yeah, my grandmother moved with my grandfather [Clarence Golden] to Philadelphia and that's where she raised her children. Story_ID: 525060 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, can you give me his full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, my, my dad's name is Howard Carlton Stevenson [Howard Stevenson]. He was born in Georgetown, Delaware in August of 1929. His parents were married when they were very young. My grandmother, Mary Emma Stevenson [Mary Hoxter Stevenson], was only sixteen when she married my grandfather, Edward Stevenson [Charles E. Stevenson]. Her maiden name was Mary Hoxter and my grandfather, Edward Stevenson, she and my, my grandfather got married when they were teenagers. My grandmother was half Native American; her mother was Native American and her father was black and her mother died during childbirth, so she never knew her mother and her father was an itinerant preacher and so he was on the move, and so she was actually raised by a woman who was known to the family. She wasn't really accepted on the reservation where her mother's people were from. Speaker 1: Now, this in--? Speaker 2: This is in Maryland, actually. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: On the Eastern Shore, and so she grew up and when she was sixteen she met my grandfather who is the son of people who had a long history of enslavement and work in that region, and they moved to Georgetown. My, my grandfather was actually a pretty skilled mechanic and so he could make money working on cars and things. My grandmother worked as a domestic, both of my grandmothers worked as domestics, and my, my dad's mom had four kids. My dad was the youngest of four children. My mom [Alice Golden Stevenson] was the youngest of ten and my dad was the youngest of four and like his parents when he was young he was basically working as a, as a domestic. He would do house cleaning and living with families et cetera and that was sort of the primary employment for people on my father's side of the family. My, my aunt was a domestic, my, my grandmother and my cousins--a lot of people did that kind of work. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did he ever work for General Foods [General Foods Corporation]? Speaker 2: So, my dad actually yes, he went away. He went to Wilmington [Delaware] and, and went to high school, got a high school degree, 'cause there were no high schools for black kids in the county where we grew up. When he was a teenager, there were no high schools available so he went to Wilmington to attend Howard High [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware] and graduated from Howard High. Then he got drafted into the [U.S.] military and fought in the Korean War, in an all-black regiment. When he came back he went to barbering school and then he got a job in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and that's where he met my mom. After they got married, they went south, back south. Story_ID: 525061 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They were both working, actually in, I believe in the Philadelphia Police Department as clerks, as just a non- as civilian employees in the city. No, at city hall, that's where it was, and they met each other. They were both older for couples those years, they were both twenty-seven, twenty-eight years old and in those days, you know my mom [Alice Golden Stevenson] said if your weren't married by the time you were twenty-five, you were considered a little bit of an old maid and certainly by the time of thirty, and my dad [Howard Stevenson] because he'd been in the war [Korean War] and because he had been moving around, hadn't married and so I think they were both ready to start a family, and you know both--my grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden] really--my mother's mother really liked my dad (laughter), and I think pushed my mom into marrying him and, and my mom wasn't very excited about moving back south because having gone to Girls' High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and grown up in a community that was not as impacted by Jim Crow, it was a real shock for her to come back to southern Delaware and, and to deal with that kind of overt segregation. Story_ID: 525062 Speaker 1: Now, a lot of people are not familiar with Delaware-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Delaware's the state that we were talking about in the car over here, it kind of flies under the radar. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Somebody, I think asked Matthew [Matthew Hickey] what state is Delaware in (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: I guess, not even a state, but, Dela- Delaware has a dual character. Speaker 2: It does, it does. Yeah, Delaware's interesting. It's a very small state which is why so few people talk about it or know much about it, but it's a really interesting state because there's three counties in Delaware. There's New Castle County [Delaware], which is the county of the far north. There's Kent County [Delaware], which is the county in the center, and then there's Sussex County [Delaware], which is the county at the very bottom of the state, the very south of the state and Delaware was a slave state, and Sussex County was a very big slave-owning community, and you know Delaware was a border state during the Civil War. It did not fight with the North. It did not fight with the Confederacy either, and the Emancipation Proclamation which freed the slaves, was really prepared for states like Delaware. Most people don't realize the Emancipation Proclamation did not end slavery in all states. It freed only the enslaved people in the states that were warring against the Union. With regard to enslaved people in states like Delaware, and Kentucky and Maryland, the Emancipation Proclamation expressly allowed those people to remain enslaved, and that was in part because of the fierce resistance Delaware had to ending slavery, and so, it was very southern. When I grew up, the schools were segregated, the beaches were segregated, there were buildings that were segregated, and it had a very strong southern culture, character, and tradition. Whereas the north of the state, Wilmington [Delaware], really thought of itself as almost a suburb of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it was much more industrial. It was much more oriented and enculturated to the North and for such a tiny state to have such a dual character is a really fascinating reality, but the Eastern Shore generally is, was a difficult place for people of color, and that's about most of our nation's history because of slavery, and because of lynching, because of segregation and even today you see the remnants of that era in that region. Speaker 1: Right, we just don't think of Philadelphia being so close to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right, that's exactly right. Speaker 1: --that legacy of slavery. Speaker 2: And I--that's right, and I think what happens is that when you're a southern community right on the border of the North, then you have to do a little bit more to kind of mark your southernness, so I think we had more Confederate flags in Sussex County than you might find in some county down in Alabama or Georgia, because there wasn't the need to express that southern identity so consistently, so vocally, but when you're close to the border, you have to reinforce that identify over and over again, and that's why I think segregation and that, that whole Jim Crow orientation was so visible in the county, county where in grew up. Story_ID: 525063 Speaker 1: Now I always ask this question, when you consider your parents' [Alice Golden Stevenson and Howard Stevenson] talents, their looks, how they walked, talked, how they--their personalities and sense of humor. Who do you think you take after the most and why? Speaker 2: That's a great question. My mother I thought was really smart. I thought she was just curious and thoughtful and insightful. She was so committed to us learning, like my, my mom--my family went into debt so that she could buy the 'World Book Encyclopedia.' We were not well off, but she wanted us to have those books and she really believed in the power of education and so, you know because I, I went to college [Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania] and I went to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and have done the work that I do, I think this sort of curiosity I have about how the world works and understanding, I very much have got from my mom. She was also an incredibly talented musician and she taught me to play the piano when I was young, and I think a lot of that comes from my mom. My dad was really, really smart in a different way. I think he was really attentive to kind of environmental dynamics and he would say, "You shouldn't do that," or, "You shouldn't do that," or, "That's not safe." He was a very talented dancer, he moved well. He wasn't an athlete per se, but he had the ability and I think we got some of that from, from my dad. You know, I think like a lot of people, I'm certain where you can see traits of both of my parents, but I think my mom was the person who really wanted me to become, someone who could have a professional life helping other people. That was very much her dream, and I definitely see myself trying to live in response to that passion she had. Story_ID: 525064 Speaker 1: Now you have two siblings. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: An older brother and a younger sister? Speaker 2: That's right, my, my brother's thirteen months older than me and my sister's eleven months younger than me, so I was an extra middle child. I was really packed in there and my brother's a clinical psychologist, and teaches at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and my sister's a music teacher in an elementary school in southern Delaware. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Howard Stevenson [Howard C. Stevenson] and Christy Stevenson [Christy Stevenson Taylor]? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right Howard Stevenson, my Chri- and my sister got married, so her last name now is Taylor, so it's Christy Lynn Taylor. Story_ID: 525065 Speaker 1: And y- your household, I think, in the book ['Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption,' Bryan Stevenson] you describe your household as being typical of a lot of black households where there's a matriarch that rules the roost (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And your grandmother played that role. Speaker 2: Yeah, my [maternal] grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden] was absolutely that classic African American matriarch. She was tough, she was strong, but she was also loving and kind. I tell people she was end of every argument in our family. I mean she was also the start (laughter) of a lot of arguments in our family. I--my grandmother was really, really influential, she just had a quality about her. When I was a little boy she'd give me these hugs and she'd squeeze me so tight I could barely breath and then she'd let me go and she'd see me an hour later and she'd say, "Bryan [HistoryMaker Bryan Stevenson], do you still feel me hugging you?" And if is said no, she'd jump on me again, and if I said yes, she'd let me be and by the time I was ten she'd taught me to say it, when I would see her I'd say, "Mama, I always feel you hugging me." And she just had this way of giving wisdom and insight and yeah, we definitely felt influenced by our grandmother in that way. Story_ID: 525066 Speaker 1: I--I think there's a big church influence, too with the-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely yeah, my, my, my dad [Howard Stevenson] was very involved in the church [Prospect A.M.E. Church, Georgetown, Delaware] and, and we got involved and my mother [Alice Golden Stevenson] became a church musician and so we spent almost all of our time in church. I started playing the piano and organ when I was a young kid, and for us it was the really only interesting and sort of exciting thing to do, and you'd--you know we were in these music groups and you'd tour around and you'd listen to other groups. It was just sort of a way of life. We were also very involved in sports, and so it was pretty much you know, music, church and sports in, in our household growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. One aspect of your, your spiritual training which I thought was interesting in this A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and it's probably true in early A.M.E. churches, I don't know if you see this much anymore, but a lot of black churches, I--you know take the rap that they're not really as community-oriented as they used to be and they're more socially fixed. If you come in from the outside, you might not be welcomed, especially if you have a problem. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You know, but you said your church would welcomed people if they have issues and if they--if you had fallen down and on your way back up they were more supportive than-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know I mean the faith community I grew up in was, was poor. I mean the people who were there were often people who lived in the margins of society, and so to reject someone or turn someone away would be absolutely oppositional to the what people believed and you know we took seriously this idea of that you're supposed to stand with the people who are most in need and that was very much the culture and character of the church I grew up in. Story_ID: 525067 Speaker 1: One of the lessons from your grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden] was, well she had like several lessons, but one was not to drink, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. My, my grandfather [Clarence Golden] was in prison during Prohibition and he involved one of my grandmother's sons, my uncle and while he was incarcerated my uncle, with my grandfather, his appendix ruptured and he died, and it was just so devastating for my grandmother and I think she thought of alcohol as being the real cause of that and she was very religious, my grandmother, and so when I was a little boy, she made promise three things. She made promise to: always love my mom [Alice Golden Stevenson], and she made me promise to always do the right thing, even if the right thing is the hard thing, and she made me promise to never drink alcohol, and while I may be the only misguided cousin or grandchild that took it to heart, I did take it to heart and after--at a certain age, it just became part of my identity and, and it's remained true. Story_ID: 525068 Speaker 1: Tell me about your first school, you started school at five right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, I--'cause my birthday's in November, in those days, you know they just wanted--my parents [Alice Golden Stevenson and Howard Stevenson] just wanted kids in schools 'cause they had to work and so as soon as you were capable of getting on the bus and going to school, they sent you to school. I actually started kindergarten at four at a colored school, and then first grade and then in the middle of that year, right before I started second grade, that's when the schools integrated. So, I started at the (air quotes) colored school and then when they opened up the new public school, they integrated it. That was the H.O. Brittingham Elementary School [Milton, Delaware], which opened when I entered the second grade, and that was the first year we had racially-integrated classes in my community. Speaker 1: This is the Brittingham School? Speaker 2: Yeah, Brittingham School in Milton, Delaware. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So I know--I noticed that the church [Prospect A.M.E. Church] was in Georgetown [Delaware]? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, my dad (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so these communities are small communities, close? Yeah. Speaker 2: Small communities, very rural small communities, yeah, Milton had a population of like three thousand and Georgetown probably had a population of five thousand. They were very tiny towns, but Georgetown was the county seat [of Sussex County, Delaware], and because that's where my dad had grown up that was where we went to church when I was a little boy. Speaker 1: Okay, how did your mother adjust to that kind of small, (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Rural, southern kind of life after having come so close-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think it was really hard on my mom. I think that--I mean she had three children in a really intense short way and we were basically in the sticks. We were in the county, in a black ghetto, in a black rural village. There were just a lot of concentrated poverty, and I don't think any of that bothered her. I think what bothered her was the constant humiliation of having to conform to requirements of segregation and Jim Crow. You'd go into the store and you buy your food and you give your money to the clerk and the white clerks would throw your money down on the counter. She didn't like the colored school because it wasn't in very good condition, it was a dilapidated building, it didn't go very high. The classrooms were filled and she wanted her kids to go to, to get the best education possible. It was challenging for her, even after integration there was this sort of de facto segregation where they put all the kids, all the black kids in the same classroom and that was really geared toward vocational educational, not toward college courses and things like that and you know she had this dream that you know her children would go to college and so she had to fight to get us into the other classes and you know she was beautiful and kind and loving and generous and sweet and charitable but she was also a fighter. She taught us to not accept the, the burden of bigotry and discrimination without saying something, without doing something. And so, I think her struggle was passed onto to us until it became our struggle too. We resisted, we were mindful of ways in which we were racially segregated, ways in which we were constrained by this history of racial ine- inequality. Story_ID: 525069 Speaker 1: At H.O. Brittingham School [H.O. Brittingham Elementary School, Milton, Delaware]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now this is--so you're still relatively young when integration hits? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so how did Brittingham do it? Were you in an all-black classroom, 'cause you--the only one (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so, so I started at the colored school and then when they had integration they put all the black kids in all black classrooms with the black teachers that had been brought from the colored school, but because my mom [Alice Golden Stevenson] wanted me to be on track to take some of the college courses. Now, she got me out of that classroom and then I ended up in a classroom with all white kids. Throughout a lot of my years at the Brittingham School, third, fourth, fifth grades and a couple of other kids got into those classes, and despite the fact that we had been racially segregated until that time, and we didn't have enormous problems, there'd be fights, there'd be issues, there'd be things that--I remember one time all the, the boys had told me to meet them in the bathroom and, and it was some effort to sort of beat me up and there would be some of that kind of stuff, but when you're really young, it didn't seem that serious, but yeah, I, I moved from that all black school and then an all black classroom to a classroom that was mostly white because my mom wanted me to be on track to take college courses. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in school, grade school? Speaker 2: Grade school? Probably like a lot of kids--I actually liked writing and English, I mean I liked writing, I mean we liked math too. I liked reading, they had to do this--they had something called SRA [SRA Reading Laboratory] I don't even know what--maybe it's--I don't even know what it stood for, but you'd go through these colors, you had different reading levels, and I remember being preoccupied with getting to gold or whatever the highest class level was, so I would really enjoy reading these books and materials that then would allow you to go through this color chart in terms of your reading ability, and that was for me a lot of, a lot of fun. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--when I got to fifth grade there was a very popular teacher, a man named Honeycutt, Frank Honeycutt. He would take the kids out to play softball and football and, but my--he also was the math teacher and he taught my brother [Howard C. Stevenson] math. I liked Mr. Honeycutt and I think he's the one that probably stands out during my, my early years. Story_ID: 525070 Speaker 1: Now meanwhile you're playing the piano for the church choir [at Prospect A.M.E. Church, Georgetown, Delaware] (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I started playing, I was about, ten or eleven--I mean I started playing earlier, but I started playing actively in the church when I was about that age, and yeah, I started playing for a youth choir and we then we had a community choir that started touring around and we'd play for them, and I just loved music. I found a great release, a great kind of outlet in music. I just thought it was really exciting to sit down and try to figure out songs and make music happen. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now and I hear that some of your favorites were Stevie Wonder and Sly and the Family Stone? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well we (laughter) you know in our part of the country, you know you didn't have TV, we had a TV, but you could only get one station and that was only if the wind was blowing in a certain direction. This was sort of antennae TV because we lived so far out in the country and, and so we didn't really watch a lot of TV, but we had a record player, and so buying records was a way for us to get a lot of stimulation and yeah, I loved Stevie Wonder growing up. I mean we played, we, you know we were very involved in the church so we did a lot of gospel, but I also liked you know Stevie Wonder, I liked the Motown [Motown Records] artists, I liked you know Aretha Franklin and Donny Hathaway and Sly and the Family [Sly and the Family Stone]--all of those popular artists were very influential for me as a young kid. Story_ID: 525071 Speaker 1: As you were growing up that--you know you're the generation right past the Civil Rights Movement, as we tend to think of it was. But when you're growing up though the rhetoric in the country's about crime and disorder and how to--war, the war on drugs and all that sort of thing. Did--were you paying attention to any of that that? Speaker 2: Well, I think you know it was still so early you know when--after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated I do remember all the crisis that hit. Speaker 1: 'Cause you were only about what, fi- eight (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight, eight or--yeah I was about eight years old when he was killed, eight or nine, and I do remember that summer very well 'cause all of a sudden it just seemed like the Civil Rights Movements which had been about getting rights for people in voting and education turned into what people talked about as this crying problem. That was the very beginning, but the riots and the disturbances and the resistance to accepting things was clear in the urban cities of the North, and you didn't see that in our rural southern community, but you certainly read about it and you heard about it and then there just seemed to be this pushback against civil rights. We had a huge busing challenge in the State of Delaware around integrating the schools in the North, which interestingly didn't happen until the '70s [1970s] and, yes, I do remember people talking more and more about crime and needing to create a war on drugs and by the time I got to high school [Cape Henlopen High School, Lewes, Delaware] that was very much the frame that was going to shape, you know, the next couple of decades of my life. Speaker 1: Now, I know it's been said recently that the war on drugs initiated, I guess, when you were about twelve years old was really a Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration war on black folks and dissident white people. Speaker 2: Oh, oh I, I think that's right, I think that, that you know we've had these four institutions that have really controlled and constrained the opportunities for black people to live full lives where they can be free and experience opportunity just like everybody else. We've certainly had slavery, then we had lynching and racial terror, then we had segregation, and, and I think now we have mass incarceration and excessive punishment, and it was a tactical choice to use the criminal justice system to replicate the same dynamics of control and hierarchy that you had seen through segregation, lynching and slavery, and so yes, I do think that this decision to call drug addiction and drug dependency a crime when we call alcoholism a disease was very much shaped by race. We, we knew lots of affluent wealthy white people who were alcoholics and we called those folks, we said those folks were people suffering from disease and we would never think it's appropriate to call the police if we saw somebody suffering from alcoholism going into a bar, but for people of color and the poor, poor blacks, poor whites that were dealing with drug addiction, they were called criminals, and we used the criminal justice system and since that time we've put hundreds of thousands of people in jails or prisons and I do think that there's absolutely a racial component to that. Story_ID: 525072 Speaker 1: You went to Henlopen-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Cape Henlopen High School [Lewes, Delaware], right? Speaker 2: Yes, Cape Henlopen High School. The school started to consolidate--these towns were so tiny that after integration there was an interest in consolidating the schools and so Lewes, Delaware which is on the beach and Rehoboth Beach, Delaware were merged with Milton, Delaware to form a new school district, and the new high school was called Cape Henlopen High, and I, I went to Cape which is in Lewes and graduated from Cape Henlopen High in 1977. Speaker 1: Okay, so, what was high school like? Were you well-known in high school or--? Speaker 2: I guess I was yeah, I was playing sports. We had a very successful basketball team at Cape and I played basketball when I was in ninth and tenth grade then I played soccer, I played baseball. I got very involved in play. There was a wonderful--my favorite teacher was a woman named Harriet Jeglum, she was the English teacher but she was also the theater teacher and she got me involved in plays when I was in the tenth grade and the eleventh grade and twelfth grade, and because you'd would be performing on stages, people would know who you are, and I ran and became the student government president during my junior or senior year. Speaker 1: And then you were in 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] right? Speaker 2: I was in 'Raisin in the Sun,' yes, absolutely. Boy, you've done your homework. Yeah, and that was a radical thing for that community for her to put on a play with an all-black cast or a predominately black cast in Sussex County [Delaware] was radical, and that's why I loved her so much. She was--she wanted to do things that shook things up. You know when you'd go to basketball games, everything was still racially segregated. All the white people would sit on one side, the black people would sit on another side. The visitors would have their little corner and then there was a quadrant where if you didn't get there early enough (laughter), you'd have to sit there until you see black and white people sitting there and that outraged Ms. Jaglemin who was from North Dakota I believe. She was from the Dakotas somewhere, and she just wasn't used to that, and she really thought that putting on 'A Raisin in the Sun' would challenge the way people think and, and yeah, I had a really powerful experience with that play and with her (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you played Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger]? Speaker 2: I played Walter Lee, that's right and, and then did a bunch of other plays after that. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said you played basketball for two years, but--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you get hurt or something your senior year or what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--you know it's so funny, I played soccer, basketball, and baseball, so I was playing sports all year long and when I got to the eleventh grade, I had an opportunity--she got me into these speaking contests where you'd go and you'd debate and do--and I couldn't, there was so many speaking events in the winter that I couldn't both, and so I opted to do the speaking contests, rather than to keep playing basketball. I continued to play soccer and baseball but in my eleventh and twelfth grade years, I only--I, I did the speaking stuff rather than the basketball stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: So I take it you enjoyed the speeching, I mean the speaking (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thing about the speaking is if you won they'd give you money and that was very exciting to me (laughter), you'd win $50 or $100 or $200 which was a big deal. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in high school from '73 [1973] to '77 [1977]? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 525073 Speaker 1: And, now what were you thinking in those days in terms of career? What--did you consider becoming a lawyer then? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Were you thinking about that? Speaker 2: I had never considered being a lawyer in those days. I was you know, I was seriously interested in sports still, and seriously interested in music. When I went to college [Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania], I went on an athletic scholarship. I went to a college that had a very strong music program, and I was probably more focused on music and sports than anything that was gonna come after that. So, I didn't really start thinking about law school until I had gotten to college and, and really at the end of my college career hadn't really thought about a career when I was in high school [Cape Henlopen High School, Lewes, Delaware]. Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in high school, correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe that's when the commercial about Willie Horton, did that come out then in the '70s [1970s], is that the one? Speaker 2: No, I think that was '88 [1988], yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: That was later, later. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So that would've been after I actually was out of law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I believe. Speaker 1: Okay, let's put this on the shelf then we'll (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: -come back to that, we'll go back to that one 'cause I was trying to remember. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause was it Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] or was it Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] or who-- Speaker 2: No, when I was in high school, Nixon and then Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and then Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was elected in '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 525074 Speaker 1: But also in high school [Cape Henlopen High School, Lewes Delaware], that's when your [maternal] grandfather was stabbed to death. Speaker 2: That's right when I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)This is Clarence Golden, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. When I was sixteen, my grandfather was murdered, and that was a--obviously, a painful moment for the, for the family. Speaker 1: Now, he was living apart from your grandmother [Victoria Baylor Golden], right? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah after my, after their son died, their son died they separated. She was so distraught about that. And so, he was living actually in the projects in South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and living alone and these young kids broke in. They were trying to get a TV from him and fought them for the TV and ended up getting stabbed to death. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--what do you think about the perpetrators of it, were you angry about it or? Speaker 2: Well, I think we were all, yeah, angry and upset. The thing that was interesting though in my family is that people were as interested in why this could happen. Why did this happen as much as being angry at the--I mean it was young kids who were responsible for this crime. I think we had the sense that, you know we're living at time where children don't know better than to not kill someone over a TV, and that was half of the conversation. The other half was of course, just the lost, the heartache of killing an eighty-six year old man who was not a threat to anybody, but I remember it being a much-more nuanced conversation than I think a lot of people would expect, and what are we gonna do to create communities where this doesn't happen? It was a real interest in trying to disrupt the behaviors, not just punish the offenders. Speaker 1: Okay, now what kind of college counseling did you get? Speaker 2: Well, I mean this happened in '76 [1976] so I was still in high school, and we didn't get--I mean it wasn't, and I think back in those days in the black community it just wasn't perceived as (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you're asking a different question, I asked about college counseling. Speaker 2: Oh, college--I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: But you're making a good point though, when your grandfather was killed there was no counseling for you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, no. Speaker 1: No formal response to it from the school or-- Speaker 2: No, that, that's exactly right, that's exactly right. Story_ID: 525075 Speaker 1: But in terms of college counseling, I--you know it's funny. I didn't get very much at all, I mean we--I knew that you had to take the SAT to get into college, but there wasn't a lot of guidance given about that to me, and so I just took the test. Because I had a brother [Howard C. Stevenson] who was a year older, he had gone through some of this and I knew some things because of him and he went to Eastern [Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania] to play soccer and I'd gone up to visit him a couple of times and that's how I ended up going there is because really he was there and I was sort of following him, but no I can't say I got a lot of counseling or direction when I was in high school [Cape Henlopen High School, Lewes, Delaware] about college. Speaker 2: Okay, and so Eastern College is--what, where is it and what's--? Speaker 1: So, Eastern is in St. Davids, Pennsylvania, it's on the Main Line, outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], little small, a small town, very affluent section of, of Philadelphia. Speaker 2: All right, now this is what--Philadelphia people always mention the Main Line (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: I'm so proud of myself I know what it was. Speaker 1: Laughter. Speaker 2: But a lot of people don't know. Speaker 1: No, that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I actually saw the old movie 'The Philadelphia Story'-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --which takes place on the Main Line. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: And I say, I know what that means, but-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. So there's a set of communities outside of Philadelphia, that if you head west these communities unfolding. You know you go through West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then you'll hit places like Ardmore [Pennsylvania] and Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania] and Radnor [Radnor Township, Pennsylvania] and St. Davids, and there are a cluster of dozens of schools and colleges, Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania], Haverford [Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylvania], Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], a lot of these schools and it's a very affluent area. When Philadelphia prospered and people moved from Center City [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they moved largely west and they created the Main Line which was the suburbs where you had a lot of wealth and a lot of prominence and you had a lot of college edu- institutions. It's a very beautiful part of that state, and Eastern was one of the colleges, it was a religious school, a Christian school and it was one of the colleges on the Main Line and that's where I, I went to school after my brother chose to go there a year earlier. Speaker 2: Okay, that's an interesting the dynamic too and black people that lived along the Main Line (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: --who service those as chauffeurs, as maids, butlers. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, no question about it, the, you know there was also a black community that worked almost exclusively in the service industry in that area, at least back in those days, yes, there were domestics and chauffeurs and, and people working pretty much in the service industry. Speaker 2: Yeah, Kobe Bryant is from the Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania] which is one of those communities, right. Speaker 1: Yes, that's right, that's out there on the Main Line, that's right, yeah. Story_ID: 525076 Speaker 1: Okay so Eastern College [Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania] is on the Main Line, so you've got this money around, and so, you're on scholarship? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you have decided to major in philosophy (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Yeah, I was on an academic scholarship and athletic scholarship and I wasn't really sure what I was going to study but I had a tremendous philosophy course with a professor, Peter Janko, [ph.] who was a philosophy professor, and I loved this exploration of ideas. I was also very interested in history, and I became interested in political science and political theory and it just seemed like there was a lot going on in that space. There was a guy named Donald Barnhouse [Donald Grey Barnhouse], who was a political theorist who taught, who I really was fascinated by. History, you know this guy named Larry Ziglar [William Larry Ziglar]. I was also drawn to English and writing and literature. Probably my favorite professors were over there, Betsy Morgan, and Caroline Cherry [Caroline L. Cherry], but ultimately it was the philosophy and the political theory and the history that won out when it came time to a major, and I minored in English, I think, or literature or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you do the typical college--did you join a fraternity and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, I mean we didn't--there were fraternities, but I wasn't very active. I was you know I was very, very heavily involved I music so I directed a gospel choir during most of my time in college. We were called the Angels of Harmony and I toured with a couple of music groups. There was a group called Turning Point, and we would go and tour for the summer. I played a lot and as a musician in churches and for other musicians. I started doing some work in little studios for, for pay and then the other activity for me in college was sports. I was, I played soccer and baseball, and that kept us pretty busy. We had a very, very good soccer team my first few years were in the national championships and so I wasn't involved in any of the fraternities or anything like that. I got involved in student government. Once again, became a student government president. Speaker 1: What position did you play in soccer? Speaker 2: I was a fullback, I played--in my early years I played wing fullback and then I became the sweeper, the, the player who plays closest to the goalie. Story_ID: 525077 Speaker 1: You're not in a fraternity, was there a black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: You know, it was just starting. I mean it's interesting, there was but the choir that I directed was sort of the central black organization on campus. It's like almost all of the kids of color were in the Angels [Angels of Harmony], and because we would rehearse you know two or three times a week and then we would--you know we'd perform on weekends, it was sort of the de facto center of sort of black student life, and like a lot of colleges in those days you know the black kids were sat together and spent a lot of time together and more than a student organization, it was sort of the Angels that were the cultural center for black students--excuse me, during those days when I was in college. Speaker 1: Okay, but--well, most of the black student organizations have some aspect of pan-Africanism, and there's a certain amount of nationalism and social change talk going on. Is it, was--did the choir engage in those kind of things (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Less so, I think because were a religious institution we were focused on creating an identity kind of in that space, and so by bringing kind of a more traditional approach to music and to kind of religious expression, that's where you saw ethnicity, but you know the Angels, our group would use drummers and bass players and other instrumentalists which were less common in the other groups that you would see on campus. You know, and so it was less overtly political. We were also engaged, there were a lot of people were gonna go into ministry, pastors and, and so there was a lot of talk about things like liberation theology and, and a worldview, that was a faith worldview, but that was in harmony with the activism that, that people thought was still needed. Speaker 1: Now, did you--'cause I-- yeah, when I saw your book ['Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption,' Bryan Stevenson], one of the early quotes in the book is Reinhold Niebuhr (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You know, so this is a liberation theologist (unclear), and one of the-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes and that was a big influence for me. I mean, I studied Niebuhr; I studied Orlando Costas, Ron Sider. We had some very progressive voices on campus, Tony Campolo was a very progressive evangelical and you know those folks were very much a part of the tradition that I was studying and reading. Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], obviously and many who came out of the Civil Rights Movement, but, but those folks were very influential to me in the readings and writings of them. Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to hear James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone]? Speaker 2: I did, I did, I loved Cone. He came and just was always provocative and powerful, and then there were other people who came from different traditions but had a still equally powerful voice, John Perkins [John M. Perkins] from Mississippi and a lot of these folks that were talking about how to make faith active in the lives of people and it was a very stimulating environment because you weren't precluded from hearing and talking about the part of the intellectual life of this country that was most robust at the time, but on main stream campuses was considered not appropriate. You didn't have preachers and theologians headlining at the big state universities, or a lot of private universities 'cause it just complicated things to have that sort of religious or theological presence, but at Eastern [Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania] it was very much the norm and I think I benefitted from that. Story_ID: 525078 Speaker 1: So your grades are good [at Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania], I take it during all this period (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did well. Speaker 1: And did you change your major at all from philosophy or did you--? Speaker 2: Well I, a technical graduation degree is history and political science because as I decided to go law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I, I just finished my--I, I actually was going to graduate in three years, and then I decided I didn't really want to leave college, even though I had enough credits to graduate, so I didn't. I added a bunch more in history and political science and so when I graduated that was the--but I continued to study philosophy, literature, history and political science until I graduated. Speaker 1: So did you, did you go to school pretty much year 'round then? Speaker 2: I, I yes, well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you--in the summers, too? Speaker 2: No, in the summer I toured with these music groups and so I, I--my, one summer I went to Georgetown and studied that summer, but the rest of the summers I was playing music. So, there's a group [Turning Point], as I said, that toured and I was in that group for a couple of summers just to make money and tour around. Speaker 1: Now, did you consider at any point becoming a professional musician? Speaker 2: Absolutely, that was very much on my mind. Even when I graduated that summer I played for a touring play that was going around the country and they were going to be performing in Puerto Rico, and so I got a job as the piano player for this. Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh I'm trying to remember it now. It's--a professor had written it. I don't remember much about it other than I was supposed to play these songs during the performance and they put us up in this really nice hotel in Puerto Rico and I didn't have to do anything all day long. I had--for me now the dream job (laughter). They flew me to Puerto Rico, I had all day on the beach. Around six o'clock I'd have to get cleaned up and at seven o'clock I had to be at the theater. I'd play with the show, which wasn't very demanding to be honest, from eight to ten and then I'd be done. I loved that job, and so particularly after I had that job, I thought, "No, I wanna be a professional musician" (laughter) and even when I went to Harvard I spent a lot of time at the Berklee school of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts]. I went to a church, where a lot of the members were students at Berklee, and because they were always forming groups and getting gigs and I was playing at the church, I got pulled into that scene, so even while I was at law school I wasn't--I hadn't completely given up on the idea of a career in music. Story_ID: 525079 Speaker 1: Now you had never been interested in law before, but what, what happened did you get advice about that when you were in school 'cause--? Speaker 2: Well to be honest, I knew I wanted to stay in school. When, when I was a senior [at Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davis, Pennsylvania] and I was studying philosophy and political theory, I knew nobody was gonna hire me to philosophize. I really just wanted to stay in school. I was unwilling to commit to a particular discipline, so I was unwilling to just say I wanna do a history professor or English professor, 'cause I keep looking--to be honest, I found law school almost by default. It was the one post-graduate pursuit that didn't really require a particular commitment or a particular career path, and that appealed to me and so I took the LSAT, I, I got in at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was great. I also agreed to do a joint degree, because I wasn't sure I wanted to be a lawyer, so I got into the school of government and I still-- Speaker 1: This is more than just great. This is, this is bigger than great. I--well, from the average person's point of view (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You graduated from college, decided, decided, I think I'll go to Harvard Law School. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, I mean, you know, that's-- Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, I, because I wasn't committed to going to law school I took the LSAT. I had, you know I had done well in school. I said, "I'm just gonna apply to a handful of these schools, I'll apply to the really big ones or the good ones." So it seemed, and I thought if I don't get in, I don't get I'll do something else. If I do get in, that'll be sort of interesting and I got in to Harvard and, and because I had the joint degree, it was my first choice over some of the other schools, which I also got into and you know obviously, I had a--I mean I had a great experience there but I had never met a lawyer until I got to law school, just never met a lawyer. Speaker 1: You never met a black lawyer before or any kind of lawyer (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never met any kind of lawyer, and-- Speaker 1: That meant you stayed out of trouble, number one. Speaker 2: Well, there was that, there is that but I was really confused about what lawyers did. When I got to law school there was a lot I didn't know and I was a little astonished to see how much more my colleagues and classmates knew because many of them were the children of lawyers and they had worked in law firms before they decided to go to law school, and I, I mean I did feel a, a big cultural gap in terms of my exposure. Story_ID: 525080 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself? There are certain things that you write about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --about your experience at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I was just considering like, how did you see yourself when you graduated from Eastern [Eastern College; Eastern University, St. Davids, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or what kind of person were you or did you see yourself? See, you were going to law school, but you didn't necessarily see yourself as a lawyer. What--? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, I mean I did think of myself as a little foreign as sort of a bit of a foreigner. I mean I came from a small Christian college which was not the norm at, at Harvard. I grew up in a poor, rural, southern community which was also not the norm. You know I was black at a time when there were almost no black faculty, and there wasn't the kind of you know black student presence that I think exists now, and so it felt very foreign. I'd also never lived in a community like Cambridge [Massachusetts] which was interesting but kind of over-stimulating in a lot of ways. So it was difficult. I became active in this church in Cambridge which was the thing that was the most familiar to me, but even that was different. It was a racially integrated church, which was new for me. I'd always been in the black church. It met in the afternoon; it didn't have its own structure. There were a lot of things that seemed different, but it was a great time to really think about what I know and what I understand. It was really the first time where I had to evaluate everything without a net, without a chorus, without a guide, and that's when I began to realize what was important to me and a lot of the discovery I think people make in college about what they want to do and how they want to live--I didn't really make until I got to law school, and it just became clear to me that we were doing terrible things in this country to the poor and to the excluded, to the marginalized. And it was in that context that I began to take courses that were, were gonna push me into the work that I do now. Speaker 1: Now, what, what made you think about these things that we were doing? I mean what was it? Speaker 2: Well, it was clear--this was the first time that I had ever been around wealth. This was the first time I had ever been around affluence and privilege and status. I mean there were people who I'm sure were privileged and wealthy at Eastern, but it was at a different level, and it was obfuscated by the faith dynamic at that campus. Speaker 1: Okay, so it kind of democratized the place on a level (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It did, it did and we had our own hierarchy of who had status and it might be about ability and some other things and faithfulness, but at Harvard you met people who were the children of you know millionaires and who were incredibly well established and were the children of judges and corporate heads, et cetera. Speaker 1: It might carry weight on you? Speaker 2: Oh, it did, it just made me have to evaluate things that I hadn't had to evaluate before. It's a much more diverse setting, you know I'd never been in a community where there was a strong Jewish presence, or an international presence of the sort that was political, we--I had obviously, classmates at Eastern who were from other countries, but it was a different dynamic. So, it was a very stimulating time, it was the first time I'd lived this far away from home as I was, and but it was a rich time. It was a time really of deep reflection about who I wanna be and what I wanna do. Speaker 1: And what I thought it was interesting was a remark that you made, that when you reflect back on those days and said you were like an anthropologist-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --amongst an exotic tribe and you're trying to figure out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: What they ate--what they-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right, no, I did--I remember I took course early in my college career called cultural anthropology and the stories they'd tell us would also be these anthropologists that were trying to understand these cultures and these tribes in these remote parts of the world, and I very much identified with that. When I got to Harvard, it just seemed like there were these fascinating conversations going on and rather to just admit that I don't have any idea what y'all are talking about or to react. I didn't know enough to react, I wanted to study, I wanted (laughter) to understand. Story_ID: 525081 Speaker 1: It was an education in every sense of the word, but it ultimately led me to a point where I could say, you know, "I don't want that, and I don't want that," or, "That doesn't feel right for, or that doesn't feel right for me." And it pushed me into really thinking about, well, what's going to feel right for you? What do you want? What's going to animate your life? How are you going to connect all these ideas you have in your mind with the conviction that you have in your heart? And I wasn't willing to get pulled into a certain path that other people were defining as success or achievement. You know people got dressed up and went on fly-outs and I did it a couple of times, and I thought, you know I don't think there's much at the end of this and so-- Speaker 2: Fly-outs? What, what--? Speaker 1: Fly-outs were when, you know so at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in those days all the big firms from all over the country would come and they would interview students and they'd make them these very, very generous offers to work as summer associates, because the idea was if they could hook you for the summer, they could hook you when you graduated, and so for the first months October, November, thousands of these firm employees would be there and you'd hear your classmates talking about, "I gotta fly out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I got to fly out to San Francisco [California]." That was a firm flying you out to the firm to meet other people in the firm and to see the city, and it was sort of this point of pride and distinction, how many fly-outs you got and how much you traveled to accomplish these things, and it just became less and less interesting to me the more I thought about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think you, you mentioned a lot of--I mean some of the classes that you--torts and contracts, and things that-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --that you weren't that interested in. Speaker 1: Couldn't make connections to it, you know because again I'd never met a lawyer, I couldn't see the relevance of these topics. They were relevant, I just couldn't see the connections. Story_ID: 525082 Speaker 1: It was only after you know, I took a course that sent me to death row that I could be- I could begin to appreciate why procedure matters, or why due process matters, how the [U.S.] Constitution can shape and control the lives of people. But once I had that experience of meeting people on death row, everything changed; I became radicalized in my interest in the law. Speaker 2: Well, tell us how this experience came about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and who was, was responsible for it. Speaker 1: Sure, so I, I finished my first year of law school. I was a bit disillusioned, I went over to the school of government [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and ended up being a bit disillusioned by that as well, they were teaching us to maximize benefits and minimize calls but it didn't seem to matter whose benefits got maximized and whose calls got minimized. So, I came back to the law school and was actually trying to persuade myself to accept a career as a lawyer but I knew was not going to be affirming, that I knew it was not going to be fulfilling, and then I took a course with a professor named Elizabeth Bartholet and at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] we had a traditional fall semester and then a spring semester, but we had a January term where you would typically take one class and in a really intense way would meet every day, four days a week and she set up a course called race and poverty litigation, but the structure of the course was that instead of having a classroom in Cambridge [Massachusetts] where you met every day, you would spend that month working with a human rights organization, or an organization working on issues of race and poverty, and I ended up coming to Atlanta, Georgia and working with what was then called the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee, what's now called the Southern Center for Human Rights and that was the formative experience of my, of my life. Speaker 2: Now, what was the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee? What's--I mean who set it up-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and who did it serve? Speaker 1: Well, the director at the time was a man named Steve Bright who was a very charismatic, very effective brilliant lawyer who I met actually in Charlotte, North Carolina in the December of 1983, and we flew from Charlotte to Atlanta and Steve was a different kind of lawyer than any lawyer I'd met. He was deeply animated by the work he was doing, deeply committed and the other lawyers were similar. And when I saw them and I saw the way they worked at starting getting this idea at how exciting it would be to have a job like this and then I'd been there a week and they sent me down to death row, and that's where I met the first condemned prisoner I'd ever met and that man's humanity and his insights and character had a profound impact on me, but SPDC provided legal services to people on death row as well as challenging prison conditions across the South. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So you spent the summer--now, this is the summer of your (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so the first time I went there was a January term-- Speaker 2: January, okay. Speaker 1: --this unique Harvard term, and then I went back in the summer, the next summer to spend more time with them and then graduated from Harvard, that's where I went to work. Speaker 2: Now, were there any other professors at Harvard who--I don't know, now [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree would be too young, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was yeah, Tree was not there when I was a student, he came right after I left. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, Larry Tribe [Laurence Tribe] was an influential professor because he was talking about problems of domination, he was very progressive and--but I didn't spend a lot of time really on the campus. Story_ID: 525083 Speaker 1: What was the, your preparation for you know, going to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know I took this course with Betsy Bartholet [Elizabeth Bartholet] who herself was a former civil rights attorney. She had worked with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and once I was engaged by those issues, I mean really turned around by this new understanding that there were people in this country literally dying for legal assistance, everything shifted. I wanted to, I needed to understand everything about substantive due process and procedural due process and federalism and comity. I was really buried in the law school library and started working on projects for lawyers at SPDC [Southern Prisoners Defense Committee; Southern Center for Human Rights, Atlanta, Georgia], even after I came back to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I just couldn't get out of my head or out of my heart this community of people who were condemned, many of them wrongly, who couldn't get the legal help they need, and when I got back to Harvard, I was really preoccupied with developing a mastery of the substantive and doctrinal and procedural areas of the law that would best position me to represent death row prisoners. Speaker 1: Okay, well what really struck you, I guess what you said--I mean you went to death row and all that, but did you hear of particulars about certain--I know you must've this heard some particular about some cases that were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --just egregious, right. Speaker 2: Well, I, you know the first person I met was a man who had been there for two years and none of the lawyers at SPDC had, had a chance to get down there just to explain to him what was going to happen and they asked me to go down and tell him that he wasn't at risk of execution in any time in the next year, and I remember being so nervous about that conversation because I was just a law student and when they got me back into the visitation room, and they opened the door and there stood this condemned prisoner, I was struck by the chains he bore. He had handcuffs on his wrists, he had a chain around his waist and shackles on his ankles and I was so nervous when he walked in, I said, "I'm so sorry, I'm just a law student." I told him I didn't know much about the law or the death penalty, but I did tell him that he's not at risk of execution at any time in the next year. When I said that the man said (simultaneous). Speaker 1: So, he wouldn't have (unclear)? Speaker 2: He would have no way of knowing, and when I said that he said, "Say that again." I said, "You're not at risk of execution anytime in the next year," and he said, "Wait, wait, say that again." I said "You're not at risk of execution anytime in the next year." And he grabbed my hands and said "Thank you, thank you, thank you." He said, "You're the first person I've met or talked to in the two years I've been on death row, who's not a death row prisoner or death row guard. I've been talking to my wife and kids on the phone, but haven't let them come and visit, because I was afraid they would show up and I'd have an execution date." He said, "Now because of you, I'll see my wife, I'll see my kids." And I couldn't believe that even in my ignorance being proximate could have an impact on the quality of someone's life, and I think that was the thing that was so transformative. You didn't need to know all the answers, you didn't have to understand all the complexities, but if you showed up, if you positioned yourself in these difficult places, you could still have an impact and we started talking. It turned out we were exactly the same age. That man asked me questions about my life, I asked him questions about his life, and before I knew it three hours had passed, even though I only scheduled to be there an hour, and I write about him in my book ['Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption,' Bryan Stevenson] because the guards had gotten angry because we'd been in there so long, and they came bursting in there after three hours and they threw the man against the wall and they put the chains back on him very roughly. I tried to get them to be gentler and they just ignored me and then they started shoving this man out the room, but when they got near the door he planted his feet and when they pushed him this next time, he didn't move. And then he turned to me and he said, "Bryan [HistoryMaker Bryan Stevenson], don't worry about this, you just come back." And that's when he closed his eyes and he threw his head back and he started to sing, and he started singing this hymn I use to play when I was a kid in the church. He started singing this hymn and he said, "I'm pressing on the upward way, new heights I'm gaining every day, still praying as I'm onward bound," and he said, "Lord, plant my feet on higher ground," ['Higher Ground']. And it just seemed like everything stopped. Speaker 1: That was the song, but can you sing it? Speaker 2: I, I could on a good day. Speaker 1: You don't have to sing it real good, I just (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's you know, you, you get to that point and then say, (singing) "Lord, lift me up and let me stand, no place on heaven's table end. No higher place than I have found, Lord, plant my feet on higher ground." And everybody stopped you know, and the guards were covered, and they started pushing him down the hallway and you could hear the chains clanging, but you could still hear him singing. You know even from a distance you could hear him singing. And, everything changed, I knew then that I wanted to help condemned people get to higher ground, but more than that I knew that my journey to higher ground was tied to his journey and I just all of a sudden needed to know everything about the law that was necessary and I went back to Harvard Law School, and you couldn't get me out of the law school library, but my focus and my orientation and my consciousness shifted away from Cambridge [Massachusetts], toward Mississippi, toward Alabama, toward Georgia, toward Louisiana, toward the slave states where there were condemned people facing death sentences that I believed were racially biased. Story_ID: 525084 Speaker 1: Is there anything significant about graduating from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] or any, anything happen or--? Speaker 2: Only that it meant that I could now get busy (laughter). I didn't even go to my graduation. I, I, I'm left after my last day of class, I got in the car and drove down to Georgia and started working and that's how consumed I was with the work that, that was in front of me. Speaker 1: Now, many people have heard of the Southern Poverty Law Center [Montgomery, Alabama] with attorney Morris Dees. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you interact, did the organization interact with them at all? Speaker 2: You know there were people who worked at Southern Poverty Law Center who folks at SPDC [Southern Prisoners Defense Committee; Southern Center for Human Rights, Atlanta, Georgia] knew, we didn't do a lot of interaction with them. The person who I worked with here in Alabama, Eva Ansley had gotten a contract from the Southern Poverty Law Center to monitor the conditions of people on death row, and so she was my contact in the '80s [1980s] once I moved down here and started working. Speaker 1: In Montgomery [Alabama]? Speaker 2: In Montgomery, yeah, I was in Atlanta [Georgia] and she was over here, but it wasn't a formal relationship with them, although I knew people there and they had done some work back in the day. Speaker 1: Okay and 1983 is when you first encountered these death row prisoners (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: Twenty years after the March on Washington, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: --so, you come down here in eighty--you graduated in eighty--? Speaker 2: Five [1985], yeah. Speaker 1: Five [1985]. Eighty-five [1985], so you had two more years? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I came back the summer of '84 [1984] to work as a summer student and start some work and then I graduated in May of '85 [1985] and moved here right away. Speaker 1: And there are some cases in the interim that the [U.S.] Supreme Court rules on. There's Pulley v. Harris [Pulley v. Harris, 1984]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And Spaziano v. Florida [Spaziano v. Florida, 1984], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, so this was still a very formative period, you know the death penalty had been struck down in 1972 and then it was reinstated in 1976, so when I came here in the early '80s [1980s], they were, the states were just getting to the point where they were ready to execute people, and there were almost no lawyers available. It was very early days, and when I moved here in '85 [1985], there weren't organizations that had been set up to provide legal services to people on death row. That was the biggest crises. We'd get a call from somebody in Virginia or somebody in Louisiana, or somebody in Florida, somebody in Mississippi who needed a lawyer because they had an execution date, and we would go run and try to stop the execution. Story_ID: 525085 Speaker 1: But those decisions where we had won a lot in the late '70s [1970s], Coker vs. Georgia [Coker v. Georgia, 1977] that struck down the death penalty for rape of an adult woman, other decisions that limited the death penalty. By the early '80s [1980s] those [U.S.] Supreme Court decisions started going the other way. Speaker 2: What's the political dynamic of this? Speaker 1: Well, you know the '60s [1960s] was a very turbulent time in this country for the rule of law. It followed a period, but I think was quite triumphant for the rule of law, the advance of the Warren Court in, to protecting civil rights where we abolished bans on interracial marriage and we created rights for people suspected of crimes, Miranda [Miranda v. Arizona, 1966], all of these landmark decisions, Gideon [Gideon v. Wainwright, 1963] creating a right to counsel--the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s] and mid-'60s [1960s] was a really triumphant era in the history of the court. By the '70s [1970s] when you had the war on drugs, you had the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration pushing back against those gains, it became a sort of reactionary period, which then led to the '80s [1980s] where you had a new court that was very resistant to some of those achievements, and the court in the '80s [1980s] started ruling against these death row prisoners and, and Spaziano [Spaziano v. Florida, 1984] was a defeat. Woodson vs. North Carolina [Woodson v. North Carolina, 1976] was a defeat. The, you know Zant [Zant v. Stephens, 1982] and these cases that had come out of the South basically were trying to make it possible for the state to start executing people, because even though the death penalty had been reinstated in the mid-'70s [1970s], there had been almost no executions in the early '80s [1980s], and that was about to change, and so when I came to start working, it was right in this period where it was a desperate push to, to get states to the point where they could start executions. Speaker 2: When did the ratio on Supreme Court change, and--? Speaker 1: Well, you know, in the '70s [1970s] when, when Chief Justice Warren [Earl Warren] left, that was the Burger Court, that was the beginning of the shift, and then when it became the Rehnquist Court in the '80s [1980s], it became a very conservative court, and obviously, you had, you know you had the Nixon appointees of the '70s [1970s], they ended up not being that resistant to some of the stuff, but the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] appointees of the '80s [1980s] followed by the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] appointees of the early '90s [1990s], really created a court that was very conservative and very law and order and very non responsive to these complaints about bias and discrimination, and when Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] retires and Justice Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.] retires in the '90s [1990s] that the lions, the champions of progressive social justice and racial justice are gone, for good. We've never seen anybody that consistently vocal, you know Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall would dissent from every death penalty case. They'd said, "I continue to believe the death penalty is cruel and unusual punishment." And that ended an era in, in the early '90s [1990s], late '80s [1980s], and they were increasingly the dissenters, and so by the time I started my career, we were really in the beginning of this period of a lot of death where executions were becoming more and more the norm. Story_ID: 525086 Speaker 1: I guess for anybody watching they probably think like I do. I'm just a layman, and I see this--I see things in the news, I have a sense that the country for some reason, you know, especially in the '70s [1970s], I had a sense that it was going forward. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: And your sense is that, okay, we don't have the death penalty anymore, and you know, civil--there's been the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. I mean, things are gonna get better-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and all this, but this isn't necessarily true, is it? Speaker 2: No, and if anything, I think we were lulled into this sense of false progress because we had seen so much change. If you compare the way this country operated in 1955 or the way it operated in 1965, we had radical change. You know, the end of these kinds of segregation laws, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], the Civil Rights Act. President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had declared a War on Poverty, you listen to Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] campaign for president in 1968, and it just sounds like something like from a hundred years ago, it's just so different from the tenor and character of political campaigns today, or political campaigns before that and you know you have all this student activism against the war [Vietnam War] in the 1960s and the early '70s [1970s] and there's a revolution in music, all these big things are happening, and then I think there's this sense of things that things inevitably moved forward, and then the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] years kick in and you start seeing this reaction against this, and all of a sudden college students are being killed on college campuses, and you see this militarization building up. Speaker 1: Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Kent State, Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], you see the weaponry of the American government being directed not at the Vietnamese, not at the Germans, not at the Koreans, not at the Russians during the Cold War, but at U.S. citizens. In a way, that was unprecedented and it changed the temperature and the appetite for progress, the kind of progress that we had seen in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], and it became very retrenched, very organized around the status quo and the death penalty came back and a lot of those punitive practices that had been such nightmares for people of color came back, and excessive punishment came back and over-incarceration started and the death penalty, executions became a way of life in some of these states, or characteristic of these states in ways that was new and different, and so it was a difficult time to start a career as a human rights lawyer, because the courts were largely saying, "You know what, we're done, we're not gonna try to, we're not gonna give you anymore." And if anything they were trying to take things back, and that's what you saw in the death penalty area. Story_ID: 525087 Speaker 1: When you arrive in Atlanta [Georgia], you had two bad encounters with the police? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I mean, I, you know I grew up in a community that had always learned to fear the police, because the police were the people who enforced segregation. You know if you drank out of the wrong water fountain or went into the wrong bathroom, or went into the part of the beach where you weren't allowed, the police would be called and they would make you comply with this racial hierarchy, and so they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this was in Delaware, right (laughter)? Speaker 2: That was in southern Delaware (laughter), that's right and in my life, they, you know I tried to stay as far away and when I lived in Atlanta, I was living in an urban city for the first time, and you know I wasn't, I wasn't--you know I had this Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degree, but I was, I was not making a lot of money I think my starting salary was fourteen thousand dollars a year. Speaker 1: This is nineteen eighty-f- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And you can explain a lot of things by inflation, but even in 1985 that was not a lot of money and I had debts, I had law school loans and other loans. Speaker 1: Now put that in perspective, that's a middle management CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] employee's salary-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from 1975. Speaker 2: That's right, that's exactly right. No, I mean it, it was not a lot of money and then when you took out the thousands you owed for your law school loans you'd, you'd--so I drove a really ratty car. I didn't have, you know I had to live with other--I slept on Steve Wright's couch for a year and a half, 'cause I couldn't afford an apartment, and, and you know I was working hard, deeply committed to the work and one night I came home and, and was sitting in my car just listening to the radio and Atlanta police pulled up and shined the light on me in my car. It was a SWAT [Special Weapons And Tactics] team, not a regular team and I got out of the car just to explain to them this is where I live and the police officer drew his weapon and said, "Move, and I'll blow your head off." And I put my hands, I will never forget watching that young man because his hands were shaking and I was like, "No, it's okay, it's all right, it's okay, it's all right." And the other officer ran behind me and threw me against the car and--they worked themselves up into this state of anger, 'cause they were acting so violently. I think they needed to believe that I was much more of a threat that I'd given 'em any reason to think that I was, just to justify this anger and violence and you know the neighbors were gathering and they were convinced that they had caught some mass murderer and it was just humiliating and I couldn't get them to let me show them my ID, which would be the thing you'd think they'd first want to see just to prove where I lived, and the thing that bothered me about that experience is I was twenty-seven, twenty-eight and I was a Harvard lawyer, I'd done civil rights work, I'd done police misconduct work. I knew to say, "It's all right, it's okay." But the same thing had happened to me when I was sixteen or seventeen and just started driving. When that officer dressed in all black pointed his gun at me, and said, "Move and I'll blow your brains out." I probably would've run, would've been a foolish thing to do, but nobody had ever pointed a gun at me before. In those days, I just felt like you run, you get away from anything dangerous, and I think that's what I would've done and it, and it burdened me because I was worried that all these young black boys and men that I saw walking around my neighborhood might now know, not to run. And so, I was just walking down the street grabbing kids, said, "Here, let me tell you what you do when you get stopped by the police." Just--and the kids would sometimes be looking at me like I'm crazy, but it's really important to me that I tell them what to do because I was afraid they'd be killed if they thought like I did. And it was that weight that bothered me more than anything. You know I was antagonized by what they did to me, but I didn't get arrested, nothing you know I got, I was terrified but I survived, but I was worried about the survival of others and I think when people see people protesting, see folks protesting today about police violence and they think that communities are overreacting, they don't understand the anger. They don't know what it's like to live with this presumption of dangerousness and guilt, to constantly be at risk of being threatened and menaced. To be doing nothing wrong and then have someone point a gun at you who is supposed to be keeping you safe, not threatening to kill you. That disconnect is so enraging that it really becomes impossible to continue to absorb all of this. Story_ID: 525088 Speaker 1: When I read this story, it's really disturbing because this is the new, golden Atlanta [Georgia]- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: --where is Maynard Jackson is the mayor. Speaker 2: That w- Speaker 1: Where, where Brown is the chief of police, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It you know I think it was particularly troubling because back in those days, yeah, Atlanta was supposed to be the promised land for black people, and it had a black mayor, and there was this new opportunity and yet. Speaker 1: Wasn't [HistoryMaker] Lee P. Brown in place? Speaker 2: Yes, Brown--had a black police chief and, and yet. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not suggesting that he's responsible for this, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. But it was--you see that today where you have leaders but you still had a culture of policing and you still have dynamics in the community that looked at young men of color as, first a threat, and it was your burden to persuade the person who looked at you that you were not a threat, that you were okay, that you were safe. Speaker 1: Were, were these white policemen? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were white police officers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Oh no question, and I think it was just one of those really heartbreaking experiences because I decided to complain about what had happened and I wrote up a statement and I didn't want them to know I was a lawyer because I didn't think it should turn on me being a lawyer, and so, I wrote up this statement, it was like nine pages long and had all these case citations in it (laughter), so they probably knew, but I never said I was a lawyer, and the funny thing is that I turned it in and at no point were they willing to acknowledge that anything had been done that was improper. They never said, "I'm sorry," they never said that this is a problem, and it was only when I then threatened a lawsuit and all this other kind of stuff that they had some black officer come in and say "Oh yeah, we're sorry, it shouldn't have happened like that," and I was like, "No." Speaker 1: So they sent a black officer to apologize? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Was, was he he community relations or something? Speaker 2: Something like that yes, that's exactly it. Speaker 1: Neighborhood relations officer (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was their strategy was to have somebody just, and it wasn't even a real I'm sorry. It's like, "Yeah, it happens, sorry but you know. Just be ready next time. Don't think I'm not telling you it's not gonna happen again because it probably will." And, you know, sadly that was in the late '80s [1980s], and here we are thirty years later and we're dealing with the same problem, same problem. Speaker 1: It has not changed. Speaker 2: No, it has not. Speaker 1: And it has--we were referring to the Charshee McIntyre book ['Criminalizing A Race: Free Blacks During Slavery,' Charshee C.L. McIntyre], during the little break we had, and she cites this being a problem not just in slavery, but in freedom, so called free Negroes had this problem even in the North (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, no absolutely. Speaker 1: --ever since the early 1800s, the late 1700s. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, no, no and that's the thing about the identity of law enforcement in this country and the identity of police offers. It is rooted in the identity of enslavement and terror and segregation. The Fugitive Slave Act [Fugitive Slave Act of 1850] was an act designed to make every law enforcement officer in this country an agent of the perpet- perpetuating slavery. Whether you were a police officer in New York or Boston [Massachusetts], or Mississippi or Georgia, your job was to be on the lookout for black people who might have escaped from slavery, and your obligation under federal law was to get them back to their slave status, and even free people in the North had to fear that these (air quotes) officers would re-enslave them because there were often rewards and benefits for being an officer that--and that's the beginning of. Speaker 1: Yeah. The burden of proof was on-- Speaker 2: The burden of proof was on the, on the black person and it always has been and that's the sad part, it still is. So, when you get stopped even if you haven't done anything wrong, you're the one who has to make sure that your hands are plainly visible. They may have open carry laws in your state. They may tell you, you can have your gun, but if you're black or you're brown, carry a gun, reach for a gun, own a gun and, and you will risk your life. Not from the criminals, but from the police. Speaker 1: Suppose you have something in your hand that looks like it might be a gun, at a distance. Speaker 2: You know I, it's just, it's just tragic where we are on this issue and, and there hasn't been the kind of commitment to seeing the threat that this stuff poses. That's the real difficulty. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is how you start in Atlanta, and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right, that's right. Story_ID: 525089 Speaker 1: Now there was a--the Sentencing Reform Act [Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984]. Tell us about that. That happens around the same time that you--or just a little bit before you--in '84 [1984] just before you get to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, the [U.S.] Congress had started becoming a force for mass incarceration, I mean they were beginning to look for ways to be tough on crime. The whole political culture was, "How do we prove that we are tough on crime?" And Congress wanted in and so it started passing sentencing reform bills, mandatory sentencing for crack cocaine, the death penalty for drug dealers, and that continued for twenty years. The truth in sentencing act gave money to states if they would keep people in prison longer, three strikes laws, all of that created a culture that made us the most punitive society in the world, and today we have the highest rate of incarceration on the planet and we've got-- Speaker 1: This, this is incredible. This is the thing the average person has to hear five or six times before it sinks in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right, and that's exactly right. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: We are the highest rate of incarceration. Speaker 2: The highest rate--we, there are 70 million Americans with criminal arrests, which means when they try to get a job or try to get a loan, their criminal arrest history is going to disfavor them, 70 million Americans. The Bureau of Justice [Bureau of Justice Statistics] predicts that one in three black male babies born in this country is expected to go to jail or prison. Now, when you were born, your mother had to worry about all kinds of challenges for you because you were a black man. When I was born, my mother [Alice Golden Stevenson] had to worry about all kinds of challenges for me, but neither of our mothers had to worry about a high risk of incarceration. That's not even something that we had to deal with that young black babies being born today have to deal with, an expectation of incarceration, and so it's tragic where we are with regard to some of these issues. Story_ID: 525090 Speaker 1: There are also decisions being made around this time around electrocution-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as being a (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, well one formative decision was the McCleskey case [McCleskey v. Kemp, 1987] where the [U.S.] Supreme Court was asked to strike down the death penalty because of racial bias, and the court in a five/four decision held that the evidence of racial bias was not in dispute, that you're eleven times more likely to get the death penalty if the victim is white than if the victim is black, twenty-two times more likely to get the death penalty if the defendant is black and the victim is white, but the court nevertheless concluded that the death penalty is still constitutional for two reasons: one, if we deal with racial bias in the administration of the death penalty, it's going to be just a matter of time before we have to deal with complaints about racial bias in other parts of the criminal justice system, and this quote, "fear of too much justice" as Justice Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.] wrote, is what pushed the court away from doing what it should do. The second thing the court said, was a certain-- Speaker 1: You said the fear of too much justice? Speaker 2: Justice, Justice Brennan wrote that, today's decision reflects a, quote, "fear of too much justice," and he was right, and the second thing the court said, "We--we're not gonna grant relief here because this problem of racial bias in the death penalty, it's inevitable." That's the word they used, and having argued cases at the U.S. Supreme Court, you know I have my own little ritual. I stand out front and read where it says, "Equal justice under the law." I have to believe that to be persuaded that it makes sense to go in to that court and when I read McCleskey, and I saw the Supreme Court talking about the inevitability of racial bias in the administration of the death penalty, it was a shock to my senses and I haven't recovered from that shock. And so, by the time I came to Alabama in 1989, I knew that we were going to have to some point change things, talk about things in a very different way. Speaker 1: So, this--in the case McCleskey v. Kemp. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], basically the Supreme Court says that racial bias is just one of the--something you had to live with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right, that's right. Speaker 1: Basically, the country is so we just have to, you know, deal with it, and-- Speaker 2: That's right, or, or in the situation of people on death row, it's something you're gonna have to die with. You're gonna have to die because of this, racial bias that we are willing to tolerate, that we are unwilling to address and I still think of McCleskey as the Dred Scott [Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857] of our generation. I think of it as the Plessy v. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] of our generation. It was an abdication to bigotry and discrimination and from the institution which is the only institution in power to protect the rights of disfavored people, and it made me really question my commitment to the rule of law if the institution at the highest, with the most authority in our structure was willing to concede to bias, to racial bias and discrimination. Speaker 1: There, there's a kind of a note here that Justice Lewis Powell [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.] who wrote this decision, I guess he wrote it, he later in life said that he regretted this more than anything he ever did. Speaker 2: It was very difficult. He retired from the bench a couple of years after McCleskey and he was asked, "Are there any decisions you got wrong? Any cases that you wish you could change your vote?" And he basically said yes, there're two. One was Bowers v. Hardwick [Bowers v. Hardwick, 1986], which is a case that continued to criminalize homosexuality, but the second he said was McCleskey. "I authored the opinion that basically said that we don't care about racial bias in the death penalty and I regret that." Speaker 1: So what they're--the message that the average person probably does not get is that the death penalty is for black people, basically. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and it's a punishment where we will tolerate bias against the poor, bias against people of color. Yes, absolutely. There's a very popular cartoonist that drew an illustration where he had a court bench in the middle with a judge, and he had two doors on each side, and one door said white and it had a prison bench on, and the other door said colored and it had an electric chair. And that we, so soon after segregation, so, soon after lynching, so soon after slavery, were comfortable saying it's okay to tolerate racial bias says a lot about, I think, our failure as a country to deal honestly with our history and legacy. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--this is what Michelle Alexander writes about in 'The New Jim Crow' ['The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness']-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely yes, and yes. Speaker 1: Okay, racism is normal, inevitable even. Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Story_ID: 525091 Speaker 1: There's a case, okay so you--there's an '88 [1988] case in Monroeville [Alabama]. I think you--this is before you moved to [Montgomery, Alabama]--? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah I started working on a lot of Alabama death penalty cases before I moved here in '89 [1989] and I took on a bunch of those cases, including the case of Walter McMillian, which is the, the subject of 'Just Mercy' ['Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption,' Bryan Stevenson], my book (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is a--this is unbelievable, almost. This is Monroeville, Alabama. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The home of-- Speaker 2: Harper Lee. Speaker 1: --Harper Lee, author of 'To Kill a Mockingbird'-- Speaker 2: And a community that celebrates its relationship to this story. You know, they love 'To Kill a Mockingbird.' They've renamed streets after characters in the book. They closed the courthouse after they made the film in the 1960s to make it a 'To Kill a Mockingbird' museum. They put on plays about the book every year, and yet when this innocent black man was wrongly accused of committing a murder and I got involved, nobody wanted to talk about Walter McMillian and his case, they only wanted to talk about 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' and it was the ultimate irony to go to the clerk's office looking for files on the McMillian case to be told you should go over and stand in the courtroom and, and see what we've created around 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' and I was saying I would love to do that, but I'm representing this innocent black man who's on Alabama's death row who is about to be executed and I've got work to do (laughter), and they would look at you like, "You're crazy." And it speaks to again the disconnect that we have in this country that to what we imagine about ourselves and who we are and what we actually live out...