 Story_ID: 558715 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Sean Van Dorn is observing. Can you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: My name is Otis Leon Story, Sr. [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]. The first name is spelled O-T-I-S, middle name is Leon, L-E-O-N, last name is spelled S-T-O-R-Y, comma, Sr. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: November the 17th, 1951. Speaker 1: And your place of bir- birth? Speaker 2: Anniston, Alabama. Anniston is spelled capital A-N-N-I-S-T-O-N, Alabama. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a healthcare executive. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's at Grady Health System, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 12th, the year of our Lord 2007. Story_ID: 558716 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Two colors, burgundy and gold. Speaker 1: All right. And what about, what you like to eat? Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I, I like, I enjoy fish, any kind of fish. Speaker 1: And when you think of the seasons, what's your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summertime. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hot spots. As long as it's south and hot. Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite saying or phrase, or bible verse? Speaker 2: Well, I guess there are a couple and--that I get--basically I say to myself, you know. And the first one I guess is the, is the first and great commandment. "Thou shalt have no other god, no other god before," you know, "me." [Exodus 20:3] But then--and then, excuse me, "Thou shall have no other Lord." And that the whole purpose of me saying it over and over again is that, you know, my commitment, spiritually, you know, to my Christ--that whatever happens in my life, I'm committed to the first and great commandment, that, "Thou shalt love thy Lord with all of your heart and all their mind and their soul," [Matthew 22:37]. "And the second is like unto it" [Matthew 22:39]. And that is, you know, I just feel that that's the essence of my life, that you know, that you honor God, you respect yourself, and you respect the world in which you live. And I think if you do those three things, you know, you will have that balance, you will have that Christ-like walk. If you, you know, just respect and honor your God and respect yourself and others and the world, I think that everything else will work out for you. Story_ID: 558717 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family. Let's--tell me about your mother. What was her name? Spell it for me, and tell me where she was born and when she was born. Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name is Martha Lou [Martha Wilson Story], L-O-U. Her maiden name was Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N. And obviously her married name is Story, like mine. And she was born in Anniston, Alabama. And my mother was raised by her grandmother [Martha Curry]. Speaker 1: It was her, her grandmother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her grandmother, her grandmother. And my great-grandmother, who raised my mother, was a Cherokee. And my great-grandfather [George Curry] was a black man who worked on the railroads. Speaker 1: All right. Tell, tell me your great-grandmother's name. Speaker 2: My great-mother--I can't tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't tell you, that's amazing. I can't tell you. I don't recall it right now. Speaker 1: All right, that's fine. Well, tell me about them. What do you know about them, your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: That my great-grandfather was a railroad man, and he was killed in an industrial accident on the railroad. And that my great-grandmother raised my mother and her brother, her best friend. And his name was--my namesake is--his name is Otis Lincoln Wilson [Otis Wilson]. And I can remember as a child growing up in Anniston, Alabama. Because he was in the Merchant Marines [U.S. Merchant Marine], and he lived in New York City [New York, New York]. And back in the '50s [1950s], he would make it his business to come home every year or two years to see his mother and sister, and to see two adults, you know, embrace with so much love and affection. Because as my mother said, that's the only thing they had, literally, was each other. Because they were raised by their grandmother, and their grandfather was deceased. And my grandmother, their mother, was working. And she lived, she was doing domestic, so she worked, you know, for some white folks. And so, she was out of the home most of the time, because she lived where she worked. And so they literally did not see their mother that much. Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Lois, Lois Wilson, Lois Wilson [ph.]. And she was a very interesting lady. I knew her probably better than--I guess--I was, I was one of twelve children, so that's--so I fell sort of in the middle of the twelve children. And in the younger half of my family, I probably knew her better than any of my other siblings, because I had responsibility for driving and--riding, excuse me, I wasn't driving, I was riding my bike. And we lived on one side of town, on the south side of town, and my grandmother lived on the west side, in Anniston. And I would ride to her house to pick up things, you know. It's something as simple as, you know, some sugar, or a package that would--it would probably be like a five mile ride on a bike, a five to seven mile on a bike. And I would ride to pick up something as simple as just maybe a, not even a half a pound of sugar. And it was some other things that she would mix, some kind of concoctions like camphor and milk of magnesium they used to mix--and they used to mix it--some of this home remedies--they would--the liquid mix was, as they said, whiskey. And I would go to my grandmother's house. I didn't know it was whiskey at the time, but I would just get it because my grandmother was a very vivacious, vivacious lady. And her house was the house that people came to play cards and to quote, have a good time, back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. And I'm sure that there was a price to come there and have a good time, you know, because the libations would be poured. Story_ID: 558718 Speaker 1: But the other thing that--going back to my [maternal] great-grandmother [Martha Curry] that what was very interesting, that my mother [Martha Wilson Story] often talked about is that my great-grandmother was the only black person outside of Anniston [Alabama], on what they call Marvin Hill where my mother was raised, Marvin Hill, who had a radio, who had a radio. So, that's when everybody would gather. You've heard stories, I'm sure, about how the black community would gather around the radio in the 1930s and '40s [1940s] to listen especially to Joe Louis and [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt; Roosevelt doing the fireside chats, and Joe Louis boxing. And so, those were like holiday events. It was like, well, I guess like when we get together today for a Super Bowl, and people would come from all over. And my mother would say at her grandmother's house they would have the radio out on the front porch, I'm sure tun- turned up to the highest level. And it would be this great social event to listen to whatever special event--but they always, my mother always referenced, you know, the Brown Bomber and Franklin Delano Roosevelt with respect to the fireside chats. So it was, it was very interesting to think about the communications, and how people communicated, you know, seventy and eighty years ago, relative to the instant communication we almost have today. So I found that fascinating--my mother and her brother [Otis Wilson], you know, living with my great-grandmother, and how they sort of fed off of each other. Speaker 2: Did you meet your great-grandmother? Speaker 1: No, no, never saw her, I've never seen a picture of her. I could only imagine her. Because my mother and my uncle was as they say big boned individuals. And I can only imagine my grandmother--great-grandmother, being equally. Because my mother always talked about my grandmother being a big woman who could swing an axe, and she took care of the house, et cetera, et cetera. And she was very strong, not only personality, but physically a strong woman. And being a Cherokee Indian [Native American], my mother was quote, light-skinned. And my uncle was just the opposite, he was dark-skinned. You know, so it was really interesting, you know, when you--because my children [Jasmyn Story, Avana Story and Prince James Story] are like that. You know, you've got--some are fair-skinned and, you know, some are dark-skinned. And that's just the way--and if you see pictures of my mother--you know, the nose, the Cherokee nose, and the feat- those physical features are somewhat pronounced. Story_ID: 558719 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Martha Wilson Story] share any other stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. She just talked about how they worked all the time. Speaker 1: Did they live on a farm? Speaker 2: No, no. They lived outside of the main city, but it wasn't a working farm. And it was just chores around the house, and helping their grandmother [Martha Curry]. And a lot of this was domestic work, you know. And her and her brother [Otis Wilson], you know, taking care of the house when their grandmother was working--like cutting wood, you know, for the fireplace and carrying water, and things like that. Speaker 1: So your great-grandmother, she worked outside of the home? Speaker 2: She worked outside of the home also. Speaker 1: Was did she--was she a domestic (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A domestic, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your mother and her brother lived outside of the city limits. Do you know about the land on which they lived? Did they own the land? Or do you know? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know exactly. But I never, my mother's never made reference to any ownership of any land. Speaker 1: Okay. How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: My mother, probably eighth grade. But my uncle was just the opposite. You know, he finished high school. He was, he played the piano, an educated man. Now, some of that I imagine came after he left Anniston [Alabama] and joined the [U.S.] military during World War II [WWII]. So I would say that he was more self-educated in finishing high school, or whatever, during his military tenure. But he was well read. He was well read, I remember that. And, you know, back in the '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] when I got to know him--you know, the encyclopedias in his home, the dictionary in his home--things that were not, you know, readily available in my home, you know. I knew that encyclopedias existed because we used them in school, in elementary school [South Highland Elementary School, Anniston, Alabama], and they were in the library in my hometown. But my uncle had all kinds of reference books in his home, and he was a worldly traveler, because he was in the Merchant Marines [U.S. Merchant Marine]. So he had traveled all over the world after the war, in particular, the Middle East. So, my exposure to Greek and Italian foods, oils, clothing, perfumes, all of that came about as a result of my uncle bringing those goods back from the Middle East, the Mediterranean area in particular, and Italy. And he was fond, he had a fondness for Italians, you know, his significant others, you know. Because once again, like Josephine Baker and other African Americans who left America in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], who went to Europe who were musicians or artists, they found that freedom. And my uncle had the same, I imagine he had the same encounters. Because talking with him, you know, he talked about the people that he played in the jazz quartet with, or a jazz trio. Because he played the piano, and we have pictures of him, you know, in Italian restaurants and bars, you know, hamming it up and hanging out with the fellows. And all the fellows, you know, were, it was this diverse group of individuals from the Middle East, I imagine, that he worked with from North Africa. And then the Italians were there, and him, this African American, you know. And he was just this worldly traveler. He was probably the first international individual that I ever knew. Speaker 1: Did he learn to play the piano after he left Anniston, or was that something that he learned while in school? Speaker 2: He learned it in Anniston. My grandmother [Lois Wilson (ph.)] had a piano, and he learned to play the piano. He was self-taught, and then he took formal lessons. And as he said, as he got older he continued to pay for his own piano lessons. And he lived in Harlem, New York [New York]. And I guess, my uncle, his real--he was in the Merchant Marines, but I think his real love was music, without question. His first and only love was music, outside of, you know, his God and his mother and my, my mother; he loved to play music. And I lived with him during the early '60s [1960s]. And when he would come in from a tour, you know, he would come in, and you would know that he was home because he would be at the piano playing. And one of his favorite songs that I remember was, he would be singing Ella Fitzgerald, 'A-Tisket, A-Tasket.' He'd just be going--playing it over and over and over again. Speaker 1: And you lived with him in New York? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, we'll come back to that-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when we get to the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 558720 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your, your mother, more about her, I should say. What type of person was she? Speaker 2: She was, she was, that Sadie, you know, we all love you ['Sweet Sadie']. You know, she was my mother, but growing up in the South, everybody loved Mrs. Story [Martha Wilson Story]. And her friends would call her Martha Lou, her peers. And it was just--I was born in Anniston [Alabama], and as I said, I lived in a shotgun house with three rooms with twelve other people. And, but we were, I lived in a community of people who took care of each other. And when my mother would be out, for example, you know, washing clothes in that black pot, you know, there were other black women, you know, doing the same thing. It's almost like a ritual. They either--they'd wash clothes like on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. And, you know, the black pots would be going. And I, my responsibility, I remember supporting my mother and doing my chores was to make sure that that black pot was on some rocks and I had the wood to keep the water boiling, you know, in particular, the white clothes. Because that's, the white clothes she would boil and wash, you know, on the rub board. But first, she would boil them in this big, black pot. And that was my responsibility. And I remember, you know, my mother being able to pick up this big black pot, and I couldn't do it. You know, as I got older, I learned to just push it over and let the water run out. But my mother would pick this big pot, black pot up, you know. And so all my life, my mother had this internal strength as well as this physical strength that was always evident to me, especially her spirit. She was very spiritual. And we lived right next to the parson. So you know that every Sunday morning--every Sunday morning, we were the first family in the church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama] at Sunday school. And we would be dressed, all them children, sitting out on the front porch, you know, ready to go to Sunday school. And my mother--I'm fifty-five years old. And, you know, I can never recall as a child growing up, and my mother was in bed when I woke up. My mother was the last one to go to bed, and she was the first one to rise, to my knowledge. Because I don't ever remember living in Alabama or New York--when the family moved to New York--I don't ever recall--the only thing I recall is I always woke up in the morning and my mother would be--it would be grits or oatmeal or rice, one of those three staples. But it would always be biscuits, it would always be biscuits. And-- Speaker 1: Homemade biscuits? Speaker 2: Home- oh yeah, homemade biscuits. You know, the flour, rolled it out, and a twenty pound bag--a sack of flour, a sack of flour. And the older I got--I aged with my ability to carry that twenty pound bag of flour, that sack of flour. The older I got, the further I could carry it without putting it down. I knew that. And when I was ten, I know that, for a fact that I could carry that twenty pound bag, sack of flour, from Little Fites [Little Fite Grocery Company]. That was the grocery store. I could carry that twenty pound sack of flour out of the store to the cab. I could pick it up and throw it on my shoulder, ten years old, you know. I knew that I had arrived then, because I could carry the weight. Because that was my responsibility. I was always, I was a man child. I, I was never really like a kid, you know. I was always a man child, and my mother raised me that way. My dad [Tom Story, Sr.] worked two jobs. And the siblings, I was the seventh child. And so, my younger siblings were my responsibility, and so I assumed that responsibility willingly. Story_ID: 558721 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Tell me his name. Speaker 2: Tom [Tom Story, Sr.], T-O-M, Elbert, E-L-B-E-R-T, Story, Sr. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Birmingham, Alabama (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know what year? Speaker 2: Yes, he was born in 19--he was born March 6th, 1901. Speaker 1: And what year was your mother [Martha Wilson Story] born? Speaker 2: She was born April 15th, 1917 [sic.]. Speaker 1: Now tell me about, let's talk about your father's parents. What were their names? Speaker 2: Okay. My dad's name, my dad's dad's name was Clarence Lee Roy Story [Clarence Story, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother [Molly Story]? Speaker 2: I do not know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do not know. Speaker 1: Did you know them, your grandparents? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no. My dad was--actually my mother was 1919, I said 1917. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, it's 1919. So, it's April 15, 1919. As you could tell, my dad was older than my mom by quite a bit. And he met my mother--remember when I told you the story about my [maternal] grandmother [Lois Wilson (ph.)] was sort of a--she ran an open house. And my dad was traveling through Anniston, Alabama and looking for a good time. And he stopped by my grandmother's house to purchase a drink. And the story, as I've heard it told over and over again, is that my dad was walking through the house and people were playing cards out on the porch and gambling here, and people were drinking. And my dad walked to the back where my grandmother was, and was talking with the people. They were socializing. And my grandmother, who was my dad's age, looked up at him and said, "Son, you need to be out front with the young people. This is for grown folks." So, my dad was, he was a very handsome man. They say he was a sporting man. He had good hair, and real keen Indian features. He was a Native American. My grandmother, his mother, was a black Indian, and had long black hair, thin, and very keen features, but was jet black, a beautiful woman, a black Indian. And I've heard my [maternal] uncle [Otis Wilson] describe her just the same. And my dad, being obedient and respectful, he left the back of the house and went out on the front porch where my mother and the younger set were, where there was no smoking or drinking going on. And that's how he met my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was a very, very interesting union. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Clarence Story? Speaker 2: No, no. So, I did not know my paternal grandparents at all. Speaker 1: So, when your mother and father get married, did they settle in Anniston? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And you told me that you have lots of brothers and sisters. So would you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The union between my mother and father, there, there were twelve children. Story_ID: 558722 Speaker 1: And my dad [Tom Story, Sr.], though, had his, his lineage was a very, very, interesting one. And I traced some of that back through time, to the 1800s (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, well tell, tell me about it. Speaker 1: My dad's grandfather was a mulatto. His name was Zack Story [Zack Story, Jr.]. And Zack Story was born in Eutaw, Alabama. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: E-W-T-U-A [sic.], and that's along the Black Warrior River about eighty miles west of Birmingham [Alabama]. And my great-grandfather on my dad's side, as I said, was a mulatto. And his dad was Zack Story [Zack Story, Sr.]. He was named after his white father. And we were doing, back about fifteen years ago, there was a search of the heir's property in Eutaw, Alabama. And one of my cousins, who was also part of this, the clan, was in Birmingham from Denver [Colorado]. And the lawyer that the family had engaged had to contact all the heirs, in order, in order to cut the timber on the land. Because the lumber baron of whoever the company was, would not cut timber on parcels of land that was the heir's property. He wanted to have access to all of the property, whether it was two hundred or four hundred acres. And in order to do that, one of my cousins retained an attorney to do a search to locate all the heirs, and to file papers, you know, in the county courthouse identifying all the heirs and their descendants. And so, we have actually on my dad's side this chronology, written chronology, of Zack Story's offspring. And Zack Story inherited all of this property from his dad, who was a white man, a plantation owner. And Zack Story was born in like 1856. And so, you know, it was very, very interesting reading when you're looking up the life of Zack Story. He married a black woman, but the records always identified him as Zack Story, a mulatto living at such and such an address in Bessemer, Alabama with a Negro woman. And when the census, when we look back at the census-- Speaker 2: It didn't list her name? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: You don't remember? Speaker 1: I don't remember her name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But that, that was a very, very, interesting process. Now-- Speaker 2: Do you know what happened to the land? Speaker 1: It's still heir's property in Eutaw, Alabama. It's still, people sold off their respective parcels to this one cousin who lives in Tuscaloosa [Alabama], who has the majority of the property now in his family. But it's, it's a very interesting walk back through history. Because this white man who fathered this child gave all this land to his son. And I don't know what the relationship is, obviously between Zack Story and his father. But it was, in the court records it's noted that this property was given to Zack Story, and it was called Zack Story's place, like four hundred acres. So, his dad literally set him up in life on some prime real estate near the Black Warrior River. Story_ID: 558723 Speaker 1: So, you were telling me about the Zack Story [Story's paternal great-great-grandfather, Zack Story, Sr.] history. And so, that means that you have cousins that you might have known about or did you meet any of the cousins who appear to be the white side of the family? Speaker 2: I did, and I think it was back in 1961. One of my dad's aunt's, aunties died, and we went to her funeral in Tuscaloosa [Alabama]. And my dad [Tom Story, Sr.] and his baby brother and I drove over from Birmingham [Alabama] to Tuscaloosa. And my dad and I took the bus to Birmingham, and then we rode with my uncle to Tuscaloosa. And I remember literally being shocked to see white people at the funeral. Because I--being raised in the segregated South at that time, you know, I was raised where if a white woman was on the sidewalk, you know, I was either to stand still or step toward the curb, or step against the building, and just always keep your eyes down. And so to be in the presence, in the same room, in the same church, and could look at white people and almost touch them, you know, in a social setting--you know, you passed them in the grocery stores and, excuse me, you know, things like that, and on the street. But I mean, this was a social setting. It was a funeral, but it was a social setting where these white people were walking around talking. And they were literally hugging my daddy. And after the funeral, everybody was embracing. And I was confused by all of this. I found it extremely perplexing, that these white people were here at the house with all of us, at my cousin's house. And it was amazing. And it wasn't until years later that I put those pieces together for myself. I imagine like when I got back home to Anniston [Alabama]. You know, I told my sisters and brothers that, you know, that these white people were at Daddy's aunt's funeral. But I just didn't understand it. I absolutely did not understand it until many years later, that these were my dad's first and second cousins who had left the South and moved to California, and Denver [Colorado] in particular. Now they had, there were relatives in Tuscaloosa who, as we said, were real light-skinned folks, and they were all schoolteachers. And once again, the same thing, you know, what could black people do at the turn of the 20th century, but educators, you know, barbers, you know. Those were the, this is what these individuals did. They were all educators, and I was just surprised by that. And it was years later that I realized that one of my cousins, who literally joined the [U.S.] Navy in World War II [WWII], and he was not a clerk or an orderly, or a valet for a white United States naval officer, because they perceived him as a white man. He was, he entered into the United States Navy in World War II. And he was listed, he was characterized as a white man. And when he told me that story years later, you know, he always laughed about it. And I'm sure he had a lot of fond memories, you know, of just how people, as he said, would be talking about black people, and warning him--and you know, here he was, you know, a black man. Because all of his first cousins, you know, were black. And he joined the sheriff's department in Denver and retired from the sheriff's department in Denver. And that's why I had a chance to meet him before he died. And it was, it was, you know, once again, it shows you how silly this whole issue of race is. Because, you know, he knew that his first cousins--he married a black woman eventually. But he had, he showed me a picture of him and the other white sailors during World War II. And he was just an enlisted man, you know, mopping the deck and, you know, working with the big guns and whatever during World War II. But he was not a cook like the vast majority of other black men, you know, who joined the United States Navy. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: I do not know, I don't recall his name (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't remember. Okay. Speaker 2: I don't recall his name right now. Speaker 1: So okay, World War II. Did he tell you any other stories about when he was in the service? Does anything in particular sticks out in your mind? Speaker 2: No, no. It was mostly like when he was, you know, I guess when he was working, and how people would say nigger and things like that in front of him. And it was just, but he had no desire--he said that after his mother, my dad's first cousin, moved to Denver, to ever go back to the South, which he didn't. And he came home to Tuscaloosa for funerals. But him and his wife--you know. And that was very interesting; he had no children, no children. And I don't know if that was because of the whole thing with the racism that he had experienced--that he, from the other side, you know--and saw what and how black people were subjected to racism--that he said, "Well, I won't subject my child to that type of racism, that type of abuse." And it was very interesting that he had no children, by choice. Story_ID: 558724 Speaker 1: Now your father, what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: My father was a presser, and he was in the dry cleaning business. Unlike the other black men in my neighborhood, he was not a laborer. He was, he didn't fix things around the house. He was not a craftsman. He got up every day and put on a tie. My dad wore a tie, and he shaved every day, every day. And he rode the bus. And he wore his Stacy Adams, and he was different from the other black men and black fathers that I knew growing up as a child. Because Tome [Tom Story, Sr.], as they called him, was always dressed. He shaved every day, he was well groomed, and he was rather gregarious. I told you they called him, you know, they said he was a sporting man. But when he married, and obviously got older, he was just this gregarious, very kind and respectful individual. He always said to me and my brothers and other young black boys that, you know, you respect, you know, your women, womenfolk, and you always take care of your sisters, you know. So, he sort of pounded that in--that you never raise your hand to a woman, and you never allow anybody else to do that; you never allow anybody else to do that. He was very protective of females. And he ingrained that, you know, in me. You know, you protect your sisters, you protect your mother, and you do the same thing for other women. And he would do that. I mean, there would be altercations in the neighborhood. And I remember my daddy going and knocking on somebody's door and saying "Don't do that anymore to that woman. Don't hit or say," da-da-da. Speaker 1: Where did your father learn the dry cleaning business? Speaker 2: I think that because my daddy was not interested in working hard labor, he knew that he had to do something to support himself. And I think that he looked around and he said, "Well, this is what I need to do. I need to work in the laundry business, because I'm not interested in working outside in the hot sun. And I'm not working in the pipe shop, the coal mines, or any type of physical labor." He just didn't do it. His hands, I don't ever remember my dad's hands being soiled like that. My mother [Martha Wilson Story] and I planted the garden at my house in Anniston [Alabama] on 8th Street where I lived. My dad was, he worked, you know, two jobs. But I don't ever remember him even going out in the back and picking, you know, cultivating--doing anything with the soil, doing anything at all with the soil. Speaker 1: How much education did he have? Speaker 2: Very little, you know. Probably elementary, you know, very little. Story_ID: 558725 Speaker 1: Now, I just want to go back a little bit before we talk about your family and your siblings and where you lived with your mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father [Tom Story, Sr.]. I had a question about, at your grandmother's [Lois Wilson (ph.)] house where the libations were flowing. Was there any talk about white lightning and bootlegging? Speaker 2: Well, she was a bootlegger. Speaker 1: So, she made the liquor? Speaker 2: She didn't make it, but she was a distributor (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a distributor, okay. Speaker 2: She was a distributor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a distributor. And like I said, very respectful. Because she had, the white person that she worked for, you know, treated her very well financially. She worked for a Jewish lady who--once again, there were not many Jewish families in the South in the 20th century, as we all know. And so it was, it was not uncommon for Jewish women to grow up, you know, not having someone to marry. And so their families would take care of them. And they had their own business. Like this lady that my grandmother worked for all of my life, that she literally raised and probably took care of, had a boutique [in Anniston, Alabama]. She ran a boutique, and she lived in a home. And my grandmother took care of her home and helped her out in her store. And so they were, I guess she was the maid and the cleaning lady. But they were, they had a close association, they had a very close association. And I just remember how people would say, that your grandmother, you know, she has a real good job because she works for the, for those Jews. And at that time, you know, if you worked for a Jewish family in the South it was preferred that you be a domestic for the Jewish family, because they were known to be very kind financially, and respectful to you as a human being. So, she had, she had a great relationship with Miss Alice Powell. I do remember that lady's name. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Miss Alice Powell. Story_ID: 558726 Speaker 1: Now tell me about, about your siblings. Can you name them in order (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: And tell me where you fit in. Speaker 2: Well, I was the seventh child. So the oldest was my big sister. Her name is Velma [Velma Story], V-E-L-M-A. It was very interesting. My dad [Tom Story, Sr.] named my sisters after his aunts. You know, he loved his family, and he--you know, we were--and he raised us that way, you know, to love each other and to take care of each other. He would always tell us that, you know, "You always remember, you're Story children. You're Story children, and you always have pride in that fact, that you're Story children." And walking down the street or sitting on the bus, or just going somewhere, and he would just remind us, he would just turn. He would see something, a situation outside the bus or outside the house. And he'd say, "Do you see that? You don't allow that to happen, because you're Stories, you're Stories." And he would always reinforce that. And my mother [Martha Wilson Story] would always reinforce the fact that--you know, I was talking about my favorite bible verse. And it's, once again, you know, "Thou shall have no other Lord before me" [Exodus 20:3]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: "Thou shall have no other god before thee," you know. And she just pressed that from a religious perspective. And he pressed from a personal perspective--your respect for yourself and your family, that you are Stories. Speaker 1: Did he get that sense of pride and family from, did he share with you about his growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. He was one of, there were six; he had six brothers. And their father was an entrepreneur. I don't know what my grandfather, Clarence Story [Clarence Story, Sr.] did. But my dad and his brothers were not, they didn't work through the Depression [Great Depression] like other people. The family, because they were educators in Tuscaloosa [Alabama] and Alabama, were quote, well off to a certain degree. And they did not engage in a lot of manual labor, per se. If they had, if they worked like at a hotel, or they were--they ran maybe an elevator in a five story building or a ten story building in Birmingham [Alabama]. I would imagine they did things like that. They were, they were not tradesmen. I don't ever recall my dad talking about his brothers, the group. And then my baby--his--Uncle Clarence [Clarence Story, Jr.], the baby brother, worked for many years with Pullman [Pullman Company] and the steel mills in Bessemer [Alabama]. But my daddy and his older brother, his other brothers, did not work manual labor; they did not do that. Speaker 1: So, there were only boys in the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. And they, from the stories that I can gather and piece together from my uncle and my dad talking about his brothers--they were, they were those entrepreneurs that left the South. Because they weren't going to work in the fields; they weren't going to work in the factories, and they went north to get a better job. But they didn't go to the steel mills in Cleveland [Ohio] or the automotive industry in Detroit [Michigan] or Chicago [Illinois] packinghouses. They went there as businessmen. And my dad worked, for example, with his brother in Chicago on four-seven- 47th Street on the South Side. And my uncle was a businessman. Speaker 1: Well, do you know what type of business they went into? Speaker 2: He had a dry cleaning business and he had, like, a bar. Speaker 1: And what about the other uncles? What other businesses were they in, same type (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, the same type. But I know that my dad would talk about his brothers, and they just were not those types of individuals. They were very, very proud men. And not that other people who worked in the factories and manual labor were not proud, but they were, they were different. They were looking for something different out of their lives. They wer- they were looking to own and acquire wealth, if you will. And they were entrepreneurs. Story_ID: 558727 Speaker 1: All right, so your next sibling after Velma [Velma Story]? Speaker 2: Velma was, was Mary Alice [Mary Story Ware]. And she was, they were born a year after each other. Then my brother, my oldest brother, Tom [Tom Story, Jr.], he was named after my dad [Tom Story, Sr.], was born. And then there was Lilla Delores [ph.], who I did not know. She was born in 1947 and died ten months later. And after Lilla Delores was Annie Vera [Annie Story]. And Annie Vera died in 1959. I do remember Annie Vera. Speaker 1: Anna, spell it for us. Speaker 2: A-N-N-I-E, first name Vera, V-E-R-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Annie Vera died in 1959. And so, I was about eight when she died. Speaker 1: What was the cause of death? Speaker 2: They, they told me, they told us that it was meningitis. And I remember that, because that happened right after Christmas. And we were, we were not allowed to go to school. The department of health sort of built a, it was a semi-quarantine. I imagine we were quarantined, I just don't recall. But I knew that we were not allowed to go to school, and nobody played with us after my sister died. But that passed. And then after Annie Vera was my sister, Shirley Barbara [Shirley Story]. And I was closer to her in age. She was born a year, the year before me. And then after my birth, it was my sister Mable [Mable Story Rhoden], Mable Lee. And after Mable, it's Maggie Ann [Maggie Story]. And after Maggie Ann is my younger brother, Clement [Clement Story], C-L-E-M-E-N-T. And he was named after one of my dad's brothers, Clement Franklin Story [Clement Story]. And then my youngest sister, Elsie Louise [Elsie Story] was, once again, people named after one of my dad's cousins, his aunts. And then my baby sister is Linda Marie Story [Linda Story]. So, between my mom [Martha Wilson Story] and my pops, they were blessed with twelve children, after not being able to conceive, which is very interesting. I hear, I used to hear my mom talking about, you know, the fact that for the first two years, two or three years, she couldn't get pregnant. And then it didn't stop for like twenty years almost. (Laughter) It was eight--you know, from 1941 to 1960, twelve children. Story_ID: 558728 Speaker 1: If you think about a sound, or a smell, or a sight, and you just think back to that time [in Anniston, Alabama]. What do you remember? What sounds do you hear? What smells do you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rain, rain, rain, rain, on those tin roofs. That was, and the smell, the smell would be right after the rain. You know, it would be so refreshing, you know, so refreshing. The air was full bodied, you know. And it could be part of the humidity, but it was, it wasn't sweaty. It was, you know, the rain would come on that tin roof and it would be beating, beating down. And in the daytime it was wonderful, you know, to be outside, you know, especially in the spring and summertime playing in the rain. Because you know we didn't have a swimming pool. But we, were blessed with God's swimming pool. And we would run around. And I even remember as a child, we would take some oxen soap and wash off in the rain. We'd be washing off in the rain, drop the soap down in the dirt, and we'd just be running around, you know, washing off, because we didn't have a shower. When I was a child, I bathed in a tin tub, and they didn't change the water. And it was twelve of us, so I think they changed the water every third child. So, you know, you're having some concerns about taking a bath after one particular sibling versus another particular sibling. (Laughter) You know, you didn't want to follow somebody, you know. You would prefer to follow somebody else. So when you had a chance to take a shower--because we knew what showers were. We'd heard about them, you know, and read about them in schoolbooks and things like that. We knew that white folks had showers, and so we had our shower. And we would get that oxen soap, and go out there and literally take a bath in the rain. And that was wonderful, that was so much fun to be outside in the rain, and especially if it wasn't lightning. And the favorite time--you're talking about the smell--you know, how the air just seemed so pure. And then the rain on that tin roof, it didn't disturb you. It was almost like the music; you were being entertained by the raindrops, you know. And then all of a sudden, you'd get the thunder, you know, for the bass. And then the lightning would be the high pitch. So, you know, we weren't in, it was an experience. It was an experience for us. And then you could see--sometimes the sun would be shining. And you're talking about brightness. And the old folks used to say when it would be raining and you see this bright light and the sun is shining, that's because the devil is beating his wife. And boy, we would go and we'd get real quiet, and we want to try to hear, because we knew the devil was beneath our feet. And it was fascinating. So, that's what I remember about the sight. It was this, you know, being able to see this bright light through the rain. And the prism that it presented was obviously the rainbows. So, it was wonderful. So, that was our entertainment, you know, the rain. And if it got too bad and it was thundering and lightning, that's when my [maternal] grandmother [Lois Wilson (ph.)] would come and stay with us. And we loved it, we loved it. Because that was the, our interaction was limited to her coming to visit us, because she could not stand--she was afraid of the thunder and the lightning, dreadfully. And she would come in and she would just-- Speaker 1: Did she ever share a story why she was afraid? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, and my mother respected that. And like I said, they weren't, they didn't have a very close relationship, because my mother's grandmother [Martha Curry] raised her. And my mother and her mother, it was more like she was my mother's aunt, auntie, you know. I don't ever remember seeing them embracing and talking like mother and--it was, the conversation was always--she called my mother Lou [Martha Wilson Story]. And, you know, and my mom just always talked about Big Mama, you know and da-da-da. But it wasn't like--her mother was her grandmother. Speaker 1: Her mo- grandmother, okay. Story_ID: 558729 Speaker 1: First tell me about Anniston [Alabama], what type of town it was. What were the jobs? You alluded to the fact that there were some mines and pipe-- Speaker 2: Pipe shops. Speaker 1: Pipe shops. Tell me, what did the people in the community do in those types of positions? Where were they? Speaker 2: Well, we like to think of Anniston as a big city. Because there's some other well known blacks like Dr. Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], for example, is from Anniston. But he's really from, like, out in the county. So, but I lived in the city. And the city of Anniston at that time had a population of about twenty thousand people, which was big for the '50s [1950s]. And it was so noted, because the counties in Alabama at that time, the tags--the largest city had--the first number on the tag was a one which was Jefferson County [Alabama]. So, our tag number was number eleven. So that meant that Calhoun County [Alabama] where I lived was the eleventh largest county in Alabama in the 1950s. Because we would always watch the tags of other cities. And we were proud of the fact that we were the eleventh largest city in the county, if you will, in the State of Alabama. And it had a downtown. So we had a ten story building, and that's what we called it. It was the ten story building, and it was fascinating. Because sometimes, you know, the black man who ran the elevator would allow me to go all the way up to the tenth story and get off real quick and look out, and get back on the elevator before he had to respond to someone else's call. So, that was fascinating, to be able to go--I'd walk to town or ride to town, and sometimes I'd go to the ten story building. But we had the typical stores, F.W. Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company]. We had Kresses [S.H. Kress Company], a dime, a nickel and dime store, Kress' nickel and dime store. And we had a grocery store downtown, Little Fites [Little Fite Grocery Company]. And we had the feed shops that were off--but the main streets, we had a drugstore. We had furniture stores, Havertys [Haverty Furniture Companies, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], and jewelry stores, et cetera. And the post office, which was a big marble building, you know, it was there. And so, main street, which we called Noble Street, ran from, in numerical order it was like from 8th Street all the way--it's like 15th Street where my [maternal] grandmother [Lois Wilson (ph.)] lived, because she lived at 15 Noble Rear, meaning she lived in the alley off of Noble Street between 15th and 16th Street. And so, they had all kinds of businesses. We had two movie theaters. We had the Carver [Carver Community Center, Anniston, Alabama] and the Calhoun movie theater [Calhoun Theater, Anniston, Alabama]. And the black people--once again, here's one of these twisted ironies. We were relegated to the seats upstairs, which were the best seats to watch a movie at that time. The screen, because of the size, et cetera, et cetera, it was the, those were the best seats. But the black people had to sit upstairs. And we enjoyed it, because they're great seats and things like that. So it was a, it was a big town. There were car dealerships, numerous car dealerships. And that's because it had an economy. It had the pipe shops, steel mills, and the other industries were around the things downtown, you know. So, there were a lot of jobs at that time. I don't ever remember people being, quote, unemployed. Story_ID: 558730 Speaker 1: We were talking about Anniston [Alabama], and you were telling me more about it. So I asked you about the iron, I guess it was the iron mills? Speaker 2: Steel mills. Speaker 1: Steel mills, okay, and the Appalachian Mountains. Speaker 2: Yeah, the-- Speaker 1: The foothills (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Appalachian Mountains foothills ended in what we call the Talladega National Forest [Alabama]. So if you, when you look at a map of the United States, you know, you see the Appalachian range comes all the way down into north central Alabama. And so, it made, it had all the natural ingredients with respect to coal and iron ore to develop this industry, which we call the Pittsburgh Steel of the South. So, Birmingham [Alabama] was a mini-Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and we were fifty miles away from Birmingham. So, we had the same type of economical makeup as Birmingham and on a very, very small scale as Pittsburgh. And one of the major economical drivers in Calhoun County [Alabama] was Fort McClellan [Alabama], the [U.S.] military base. And that was another place where my dad [Tom Story, Sr.], you know, spent a lot of his time after work on Fridays and Saturday nights, as they say, to go up there and shoot dice with the soldier boys. And that's what he--that was a part of his recreational extracurricular activities. Speaker 1: But it also was the headquarters for the Women's Army Corps. Speaker 2: Women's Army Corps during World War II [WWII]. Story_ID: 558731 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your immediate neighborhood. Because you basically gave me a description of town. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you did live in the city? Speaker 2: I did live in the city. Speaker 1: Well, tell me-- Speaker 2: Paved streets, sidewalks, curbs (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I want you to give me a description. And tell me, who was living in the neighborhood? Who were some of your friends? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: And their parents, if you knew what their parents' occupations were. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I could go just--I lived in a double shotgun. And the owner of the double shotgun, Miss Sara Crook [ph.], lived next door to us. Our address was 410 [8th Street], and hers was 408, and it was a double shotgun juxtaposition. She was an educator; she was a schoolteacher who worked out in the county. And she was, as we say, an old maid. And she kept to herself. And it was, she was a very interesting lady. We lived next door to her, and she said very little to us. Even though she owned the property, all of the property, I would have to go downtown to pay the rent, $17.50 a month. That's one, I remember that number. And I'm sure it probably was lower than that before I started paying it. But she was very innocent. And you know, you thought that she didn't have a dime to her name, because she washed her coats. She washed everything. My daddy [Tom Story, Sr.] was in the dry cleaning business, and he would have welcomed, he would have taken her clothing and cleaned them for nothing. Because that's one of the perks that we had as a child, is that we had, our clothes were dry cleaned, you know, all the time, because that's what my dad did. But she would never lend herself to anything like that because of the quid pro quo. I think she probably perceived that my daddy would have wanted a reduction in rent for cleaning her coats. And she would take these winter coats, these big coats, and she would hang them out on the line. And everybody around on our block would comment about this one lady who had responsibility just for herself, and who had inherited property from her dad. And so, people in the community knew she had money. She had a great job as a schoolteacher. She had a driver who would come and pick her up in the morning. Speaker 1: Was this a black woman? Speaker 2: This is a black woman. And he would pick her up in the morning, because she didn't drive. And she was really mousy, she was easily intimidated, and she stayed in her house all the time when she wasn't working. She did not sit out on the front porch a great deal. She would go to church and she would come back home. She did have a friend, one friend who would come and see her and he would leave. But that's all. But she had a driver who would drive her to the county school where she taught and bring her home. And that's all we knew. And I would, when I cleaned the yard, I would rake the yard, the leaves, et cetera, et cetera. And I would rake both sides of the house. She would not give me one penny; she would not give me one penny. But once again, I did that because that's the way my dad, you know, raised me. You know, she didn't have a husband. You know, even though she could afford a lot of things, and she could have very easily afforded to give me a penny or a nickel, I didn't worry. You know, I never asked for anything, because once again, I was supposed to--that's what you were supposed to do. You live here, you take care of the environment that's around you. And I would sweep and rake the leaves in front of the house and up and down the street. And we lived next to the parson, so my dad would always say, "You sweep the street all the way down by the church." That's just the way we were raised at that time. And the people who, whoever the pastor was--the church was right next to the parson. So I grew up in the church that was next door to me, Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church [Anniston, Alabama]. And we all chipped in to maintain the church. So, I would sweep the street from my house, to the parson, to the corner where the church was located. And I never asked for a dime or literally a penny from anyone. Story_ID: 558732 Speaker 1: And my neighbors who lived across the, directly across the street from us, was Mr. Hicks [ph.]. Mr. Hicks was a barber, and obviously well groomed. And he was also on the trustee--in the church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama] that we attended, and one of my daddy's [Tom Story, Sr.] sort of mentors, if you will. My dad had a tremendous amount of respect for Mr. Hicks and Mrs. Hicks, who lived next door across the street. And they also had, their grandchildren were friends of ours who used to come and visit from California, and things like that. So we loved, you know, we welcomed the opportunity to--when people would come from out of state or up north, we just all went crazy. And my mother's sort of best friend and mentor was Mrs. Smedley [ph.]. And Mrs. Smedley lived diagonally across the street from us. And she was like my mother's rock. She was more like a mother to my mother [Martha Wilson Story], I sensed as a child growing up. Because I don't recall the conversations, but I know that my mother would go and visit with Mrs. Smedley. And that was her counsel; that was her advisor. I understand that today more so than ever. And whenever my mother needed anything, if she needed anything, I would take the note and give it to Mrs. Smedley. And Mrs. Smedley would give me something to take back to my mother, whether it was something that we needed to prepare a meal, or monetary. That was my mother's rock, Mrs. Smedley. And she lived in her home with her daughter. And her daughter had twin boys, Bordon [ph.] and Gordon [ph.], who were younger than me, and so I didn't play with them. All of my playmates were around the corner from my house, because the other people who lived on my block did not have any children. They were older, or they didn't have any children. Like, my cousin lived to the right of our house. His name was, the Youngs. And Henry Young was the high school quarterback [for Cobb Avenue High School, Anniston, Alabama]. You asked me about my favorite colors. Well, my favorite colors come from my cousin's football uniform, and he was the high school quarterback. And so, you know, in a black town in the '50s [1950s], you know, he was, as they say, he was the man, Henry Young. And he was the high school quarterback. And so, he was my big cousin. So, you know, I took a great deal of pride in that, you know, because that was my cousin. And we'd go and watch the football games on Saturday night. The black schools played on Friday nights, excuse me Friday nights, and the white schools played on Saturday nights. So, and then my cousin was the high school quarterback. Story_ID: 558733 Speaker 1: And I loved football, and that's what I did as a child growing up. I played football, I wrestled. And my friends, Michael Bogus [ph.], Carl, you know, Harold Ramsey, Carl Ringo, Walter Bagley [Walter Bagley, Jr.], Anthony Ashley, who's my cousin, all of us guys--and the Woods, T., the Woods, Tyrone [ph.] and Joe [ph.], and John Eppert [ph.]--all these guys that I grew up with lived around the corner on Christine [Avenue]. I lived on 8th Street, and my church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama] sat there on the corner of Christine and A Street. And we played football in the fall in the street. And in the springtime and the summertime, we played baseball in the street. And there was only person who had a glove, and that was Carl Ringo. And Carl Ringo had a glove because he was an only child, and his parents were, we thought, the wealthiest black people in the world. Because Carl Ringo, being the only child, his dad worked at the foundry. So, as we say, he had a good job. Because he came out of the Korean War and he had a good job working in the foundry. And his mother, who was an extremely attractive black woman, extremely attractive, worked at the Coca-Cola bottling plant [The Coca-Cola Company], a big job on Noble Street, the main street. And what she did was, she was what I would consider today in charge of quality control. The quality control was that she sat there, and she stood up at times, a black woman at the Coca-Cola bottling plant. And we could--because there were windows in the front, and you could stand there and watch the Coca-Colas go around and be filled. And she had these white gloves on and this white dress, like a nursing uniform. And she was always impeccably dressed. And she was, like I said, she was just striking. And people would just walk by, white and black, and watch her work. And that's what--she would take them off the line, you know. If they weren't filled before they were capped, that was her job; she would take them off and just put them in the crate. And everybody thought that was, they said, "Wow, a black woman. She's not cleaning up, she's not washing anyone's clothing, and she's not teaching," she's not a schoolteacher. Because most black professional women I knew were schoolteachers. And here Carl Ringo's mother was--and I know that we always felt that any woman, white or black, would have loved to have had that job. And she was there in the front, and I'm telling you, people would literally stop and just watch her with her white gloves. So he had all the--he had a train set, he had a glove, he had a baseball bat. Everybody else, we had sticks or we had two by twos that--when we played ball. We played--and we called it a tennis ball, we didn't say baseball; we had a tennis ball that we hit. And the bases, we played what we called straight base. We didn't go to first base, second base, third base. We did it when it was fifteen of us out there playing. But usually, when it was only like eight of us, we just played straight base, four on each side. And that's when we had all of our fun. I literally grew up outdoors with these guys, wrestling, playing baseball, playing football. And we all wanted to be able to do this one day. And we used to say, "We're going to buy our mama a house, because we're going to be a professional football player or baseball player." Because we're going to be like Willie Mays and [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron or Willie McCovey, you know, people that we knew, you know, Jim Brown, because we read Jet. Story_ID: 558734 Speaker 1: See, everybody in my community [in Anniston, Alabama], the Jet magazine was passed around. Ebony was passed around. We didn't get it, but we had access to Jet magazine. I will never forget, one of the most striking pictures, and devastating pictures that I ever saw in Jet magazine was Emmett Till, the picture of Emmett Till. And that's why--you know, my mother [Martha Wilson Story] was the one who said, "You get on that bus, and you go all the way to the back." And my daddy [Tom Story, Sr.] said, "You get on the bus and you sit down where you want to." My mother would say, "You know what you're supposed to do. If you see some people, a woman coming, you know, just move out the way." And my daddy said, "Just keep walking." So, it was always this contrast, you know. He was not trying to put me in harm's way. My mother was trying to protect me, because she would say all the time, she would say, "I would rather say that there he go, rather than there he lay." She used to say, "Don't you be afraid to run." And my daddy would say, "You don't run from nobody. If anybody puts their hands on you, you send them to the cemetery." A difference--different personalities, you know, different personalities. Speaker 2: So, what were your thoughts about that? Speaker 1: They were mixed, I was a child. I mean, I'm talking about a child between the ages of six and ten. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you know, these contrasting views on life, on life, you know. You're a man child. I'm six years old, you're a man. You know, my daddy would say, "You're a man. You take care of your sisters." And my sister who was older than me, Barbara [Shirley Story], now she could beat me. She beat the hell out of me. But that's your sister, you know. So you have to always go before. But she literally could whip me. (Laughter) She could protect all of us, the younger siblings. But that's the way I was raised. And, you know, I would leave the house, and I remember, you know, it was like, you feel, sometimes you feel ambivalent. You know, you get on the bus and you say--well, you take four or five steps. And you say, well, here is a seat there. Story_ID: 558735 Speaker 1: Obviously a tremendous respect for my mom [Martha Wilson Story], because my mom and I had a special bond because I was a sickly child. And I used to have these convulsions, and I would just fall out; I would just collapse. I'd be playing, or I'd just wake up in the morning or the middle of the night, and I would be almost comatose and foaming at the mouth, et cetera, et cetera. And you know, everybody else thought I was having spells, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: This was epilepsy? Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No? Speaker 1: No, they never--I don't--what I was told, and what the doctor told my mother, "We don't know what's wrong with him. Hopefully, he'll just grow out of it." So, I would have these convulsions. And back in the '50s [1950s], they had these, they didn't have the kind of--what we have, O2 [oxygen] now. You know, they'd put you in what we called a tent, an oxygen tent. And I remember so man- on a couple occasions, literally--and that's why there's such a special bond between me and mom--my mom calling me back to life, calling me back to life. That's how I describe it as a little baby. I mean like four, three or four, my mom's hand on me calling my name, "Leon [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], Leon, come on baby. Leon." I'll never forget that; I'll never forget that. My mom was, you know, she was the closest thing to my God in my mind, my heart, and my soul, it's my mom. Because every time something happened to me, my mama was there holding my hand. And today at fifty-five years of age I can sense my mother's presence, her prayers, pulling me and telling me it's going to be all right, as an adult. And all throughout my life, I didn't understand it in my middle years. But I know it was the same mother's prayers that was holding on to me in this oxygen tent, because they couldn't tell my mom or my pop [Tom Story, Sr.] what was wrong with me. The only thing they would do is, they would say, "Whenever he would start," they would say, "having one of these convulsions is to rush him to the hospital." And my brother [Tom Story, Jr.], God rest his soul, my oldest brother, who was--my mom was at the hospital with another child who was sick. And I was in the bedroom; I slept in the bed with my brothers. Three of us slept in one bed, and we slept, you know, head to toe. So, you know, one person's head was this way. The next person's head was down here. The next person's head was back up there, head to toe. And my sisters slept in the back, in one room, like five of them. And then the baby, whoever the baby was at that time slept in the front room between my mom and my pop. And the baby, the knee baby, was in the crib. It was just sort of, that's the way, in this shotgun house that's the way we lived [in Anniston, Alabama]. The front room was our living room and the master bedroom. And the room in between, the breezeway if you will, was where my brothers and I slept. And the kitchen was an appendage, right off to the side. And I remember when we had indoor, sort of a built-in bathroom. You know, I mean that was great. Miss Crooks [sic. Sara Crook (ph.)] did that for us, the owner. She sort of broke down and built it in the side of the house so we wouldn't have to literally go outside to, it was like a shed. It was plumbing, but we had to literally go out to the back porch and go into a separate room to go to the bathroom. So, Miss Crook sort of sprung for some money and just closed it in, so that we could walk from my sisters' bedroom out into this breezeway into the bathroom. Speaker 2: But it just had a toilet, is that right? Speaker 1: Just the toilet. Speaker 2: Toilet. Speaker 1: We had the tin tubs outside (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tubs, okay. Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Of that, of my mother calling me-- Speaker 1: Calling you back? Speaker 2: Calling me back. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: "Leon." I can almost just, I don't see myself at that time. But I just see my mom and her hand, holding this child's hand, and I know it's me. Because people will tell you, you know, we all brag about what our mothers do for us. My mother not only birthed me, but she sustained my life, and she sustains me today through her prayers from heaven. And I just think that, that is just, to me it's so powerful. And I try to, and I want to be able to try to offer the same thing. And I pray to God that I'm doing that with my children. Story_ID: 558736 Speaker 1: Let's go back just a little bit. You were talking, we were talking about the people in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: And you were telling me about the lady that worked at Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company]. Speaker 2: Miss Ringo, Carl Ringo's mother. Speaker 1: And he was an only child. Now, what was the makeup of most of the kids? Were there two parents in a home, in most of the homes? And what other work did their parents do? Speaker 2: Most of the homes were two parent homes, mother and father. And the average size was about four or five kids. The mothers who worked were, they were domestics. They worked--and you would see them all walking to the white folks' section. And they would have their white on. And the ones who didn't work, like my mom [Martha Wilson Story], took in, as they say, they took in laundry. So we had, my mom had two or three white women that she washed clothes for. She washed and ironed; she washed and ironed. And the white ladies would bring the clothes down, you know. And my mother would wash them and hang them out on the line and would iron them. And sometimes we had an opportunity, depending on when the pickup was, to wear some of those white clothes. Speaker 1: Would you wear them to school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To school, to school. My sister had a chance to wear one of those blouses that that white woman had brought down for my mama to wash and iron. My mama would wash it real quick, iron it, and my sister would just--not often, but there were opportunities, you know, for us to--and it was always, you know, just part of that--just something extra, that we as a people did to survive. Just a little extra, just something extra. That's what our parents did for us. They made a way out of no way. And that's why I just love, and I thank God for my mother and father [Tom Story, Sr.] and their fathers, and so many of our ancestors whose shoulders we stand on today, because they made those ways. We don't even--the sad thing about is that I don't know all the things, all the deals, that my dad cut to make things happen. I know that, you know, he gambled. He gambled with meat. You say, meat? Yes. My daddy had two jobs. He worked, he was one of the best pressers in the dry cleaning business in the county [Calhoun County, Alabama]. And I know that to be a fact, not just only in my heart, but I believe in my mind. Because when the One Hour Martinizing [Martinizing International, LLC], which was a franchise dry cleaning business, came to Anniston [Alabama] they recruited my daddy from the Anniston Steam Laundry. He was that good that they looked around--they were starting the business--and my daddy could work two pressers at one time. He would be popping (makes noise); pressing this one down, turning the pants over (makes noise); popping it and putting the shirt back in. And they got their money's worth out of him. And he told them that he could run, he could do two jobs, but I've got all these children, you've got to pay me. So he was, he was, he was different. He was, he talked to people; he talked to people. He wasn't--he feared no man, only his God, no man. And that's the way he raised my oldest brother [Tom Story, Jr.] and raised me. My oldest brother and my dad were like this (gesture). They were like this. He had my dad's back when my dad was shooting craps. My brother, like I said, we were not children; we were a man child. I was a man child, and my oldest brother was full grown. And he would go with my dad out to the fort [Fort McClellan, Alabama] and out to 15th Street, that's on the west side. And my dad worked at, at Krogers [The Kroger Company], and he would get the meat before it was spoiled, before that expiration date. And folks would give him the meat, because they would have to throw it out the next day. My dad would go and gamble with the chicken, with the beef, with the steak. If somebody put a nickel down, he'd put a quarter pound of beef. And you know, he gambled. And my brother was his accountant. And they, and we, and that was out on the west side. So, you know, it was like, say, they would be--you know, when you gamble, you drink a little bit and everything. And if he had a good night, my mama could hear him singing all the way from the bus stop, twelve o'clock at night, that last bus, him and my brother coming home with the sack. Because he kept his meat, and he got his money. So, if his sack was empty, it probably wasn't a good night for him. But when that sack was full, his pocket was full also. And my brother would always rake in the earnings. And he knew when it was time for my dad--like you say, to fold them--we got to go catch this bus now. And him and my dad would leave the west side and come on back to Anniston. And like my mom said, you could hear him singing. Story_ID: 558737 Speaker 1: Because your father worked at Kroger [The Kroger Company] and was able to get meat and probably other different items (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, food, food for us. Speaker 1: What were holidays like, say, Christmas? Were there any traditions that were unique to your family, I should say? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think they were unique to us as a family. Because most of the black families, we had--I didn't know that we were poor or anything like that, you know, because we had all these, my parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.] had all these children. We basically, all in the neighborhood where I grew up [in Anniston, Alabama], around Christmastime the big thing that everybody wanted was skates or a bike. So, if you got a bike, you know that you had arrived. But everybody got skates, and we would skate up and down. So the older--I just looked forward to the day that I could get out of my training skates, and skate on the streets with the big kids. And that was the wonderful thing about the community. It was more, we were basically all on the same economical level. Speaker 1: Okay, which was what class? Speaker 2: Well, we thought we were, we thought that we were like working class. You know, but when you look back now, you know, people with ten children and living in a shotgun with three--and my mom and my aunts and people in the neighborhood made the quilts that we slept on. So, we didn't, we didn't have a whole lot of household goods. But it was love, it was all love. Story_ID: 558738 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Otis Leon Story, Sr. [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]. And the spelling of my first name is O-T-I-S, middle name is Leon, L-E-O-N, last name is spelled S-T-O-R-Y, and then senior, S-R. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is November the 17th, 1951. I was born in Anniston, Alabama. And Anniston is spelled, A-N-N-I-S-T-O-N, Alabama. Speaker 1: And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 20th, 19- oh my goodness, 2012. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're located in College Park, Georgia. Story_ID: 558739 Speaker 1: Now we left off with, you were talking about your childhood. And we never discussed the schools you went to. So, can you tell us where you first went to school? Speaker 2: I attended school in Anniston, Alabama at South Highland [South Highland Elementary School]. And that's two words, S-O-U-T-H, Highland, H-I-G-H-L-A-N-D. South Highland was a segregated elementary school, went from grades one through six. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you go there for the entirety of grade school? Speaker 2: Yes, undergrad. I mean, elementary school. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right. So, did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved going to school. I loved going to school, and I loved going to school with my sisters. I come from a large family. And it was almost like a parade, leaving out of the house in the morning going to school. I had one sister who was older than me, and I had two younger sisters. And we would go trotting down to Leighton [Avenue] and going to school. And it was like a parade in the sense that we would pick up our classmates and our friends on the way. And we were the Stories. So, when the Stories would come walking out going down Allen [Avenue] to school, other people would notice and say, "Well it's time to go to school." Or they would wait for us. And it was like an unwritten rule, I mean nobody planned this. They didn't say, "Well, we're all going to be meeting on C Street at 8:05." It just naturally sort of evolved over my lifetime, from my experiences. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it a long walk? Speaker 2: It was probably less than a half mile, but probably more than a quarter of a mile. But it was, it was great and, you know, we could--as I got older I sort of separated from my sisters, and I took a shortcut through the woods and crossed the ditch; there was always a ditch. Speaker 1: Okay. What were your favorite features of school? Speaker 2: Oh, math, math. Math and reading. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite teacher? Speaker 2: I had a couple of favorite teachers. I adored all of my teachers. At that time, black educators were such prominent figures in our community. You know, being raised in the Deep South, a black educator was someone who had status equivalent to the preachers in our community. So I adored all of my teachers, and they were all females at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, so you were there through sixth grade? Speaker 2: Sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, where did you go to middle school? Speaker 2: I, well, that was a transition. That was, a major change in my life occurred after sixth grade. Because my family, my mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father [Tom Story, Sr.], made a decision that I would not attend middle school in my hometown, in Anniston, Alabama. And the reason why they made that decision was that would have been the first year that the schools would have been integrated in my hometown. And given all of the violence that was occurring around school integration, desegregation of schools in the South, my parents made the decision that I would go north. Story_ID: 558740 Speaker 1: Now, I, I don't remember reading in the transcript you telling the story about the bus burning in Anniston [Alabama] in 1961. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were living there when that happened. Speaker 2: And I saw that. I saw that bus out on Highway 21 [Alabama State Route 21]. Speaker 1: Now this is, now, let's set it up. Now, this is the Freedom Riders, right? Speaker 2: That's correct (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 1961 coming out of Nashville [Tennessee] going down south. I think they were going down to-- Speaker 2: Birmingham [Alabama], they were headed to Birmingham. They were headed to Birmingham, and they were making their stops. And it was a Sunday, and we knew all about that. We knew all about that. We lived it every day. The F.W. Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company], Kresses [S.H. Kress Company], all the major stores that were located in my hometown were being impacted by the sit-ins, you know, the Freedom Riders, et cetera, et cetera. And the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], you know, people were pushing for voting--going to register, registering voters. So, all of that was buzzing around me and my family and the community, as I can recall. I guess I was eight or nine years old. And the conversations that my parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.]--and the conversations that were held in the community around voting, you need to go out and vote. And that brought, that created a lot of controversy obviously in the community. And the violence started to increase. The violence, you know, that was being perpetrated against blacks. You know, I can--one of my dear friends, I'll never forget. His brother, his name was Phillips [ph.]. The black segregated high school [Cobb Avenue High School, Anniston, Alabama] was on the west side. We lived on the south side. And if you missed the school bus, you would have to walk home from the west side unless you rode the public bus. And if you, you know, a lot of black families couldn't afford to have kids paying to ride the bus. So, they would walk home. And you'd have to walk through what we called the white folks' section. And if you walked through the white folks' section, depending on what folks' section you were walking through in Anniston, it could be perilous. And I'll never forget. One of the Phillips boys--that's how we identified families, you know, the Story children, the Phillip boys, et cetera, et cetera, was coming home by himself. And he was walking through the white folks' section. And he made a decision to cut through a city park. This was a city park in Anniston, Alabama right off of Noble Street; this was right off of downtown. And he was confronted by two other white boys, and there were some words exchanged. You can imagine what they were saying, "Nigger, what are you doing walking through our park?" And Phillips didn't, he said he didn't say anything. And they attacked him with a Coca-Cola bottle. They attacked him, and he fought them off. But I remember him being in church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama] that Sunday with a big old bandage on his head. And he, he said that, you know, he got the best of them. It was two of them, and it was one of him. But they left him bloody above the head, about the head. And that was just, that was just something that we had grown accustomed to, my own self, you know, being attacked. Story_ID: 558741 Speaker 1: And one of the things that I'll never forget that happened to me personally was the--how white people would always--what they would say, sic a dog on you. And you know, you'd be walking through the white folks' section [of Anniston, Alabama], or you'd be riding your bike. And I was always riding my bike uptown. And in order for me to get uptown, I had to ride through the white folks' section. And you'd be riding your bike, and invariably some white kid, they'd be out and they would tell their dogs, "Get them. Sic 'em, sic 'em." And to this day, my wife [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story] will tell you, even though, I have this problem with dogs. Yeah, I have this problem with dogs. Because a dog, to me, represented Bull Connor, German Shepherds, white people saying, "Sic him, sic him," and chasing us and running away from their dogs. So that's, that's something that I've lived with all of my life, is the thought of somebody--you know, if I walk past a dog today, you know, I'm cautious, especially a big dog, and in particular German Shepherds. Because it seems like Collies and German Shepherds were the dogs that people had that were fixated in my mind as a child that always chased us. And we would run. They would love to see us running from the dogs, or riding our bikes. And they would get right to the edge of the white community and the black community, and the dogs would sort of slow down, and they would just go back and turn around and leave. But they would literally run us through and chase us through the white folks' section. Speaker 2: They knew what the boundary of their section was? Speaker 1: The dogs, it was, it was--I just thought about that, you know. It wasn't like it was an electrical fence, but they would chase us. Because when I got to, like right near my hometown--if I got to, right over on C Street, the dogs would just--you know, you could almost stop as you crossed the street, and look back. And the dogs would just stand there and bark at you. They wouldn't come over into the colored folks' section. Like, I lived on 8th Street. And it was 3rd Street, 8th Street. And then the rest, A [Street], B [Street], C, D [Street], was the south side, which is where the black people lived. If I got to 3rd Street, that was the transition street. So somewhere between 3rd Street, that dog would slow down, and I knew that I was home safe. Story_ID: 558742 Speaker 1: So, what--do you remember what happened on that day in Anniston [Alabama] in 1961 what you were doing? Speaker 2: I was, well, we were in church. You know, the church was the center of our universe. You know, everybody knows that, as a southerner. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Gaines Chapel, G-A-I-N-E-S, Gaines Chapel A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal. So, Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church [Anniston, Alabama], and it was located on 400 A as in apple, A Street. And it's still standing there, and it's still my church home; it's still my church home. And it will be my resting place. You know, that's my church. I've attended churches all over this country. But Gaines Chapel A.M.E. chapel is my church home, and that was the center of our universe. And so, when things happened like when the Phillips [ph.] boy was attacked, I can remember people standing outside of the church, you know, talking to his parents about what happened, what we should do, or what's going to happen next, et cetera, et cetera. But invariably, nothing happened. They weren't arrested. I don't even think Mr. Phillips and them filed a police report. It wouldn't have done any good; it wouldn't have done any good. They would have said that, you know, he attacked those two boys who were playing in the park, and they were defending themselves when they hit him in the head with the Coca-Cola bottle. Speaker 1: Or that his head attacked the bottle. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. So we understood that as a child, as young as eight, eight, nine years old. I understood the dynamics, because we were raised that way. We were raised to get on the bus and go immediately to the back of the bus. And if there was not a seat, you know, on the back of the bus, you just stood up. But you wouldn't dare go and sit in the seat in front of the bus, meaning where the back door was. That was the sort of dividing line. And I don't even remember if it was actually a mark on the bus. But we knew that once you got past the back doors, that's where you were supposed to sit. Now, my daddy [Tom Story, Sr.] had a different view of that. My daddy and mother [Martha Wilson Story] had this conflict around racism and behavior. My dad always raised us in such a way that, you know, if there was a seat on the bus and it was close to the front, you sat in it. And my mother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he ever have any conflict because of that? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. My daddy had a major conflict back in the '40s [1940s]. In my hometown, there's a [U.S.] military base called Fort McClellan [Alabama]. And my daddy was, he worked, unlike most of the black men, he was not a quote laborer. He didn't work in the pipe shop; he didn't work in the foundry or steel mill. He didn't work outside doing carpeting; he didn't pull concrete or anything like that. He was a professional presser, he worked in the dry cleaning business. And so, my daddy, even though he worked in the dry cleaning business, he wore a tie and a suit-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to work every day. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So he was a, he was a different type of black man. Story_ID: 558743 Speaker 1: But I want to get back to this day in Anniston [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --when that bus was burned. Now you were in church, you say? Speaker 2: We had gotten out of church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama]. And the word spread that they were beating up those people from the North, you know. You know, we, you know, the black people who didn't live in the South, they were those people from the North, the Freedom Riders. And so, naturally, you know, all the kids, we started running. You know, because we wanted to see where the action was. And it was, the bus was ablaze. And people were standing around. I mean white people, black people, just standing around looking at the bus burn. And, you know, the police was there and the people who got hurt were there. But it, it became like any other accident scene. You know, people were just standing there looking across the street. Nobody was saying anything. White people were standing over here, we were standing over there. And it was just an event that happened. Speaker 1: So everything had really taken place? The attack had already taken place? Speaker 2: It had taken place and was over with. People were gone wherever. And the Freedom Riders went back to the Greyhound bus station in Anniston, back uptown. I don't know how they--but the police and other people had gotten in back. But everybody was just standing around watching the bus burn. Speaker 1: Now did you, now in those days I guess you would have been, what? Speaker 2: About eight (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight? Speaker 2: Nine. Speaker 1: Maybe nine? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that that was historic, that this was going to be an iconic-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --episode in the movement? Speaker 2: No, no. It was just, it was just a Greyhound bus that was on fire. And we knew that it was some black people that were sitting on the front of the bus. They weren't, they weren't in their place. And we knew that; that was the whole thing. And that's what our parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.], my mother in particular, and the black women would say, "See, they were out of their place. And that's why they were beat up, that's why the bus was burning." And see, if you do that here in Anniston--now, they weren't going to burn up any city buses, you know. But you were considered a troublemaker. And black people would say that, you know, "He was just a troublemaker." Speaker 1: That's an interesting spin on that. You know, you would never think that when you're watching the civil rights films and the bus burning, that the people in Anniston see it as somebody who's not sitting on the back of the bus, right, where they ought to be? Speaker 2: Yeah. And they were, and we even used the term that they were the troublemakers. You know, that's how racism, how it conditions you. Because that's what was said in the paper, and that's how they were characterized on the news and the radio. People would say, "Well, the troublemakers who arrived from such and such, you know, were attacked." And so, when we would repeat it, you would say, "Well, the troublemakers got bloodied. They got beat up. Because the bus that they were riding, those troublemakers were riding, is sitting over there on Highway 21 [Alabama State Route 21]." And it was just the language, it was the common language that was used by blacks and whites to depict what was occurring at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, the-- Speaker 2: Now, I wouldn't use that to characterize those people, those individuals today. You know, I consider them heroes, as heroes, you know. But then, they were just those people from the North who were troublemakers. Speaker 1: I know we've interviewed some of them now, and they're HistoryMakers. But then, they were troublemakers (laughter). That's interesting. Story_ID: 558744 Speaker 1: When you're twelve your parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.] make the decision that you should go to New York, to avoid being in what inevitably would be a conflict-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of school integration, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And judging by how the bus turned out and some other things turned out, and what happened to the Phillips [ph.] boy and other incidents, I'm sure there were a million, you know, stories of-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean they, they--my dad sitting on the front porch--you know, and people coming by throwing baskets and peaches at him, because my dad would not quit his job. Because he worked at a small dry cleaners [Anniston Steam Laundry, Anniston, Alabama], and it was only two people, him and a white woman, who took the clothes in. And they told him that he couldn't work there, because he couldn't work in a building where it was only a black man and a white woman. Yeah, I remember things like that as a child. And it was like--but my dad, he was not intimidated by that. And it was, everybody knew who they were. The Ku Klux Klan [KKK], as they called them at that time, were associated with a family of whites called the Adams boys. And you've seen them before, because they were the ones who attacked Nat King Cole in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. I don't think that-- Speaker 2: It's, you've seen the pictures in Life magazine of Nat King Cole performing at the Civic City [sic. Municipal Auditorium; Boutwell Memorial Auditorium] in Birmingham, Alabama in the '50s [1950s]. And there's a picture of some white boys pulling Nat King Cole by the pants leg off the stage at the Civic Center in Birmingham, Alabama. And those were the Adams boys from Anniston, Alabama. So it was a whole, you know, cliques, I mean Klan. And it was-- Speaker 1: What was the issue with Nat King Cole? He was--was he performing before an integrated audience or something? Speaker 2: I don't know if the audience was integrated, but it was all whites. If it was integrated, you know, we know that the white people were downstairs. It was like in the movie theater. When I went to the movie theater, the whites sat downstairs and the blacks sat up in the balcony. So, I imagine if they allowed blacks to attend the concert, they were all upstairs. Speaker 1: Well, I know that they didn't particularly like black performers singing love songs when white women were around, and that sort of thing. So, that might have been-- Speaker 2: Well, they didn't--the fact that Nat King Cole--any time a black entertainer performed before whites au- for a white audience, that put them at some risk, I would imagine at that time. Story_ID: 558745 Speaker 1: And so, those were the same guys that probably threw the baskets, you know, at our house, and shot up at my daddy [Tom Story, Sr.]. And, but he was sitting behind a column, so he wasn't injured. Where the front porch is, in the South you've got a front porch. And we had a front porch that had brick columns that came about four feet. And I remember running home when I heard about the incident. And it was in the summertime. And it didn't even faze my dad. He was not intimidated, you know, at all. He didn't have any fear in his heart of white people or nothing like that. Because like I said, the incident that we talked about earlier, he had been involved in--coming from the fort [Fort McClellan, Alabama], he had shot a white cabdriver with his own gun, because the cabdriver pulled the gun on my dad because my dad didn't have any money to pay the cabdriver. And he wanted to get out the cab to go inside the house to get some money from my mother [Martha Wilson Story]. And evidently the cabdriver didn't believe that my dad was sincere about going in the house and coming back to pay him. And that's when he pulled the gun on my dad, and my dad turned the gun on him and shot him with his own gun. Speaker 2: Well, did you talk about what happened after that in the last-- Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: Well, was there a trial or something? Speaker 1: No, no, no. It was an embarrassment. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: It was an embarrassment, because my dad shot the white man with his own gun. Speaker 2: So, he didn't tell anybody about it? Speaker 1: He told, he told--the police came and everything. But they didn't want to make an issue out of it. Because here was a white man that got shot by a black man with his own gun. Speaker 2: Okay. Now this is something. I've heard of these kind of stories, too, where intimidation would backfire and then the white community wants to keep it on the low. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep it, keep it, keep the noise down. Speaker 1: He didn't want, he didn't want his friends to know that he had pulled a gun on this nigger, and this nigger took his gun and shot him. And his side--it was a flesh wound. So it was, my mother said it went through his side. I imagine in the cab my dad just pushed the gun down, and it probably discharged and shot him in the lower quadrant. And he drove himself on, and the police came and my daddy went to jail. Of course, he went to jail. But my [maternal] grandmother [Lois Wilson (ph.)] had some work for a Jewish family. And that's how blacks survived in some communities, is through our friendship with Jewish families who had the financial means to get us, quote, out of trouble. At least in Anniston [Alabama], I know that. My grandmother worked for the Powells [Alice Powell], who was a Jewish family. And my mother told her mother that my dad was in trouble. And the Powells were able to get my dad out of jail, and there was no trial. Speaker 2: I think that's a common story in a lot of cities. Anyway. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Interesting. Story_ID: 558746 Speaker 1: You're twelve years old. So, you're going to, you have an uncle [Story's maternal uncle, Otis Wilson] in New York [New York], right? Speaker 2: I have an uncle in New York, and two sisters [Velma Story and Mary Story Ware] and one brother [Tom Story, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you know, you've got family there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And had you ever been to New York City before? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I had spent a couple of summers in New York City, so it wasn't foreign to me. But it still broke my heart that I was being sent away. Because I was--this was, in my mind it was a permanent separation. It wasn't like going up for the summer like I'd done in previous years. Yeah, I knew what this meant, that I wasn't going to Johnson Junior High School [Anniston, Alabama], and that I wasn't going to be able to, you know, grow up and do what I wanted to do in Anniston [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Johnson High School, okay. Speaker 2: Johnson Junior High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, well, tell us about New York. You're somewhat familiar with it. But, so did it take any adjustment period? Well, being away from home is probably a big adjustment? Speaker 2: Well, it was a big adjustment, because obviously I missed my mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father [Tom Story, Sr.] and my sisters. But I missed my dear friends. The brothers and sisters that I'd grown up with, you know, I remember their names today. I go back to Harold Ramsey, who they called Woo Man [ph.]; Michael Bogus [ph.]; Andrew Weeks, III, one of my best dear friends. And Stephanie Stephens [ph.], Barbara Gass [ph.], and Diane Hurt [ph.], all of these individuals, and many more. We had, we either, most of us went to the same church [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama]. We obviously went to the same school [South Highland Elementary School, Anniston, Alabama]. And we played together every day. You know, we interacted. And all of a sudden, that was all taken away from me. And I had, I was a pretty good football player. And my ambition, my dream, was that I was going to play professional football. But before that, I was going to be the first black to play football for Bear Bryant at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]. That was my ambition as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you actually, you actually thought of that as a-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Somewhere in my mind, with all of this racism circulating around me, you know, I felt that I was going to be such an outstanding athlete that Bear Bryant would want me to play football for him at the University of Alabama. Even though George Wallace had been standing in the door, you know, at the University of Alabama, somehow Bear Bryant was going to get me around to the back fence and get me on the football field at the University of Alabama. Because we were big fans. My dad was from Tuscaloosa [Alabama], so we were big fans of the University of Alabama and Bear Bryant. Speaker 1: And it's interesting-- Speaker 2: Go figure. Speaker 1: --because the northern view, black people up north would sit around the barbershop, and they hated Bear Bryant. And you know, the coach of Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], you know, Adolph Rupp, they hated those guys because, you know, they had segregated teams. Speaker 2: And we knew that; we all knew that. We all knew that as a child. Because I played football, and my hero obviously back in those days was Jim Brown, you know. And, but nevertheless in my mind--and once again that that shows you how delicate a child's mind is in formulating their behavior. And you have to be careful about, you know, how you manage your children. Because nobody said to me directly, "Leon [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], you're never going to be able to go to the University of Alabama." But I knew that the University of Alabama was a segregated school, and that you would have to probably wind up at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], Stillman [Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], Arkansas State [Arkansas State College; Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas], you know. But it didn't faze me, it didn't faze me as a child. I was going to be that first black at the University of Alabama. Story_ID: 558747 Speaker 1: All right, so in New York City [New York, New York]. And now, so what school did you go to in New York? Speaker 2: I went to Shimer Junior High School 142Q [P.S. 142, Shimer Junior High School, Queens, New York]. And Shimer is spelled S-H-I-M-E-R, Junior High School, 142Q. And all the schools, as you know, most of the schools had numbers, all the elementary schools, like I lived across the street from P.S. 123 [Queens, New York]. Speaker 1: So this is Queens [New York], right? Speaker 2: This is Queens. Yeah, that's what--142Q. Speaker 1: Queens is different from Brooklyn [New York]-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and the Bronx [New York] in terms of the space, right? You had grass and-- Speaker 2: It was definitely a more suburban atmosphere. I lived in my [maternal] uncle's [Otis Wilson] home. It was a, at that time a very nice home, a nice--I'd never lived in anything like that before, with the, especially with the bathrooms and everything inside the four walls of the house, and a basement, the main floor, and upstairs. Yeah, it was just, it was heavenly for me, coming from a shotgun [in Anniston, Alabama] with a bathroom outside on the back porch. This was, it was day and night. And that was, that was--and that's what my mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father [Tom Story, Sr.] wanted for all of us. They just wanted a better quality of life, you know, from a materialistic perspective. Speaker 1: Now, what was the population of Shimer like? Speaker 2: It was, it was probably 90 percent black, African American, and maybe 5 percent white and 5 percent Hispanic. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I shouldn't say Hispanic, because they were Puerto Ricans, basically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's probably what the, you know, racial makeup would have been at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Were your teachers mostly white, or--? Speaker 2: Mostly white. We had, the first time I ever had a black male instructor was when I, when I was in junior high school. The first time I'd ever been in a classroom where a black man was an instructor was in New York-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at Shimer. Speaker 1: So, how did you do at Shimer? Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I was a great student. And that was one of the myths, once again, that sort of blew up--that because I was from the Deep South, you know, I couldn't talk, and obviously I didn't have the intellectual capacity to achieve, and that the classroom would have been a challenging environment. And it was just the opposite for me. I was, I was at least--in math I was like a whole year ahead of my peers in the seventh grade. I mean I didn't even study math, because it was multiplication and division of fractions, et cetera, et cetera, all that I had learned in the fifth and sixth grade in Alabama. The only challenge for me in junior high school in the North was the foreign language. I took Spanish, Spanish and English grammar. Speaker 1: Okay. So there was no foreign language in the school in Alabama? Speaker 2: None, none. So, that was just totally different. So, that just sort of threw me for a loop. But academically in the seventh and eighth grade, I did well. I played a musical instrument. Speaker 1: What did you play? Speaker 2: I played the bass. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one of the highlights of my life, and I still tell the story, is that I had a chance to play at a pool party at Count Basie's house. Speaker 1: Now, so Count Basie lived in Queens? Speaker 2: He lived in Queens, and that's where-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He lived in Queens. Speaker 1: Now I know Louis Armstrong lived in Queens. Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong lived in East Elmhurst [Queens, New York]. But Count Basie lived in what we call St. Albans, right around the corner from James Brown. So we could walk from South Jamaica, Queens where I lived to Count Basie's house, or to James Brown's house, or the Arthur Prysock home. They all lived out in a place called St. Albans, Queens, the black entertainers, you know, at that time. So, it was--that aspect in terms of exposure, academics, music, foreign language, that was all wonderful. But I still missed, you know, being at home with my parents and my sisters and brothers. Speaker 1: Did you go back in the summer? Speaker 2: I, I did. I went back to visit, and I was just so excited. But I knew that after two weeks, I would have to head back north. Story_ID: 558748 Speaker 1: Now, what about high school? Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to a great high school in New York City [New York, New York]. I went to John Bowne [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York], B-O-W-N-E. And John Bowne was a pacifist during the Revolutionary War. That was one of the significance about that school. Because the school opened during the Vietnam era, so it had some political overtones, the naming of the school. Speaker 1: What's the last name again? B-O? Speaker 2: B-O-W-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay. It almost sounds like John Brown, but it's John Bowne (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bowne, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we would, you know, he was a pacifist during the Revolutionary War. And you know, this was the height of the Vietnam War in the '60s [1960s] when it was opened in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Now, how did you end up going to John Bowne? Now this is in Manhattan [New York]? Speaker 2: No, this is in Queens [New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's in Queens, all right. Speaker 2: Because where I lived in South Jamaica, Queens, was a segregated part of Queens. All the folks who lived around St. Albans [Queens, New York] where Arthur Prysock and James Brown--that was a black community. South Jamaica, Queens was a black community. So, what my parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.] had sent me from Alabama to get away from, I was re-introduced to a segregated educational system in New York City when I got to Queens. Because John Bowne High School, while it was a new school and just opened, the junior high school I went to [P.S. 142, Shimer Junior High School, Queens, New York] was basically all black, 90 percent black. So, what the community, and I guess the board of education in New York City [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education]--the political beings, the shakers and the movers--decided that they were going to integrate in schools in Queens. Because all the other high schools in Queens, which were predominantly white, were sort of, we were zoned. And so because we lived in South Jamaica, we weren't zoned to those schools. And they made a conscious decision to integrate those schools by establishing a lottery for the kids who lived in the black community. So, we had an opportunity to select our top three schools that we wanted to attend in Queens, and they were the majority white schools. So, I picked John Bowne as the school that I wanted to attend. So all of a sudden they broke up all the black kids that lived in South Jamaica, Queens and they dispersed us through integration throughout Queens. And that's how I got to John Bowne High School. And I was very fortunate that I selected John Bowne High School, because it was a brand new high school and it was the only agriculture high school in New York City--the FFA, Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization]. So it was a specialty high school. Speaker 1: Now this is 1965 I guess, right? Speaker 2: No, I, I, it's '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay, all right. Speaker 2: Sixty-five, [1965], '66 [1966], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, Future Farmers of America is there, the FAA? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's a-- Speaker 2: Specialty high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the specialty part about that, it wasn't farming. It was veterinarian medicine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A significant number of students who selected John Bowne--the white students, not the blacks--because we didn't know anything about this. You know, but the white students who came from out in New York City to attend this quote, specialty high school were interested in two major disciplines. And one was veterinary medicine, and one was general medicine. So, it was this gateway. Story_ID: 558749 Speaker 1: So, how did you do at John Bowne [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]? Speaker 2: I did good, I was a good student. I continued to be a good student at John Bowne. Obviously, I was good enough to get into Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 1: So, did you continue to play the bass when you were there? Speaker 2: I did, I did. I was the, that was one of the things that my classmates sort of kidded me about, because I was the only black male in the orchestra in high school. And there were, there was one other black male who was the number one violinist, but he never spoke to me. (Laughter) He never spoke. And I think he was only a year older than me. He was a great-- Speaker 1: Now, that's a syndrome that, it doesn't happen to everybody. But it's a syndrome in integrated situations where when black folks come into all-white situations, some of the black folks will not associate with other black people. Speaker 2: Oh, he did not. It wasn't just me. I didn't take it personally. You know, he didn't speak, he didn't socialize with any other blacks. Because most of us were from South Jamaica, Queens [New York], or a place called the Ville [ph.]. It was a black enclave somewhere between Union Turnpike and Astoria Boulevard, where blacks lived. And he, I don't even know where this guy came from. But he was the number one chair. And when you saw him in the hallway, he was always with white students. And so, you know, we didn't speak to him because he dressed different. You know, back in the day, you know, the Afros and stuff like that, no. Speaker 1: Well, how did you dress in those days? Because dress seems to separate black males from the rest of the--and it still does today. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was a, I was, I had a job, so I was very fortunate. So I dressed--back in the day we called it the Italian hust, a hustler. And it was mostly like Italians, you know, with the alligator shoes, you know, and the silk pants, and what we called blies [ph.]--they were called alpaca sweaters. And that was just the style. And I was very fortunate in the sense that I could dress, as we said, Italian hust, because my older brother [Tom Story, Jr.], we could wear the same shirts. They'd be a little bit bigger on me, these sweaters called alpacas, and leather jackets. And there was a place, there is a place in New York City [New York, New York] down on Canal Street near--Canal Street divides Chinatown [New York, New York] from Delancey Street. (Cough) And I would go down and I could buy my clothes at a significant discount. And I had these multi-colored, three or four different leather jackets. So I was sort of, I dressed well as a student. Yeah, I dressed very well, and I had three or four pair of Converses. And that was another thing, a status symbol. I had, because I worked on the weekend, I could buy, you know, my sneakers. And so, I had three or four pairs. And if you had three or four pairs of Converse sneakers where you could change from low tops to high tops, and have a blue or a red pair--other kids didn't have that. So, I was, and I was a ballplayer, so you expected that. Ballplayers were different. They were, you know, it was more of a status symbol. Story_ID: 558750 Speaker 1: Did you start playing ball in Alabama? Speaker 2: I didn't play basketball in Alabama. I was a football player in Alabama, because that's what Bear Bryant needed. He needed a football player of my stature. And as I said earlier, I didn't get a chance to do that in my life. But this was so important, going back to Alabama and Bear Bryant. It's that when Bear Bryant--when the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] selected its first basketball player, Wendell Hudson, my mother [Martha Wilson Story] sent me the clipping, because we got it from The Anniston Star. Because they knew, people knew that Leon [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], that's my middle name, that I had the physical attributes and the academic and intellectual powers to attend a place like the University of Alabama; that I could, if I was given the opportunity, that I could succeed, you know, on the basketball court or the football field, or in the classroom at a place like the University of Alabama. So, my family, it was sort of an undercurrent. They knew--we didn't talk about it; I didn't talk about it with my dad [Tom Story, Sr.]. But people knew that that's what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, back in, so you started playing basketball in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: The transition. I got to New York, and because I was an athlete, I played basketball and handball. I was a great handball player. And my best friend who I played handball with was Jamie Suarez [ph.], Jamie Suarez. And that's how--because when I first got to New York, they used to call me Bama. So people would pick on you, you know, "Say something, Bama." They would, you know, it was bullying, a form of bullying, you know. They would say, they would come up to me, the black kids would come to me and ask me to say my name. They'd say, "Can you talk?" You know, and I'd say something. And they'd say, "How does it feel to have shoes on your feet?" And these were all black kids. And Jamie Suarez, he befriended me; he befriended me. He became my friend. He was one of the kids, you know, I was standing--you know, in the cafeteria you're sitting by yourself. And Jamie Suarez, he became my friend, my best friend. Speaker 1: Was he Puerto Rican? Speaker 2: He was Puerto Rican. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was Puerto Rican. And he was short, shorter than me, but he was tough as nails. And what we became, we became handball partners. And when we were in the seventh grade, we dominated the seventh grade handball court at recess. And we soon became two of the best handball players in our junior high school [P.S. 142, Shimer Junior High School, Queens, New York]. And so, our status changed. And so people stopped calling me Bama, and they stopped, quote, picking on me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, basketball, though, now basketball. You're in New York City and you hadn't played a lot of basketball. Was it different to crack the lineup of the basketball team in New York City? Speaker 2: It was, it was. Because I played basketball like I played football, very physical. And so I would run, if there was a loose ball, I would dive. And so obviously, they thought I was touched. And, you know, the word back in--when I was growing up, the word that people would use is, they'd say, you know, "Oh, man, he's retarded. That boy's retarded. Look, he's diving." Because, you know, New York City is an asphalt jungle. And I would dive on the ground, on the asphalt, for a basketball. And so people started to look at me differently. And the ones who didn't know me, you know, would look and say, "He's got a crazy card. You know, why is he at this school? He should be at a six hundred school." Because that's the specialty high school, junior high school where they send kids. But I just, I played with such aggression that once I started to control that, I became a better basketball player. But people didn't want to play against me, because I played defense like I played football, and that was not the way people played basketball in New York. It was a vertical game, you know, you had moves, you were smooth. And you, you know, you jumped high. And I was running into people, knocking them down. And so, there were a lot of fights. And, you know, they knew that I wasn't, I wasn't afraid to fight, because I could knuckle up real quick. And they were like, "Oh, man, just leave him alone, just leave him alone." And people wouldn't, they wouldn't pick me to play. But then I started developing my skills. My older brother [Tom Story, Jr.] started to help me, you know, to shoot and stuff. And he'd say, "Slow down. You know, you don't run through people with the basketball. You try to fake them, you know, the head shoulder fake." And so, he started using, you know, my physical attributes and helping me to develop those. And so once I got to high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York], then I was, I still had the intensity that people in New York didn't like. Because everybody wanted to see the smooth moves; they wanted to see the jump shots; they wanted to see how high you could jump. But I had a vertical leap, so people were impressed by that. And that's how I got to play on the basketball--that's why I got chosen, because I could vertically, I could jump high, and I would always get the rebound and give it to the guys who liked to handle. So they would pick me because I was a, I was a good rebounder. Speaker 1: Every point guard needs a Dennis Rodman, you know, somebody to get the ball (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. And they loved me, because they knew that I didn't want to shoot. All I wanted to do was just grab the rebound and give to them and watch them shoot the jump shot. And if they missed, I would grab it and give it right back to them. They loved me, they loved me. Story_ID: 558751 Speaker 1: And the thing that happened when I got the--nobody expected I would make the high school basketball team, because I couldn't shoot. But my high school coach [at John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York] liked the idea that I played defense and I would always grab the ball and pass it to another teammate. So the coach perceived that I was a, quote, team player. Speaker 2: Coachable. Speaker 1: Coachable, coachable. I was coachable, you're absolutely right, I was coachable. And so the kids that I came from South Jamaica, Queens [New York]--that I grew up with who could handle, who could shoot better, had all the moves, could spin like Earl the Pearl [Earl Monroe]--because we were all trying to spin like the Pearl. I couldn't spin; I didn't even try it. I didn't try to dribble between my legs. I was different from all my partners from South Jamaica, Queens. And when the list came out, people were dismayed that I made the junior varsity. I was surprised myself, because I didn't, I don't even probably remember during the tryouts probably scoring a basket. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a difference between I guess their perception of what a basketball player is. It was a one on player rather than a component on a team. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was a different-- Speaker 1: And I didn't, and we didn't--obviously the brothers that I played with from South Jamaica that I grew up playing with, didn't recognize that that's what the coaches were looking for. They were looking for a team player, obviously somebody's who's coachable first of all--a team player, and who was willing to learn on the basketball court. And they weren't that type. And when we played in the, back at home in the neighborhood, they were still the better players. When I was in the ninth and tenth grade, they were still--I was on the team, they weren't. But I was, I had a letterman jacket; they didn't. Speaker 2: Okay. So did the team do any good when you were-- Speaker 1: Oh, when I was, during my freshman year when I was on the JV, we did pretty good. And because I was such a good player, a hustler, the coach dressed me out with the varsity. And the varsity at that time was a good, a very competitive team. So, I was in the ninth grade and I could sit on the bench with the tenth and eleventh graders. Now I didn't play, but that was a big thing, to be in the ninth grade and to be able to dress out with the varsity. Because everybody was sitting there watching the game and they would see this guy. And so, that helped my status in the streets. Because I was no longer country, which was I labeled when I was in the seventh grade in junior high school [P.S. 142, Shimer Junior High School, Queens, New York]; I made the transition to ballplayer. So, I would walk down the street behind the guys that were the big boys, the seniors and juniors on the team. But I was what? A ballplayer. And all of a sudden my status--so, when they graduated and I became I sophomore, I was a sophomore who was a ballplayer who started on the-- Speaker 2: So, did the team win anything when you were there? Speaker 1: When I was a sophomore and a junior, they won. When I was a junior and senior we had bad--we didn't do that well. But I was still a ballplayer, and when I was a senior, I was the leader of the team. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it was this--New York City [New York, New York]--the whole status symbol, that I was a ballplayer. Story_ID: 558752 Speaker 1: Okay now, your course of study, was it heavy in the sciences? Were you doing like a prep for medical school, that type of thing, biology? Speaker 2: I was. And that's, and that was my first exposure to what I later learned in life. We were talking about how we segregate. The school was integrated, but the classrooms were segregated. And the tracking of black students inside the public school system, and in particular inside my high school, John Bowne High School [Flushing, New York], where most of my friends from South Jamaica, Queens [New York] who were black, and the ones from Corona [Queens, New York] who were black, were placed in what they call commercial and general courses. I was the only one, I was one of few, I should say--one of a few black students, period, who were on the academic track. And I realized that it sort of--when I was a sophomore. Because the folks that I had gone to school with, the brothers and sisters I'd gone to school with in junior high school [P.S. 142, Shimer Junior High School, Queens, New York], we were all basically sort of integrated in the ninth grade in the same curriculum. But when we became sophomores, I noticed that my friends weren't taking the same classes. I didn't see them in Spanish; I didn't see them in geometry; I didn't see them in biology; I didn't see them in world history; and they weren't in the same English class. And that's when the separation academically internally occurred for me. And it didn't faze me that much when I was sophomore. It really hit home when I was a junior, and I realized that something was different--that things were starting to, were playing out differently internally for me and the brothers and sisters that I went to school with at John Bowne. They were on a commercial and general track, and co-op. And that's when the re-segregation and the tracking occurred. Because the brothers and sisters who were on the co-op program, they went to school one week and they worked a week. And the ones who were on the commercial, they took typing and accounting, general accounting and things like that. And I was the only one, one of few, once again, that was on an academic which was college prep. Story_ID: 558753 Speaker 1: Now did you, was there any particular mentors or special teachers at John Bowne [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]? Speaker 2: There were, there were a couple. There were two in particular that I remember. And one was a black lady named Mrs. Reynolds [ph.]. And she was my guidance counselor and social studies teacher, Mrs. Reynolds. And the other one was Miss Novak [ph.], Miss Novak. And these two individuals--you know, you always talk about these particular points and times in your life where you could have gone left, and there was somebody standing there saying, "No, you need to go right, that's not for you. This is, this is the door. We're going to help you choose the right door." Because I wanted to go left, because my partners and all my friends were going left. So all of a sudden, I was going right. But I was in a classroom with twenty-five, twenty-eight other students. But they were basically all white. There were maybe three or four or five of us in my classes. And the same blacks that were in my class when I was a sophomore, junior, and senior, I know them today. It was Deborah Leeky [ph.] and her brother, and a couple of other sisters. We were the ones in my class that were in the quote, academic. There were probably about ten or fifteen others. But in my class, in my class there were--when I graduated from high school, there were probably eight hundred students in my senior class. And it was probably maybe about twenty or twenty-five of us that were on this quote, academic track. Now the others who were on the commercial and general went on to college, because I know them, they went on to--but there were only about twenty-five of us. I don't know everybody's name, but I can point them out to you, that were on the academic track. And the others had been segregated; they had been segregated. And today when I look back--our parents, you know, we didn't go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings. My mother [Martha Wilson Story] never attended a PTA meeting. Because remember, we were bussed from South Jamaica [Queens, New York]. And my mother and sisters, those siblings who raised me, they never attended a PTA meeting out in Queens [New York]. It was a Jewish community, and it was a long way. They worked. My sister worked in Manhattan [New York], and my dad [Tom Story, Sr.] was disabled. So it was, it was nothing that I expected, you know, my parents or my older siblings to do. Speaker 1: So, the intervention of these two teachers-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were extremely important-- Speaker 2: No doubt. Speaker 1: --in that situation. Speaker 2: No doubt. Because I wanted to go to school with, to college with my best friends. They were off to Wharton Junior College in Texas [Wharton County Junior College, Wharton, Texas] to play basketball. You know, I was a good basketball player. So, remember I was the youngest of the crew who played basketball. I played with guys who played in the NBA [National Basketball Association], Len Elmore, who played at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. We played in the same summer league, on the same team; Kevin Stacom, who went to Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] and played for the Indiana Pacers and the Boston Celtics; Billy Schaeffer who played for St. John's University [Queens, New York]; Lou Carnesecca who played for the Nets [New York Nets; Brooklyn Nets]; David Evans [ph.]. So, David and Billy--so all these guys, we had the only integrated basketball team in the summer league in New York City [New York, New York] that I recall. So, I played with some good basketball players. So I told Miss Reynolds in a meeting one day--the guidance counselor--that I wanted to go to school with David and Jeff [ph.]. And she looked at me like I had just lost my mind. And she told me, she said, "No, you're not going to school with David and Jeff." And I said, "It's a scholarship." Now, I'm one of twelve children, and no one in my family had ever gone to college; I was the seventh child. And here Mrs. Reynolds was saying, "You're not going to college with David and Jeff. You're not going to follow Billy, Rupert [ph.], and Lester [ph.]." They all attended--that was the pipeline to Wharton Junior College in Texas. They had a pipeline, they had a pipeline. It was very interesting that Billy Schaeffer, Kevin Stacom, and Len Elmore went to Division I schools. But the black guys on the summer league team, Lester and Jeff, were all at Wharton Junior College. We were on the same team, but they went to great schools, Division I schools, and my partners were at the junior hi- junior college. Story_ID: 558754 Speaker 1: So, how did you, how did Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] first enter the discussion? Speaker 2: Well, first it (cough), it was Miss Reynolds [ph.], Miss Reynolds and Miss Novak [ph.] who told me that I was not going, literally, I was not going to a junior college; that I was going to a school where people who run the world send their children. And that's what Miss Reynolds that was basically--I'm paraphrasing, but that's basically what she was saying. I had to go back then and start looking at schools like Cornell, like Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], the University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts]. Because I shifted my whole thought process away from the basketball junior college path to the traditional Division I, I would say, of good schools in the Northeast. And this is when Miss Reynolds and Miss Novak started to advise me about different schools, and I started looking and just searching. There was no Internet, so you'd just go the library and pull off a catalog of Cornell or Columbia. And you'd flip through them, and I'd look at the courses, and things like that. So, I developed my own top ten list of colleges that I wanted to attend. And I wrote them on my, I had an American flag, I'll never forget. I had an American flag that I had on my door in the basement. And on the stripes, I wrote down the ten schools, the schools that I wanted to attend. And on that list was Cornell, Columbia, Brandeis, the University of Pennsylvania--places like Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York]. So, it was a different--Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] was on that list, Colgate was on that list. And basketball, people started to recognize my skills. So, I started getting letters from some of those schools after I'd expressed an interest in going. And talking to Miss Novak and Miss Reynolds, they helped me to sort of get in contact with these different schools. And I got the applications, and that's when I started to apply. Brandeis came into the play because of K.C. Jones who was the point guard, the personification of a point guard for the Boston Celtics. Brandeis had hired K.C. Jones as their head coach. He had left the Boston Celtics as a player and took the job as the head coach at Brandeis. And he recruited me to Brandeis. And Brandeis sort of jumped ahead of Cornell, until K.C. Jones wrote me a letter and said he had accepted a job with the Boston Celtics, and that he would no longer be coaching next year at Brandeis University. But he said in his letter that it was still a great school, and he advised or recommended to my parents [Martha Wilson Story and Tom Story, Sr.] that I still, you know, attend Brandeis, and that he would make sure that my scholarship and everything would be taken care of, et cetera, et cetera. Story_ID: 558755 Speaker 1: But I got, I was more, I was a political--I was sort of, I was a student that was involved in the politics of secondary education, if you will, in the '60s [1960s]. You know, we had the Vietnam War and we had the movement, and I was involved the movement. I helped establish the Blackness Is club [ph.] at my high school, at John Bowne [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]. And because I got involved in the politics of high school in my junior and senior year, I was, I got involved in some things with the board of education in New York City [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education]. And-- Speaker 2: Well, what happened? What was the issue? Speaker 1: The issue was community school boards and control of community schools. The United Federation of Teachers, Albert Shanker, was in conflict, a major, major conflict, with the community school board of Brownsville in Brooklyn [New York]. And what the black community was saying is that we needed to have more input into the educational process of our children. We did not want people that are a central bureaucracy to make decisions about the educational input, the educational curriculum. The community wanted to have some input into the curriculum, et cetera, et cetera. They wanted more black studies; they wanted more involvement in the selection of principals, the hiring of teachers, et cetera, et cetera. So these community boards--and there was this demonstration project that occurred in Brownsville, Brooklyn. And the board of education was in agreement with the community, but the union was in opposition, which was a different twist. Because in the 19--like '95 [1995], '96 [1996], I mean '65 [1965] and '66 [1966], when there was this union, the teachers union walked out of the public school system, and the community was supporting better wages for teachers. So, the community and the union had locked arms for higher wages that are paid--better working conditions for teachers in like '66 [1966] and '67 [1967]. And then almost a year later, or two years later, there was this relationship---this schism that had occurred between the community and the union which was, got played out big time with the strike, et cetera, et cetera. And so the black community saw itself at odds with the United Federation of Teachers, which was the union. And the black community and the unions in New York City [New York, New York] were like this (gesture). Speaker 2: So, did you know Les Campbell [Leslie R. Campbell], who was the leader of the Ocean Hill-Brownsville [Ocean Hill-Brownsville Experimental School District]-- Speaker 1: I met him-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because I was a student activist. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was a student activist. And I got more involved with people like him. Story_ID: 558756 Speaker 1: So, you know, there was this major strike. And there was, you know, the white teachers who dominating the union, mostly Jewish. And it was a major, major conflict, because all of my teachers in high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York] were in the union. And even though this was occurring in Brooklyn [New York], it impacted our lives, because then it became more racially oriented. And here we are, these black kids from South Jamaica, Queens [New York] and Corona [Queens, New York] and the Ville [ph.], and we started seeing--you know, everybody--one of the wonderful things about growing up in New York City [New York, New York], everybody read the newspaper, whether it was--it was not The New York Times or The Wall Street Journal, but we read the New York Post and the Daily News [New York Daily News], and we saw the pictures of people like Les Campbell [Leslie R. Campbell], you know, standing and pointing their finger at Albert Shanker, and Shanker pushing back saying, you know, "This is not what we bargained for, you're not capable," meaning the community was not qualified of having that much input into the educational process. Speaker 2: Well, the issues were community control and also (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Community control. Speaker 2: --curriculum, too? Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: People were concerned that the curriculum did not reflect-- Speaker 1: And Albert Shanker said, and the teachers union said, "You do not have the educational wherewithal to make those types of determinations about curriculum design or evaluating teachers," because they wanted to be able to evaluate teachers as a part of the selection process. And Albert Shanker and the United Federation of Teachers said, "Those skill sets do not exist in this community or on this community board. So, how dare you say you can evaluate a teacher?" And the principals were sort of stepped out, because they had their own union [Council of Supervisors and Administrators; Council of School Supervisors and Administrators]. So it wasn't so much the principals as it was the teachers and the curriculum that Albert Shanker and the community boards were clashing over. And I was the president of my student government, what we called the GO, the general organization. So, I was the student body president. And we had our own mini-strikes and we were taking sides. So obviously being on the red, black and green tip, we were supportive of community school boards. And so, that put us in direct conflict with our teachers, who were part of the United Federation of Teachers, union carrying teachers. And there were these conflicts, I mean verbal discussions. And I grew up--my junior and senior year, I grew up. I was no longer a child. Basketball was almost, had become secondary, because this was, this was, this was my life. This was more important than basketball. This was about self-determination. Those words started to promulgate. Speaker 2: So, did you see the beginning of the independent black school movement? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Absolutely, and I was very supportive of that. And I talked about that amongst our black student organization, our club. You know, we started meeting, we started to boycott classes; we had our own walk-outs. So, and these were teachers that I had grown to love and respect. And all of a sudden, you know, we were on opposite sides of the political debate. And I grew up a great deal during this conflict. Story_ID: 558757 Speaker 1: This activity then, you said it informed your decision to go to Cornell? Speaker 2: It sort of put me on a track. And the track was that I was invited to attend a workshop. Because the central board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education] and the principals union [Council of Supervisors and Administrators; Council of School Supervisors and Administrators] were trying to negotiate, mediate, if you will, this conflict between the United Federation of Teachers and the Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York] community board and the other community boards. There were other community boards that were hot beds. And I'll never forget. I spent two weekends in a row in Tarrytown, New York at a retreat. And I was one of the student leaders that was invited to attend. And the mediators for the retreat were from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. The dean of Cornell University School of Labor- Industrial Labor Relations [New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Ithaca, New York] was the mediator. Our faculty served as the mediator for these two retreats that were held in Tarrytown, New York on the Rockefeller--some estate that the Rockefeller family had owned. So, they took us up to this secluded compound--people from Brownsville, Albert Shanker's representative, student representatives, and these mediators from the School of Industrial Labor Relations at Cornell. I represented the student government during this retreat, and that's how I got to know the folks at Cornell. And at the end of one of the sessions, the dean asked me where was I going to school? And I ran down the list, and we got to talking. I told him my interest was in basketball, and et cetera, et cetera. I then got a letter from Cornell. And then the coaches started calling my coaches from Cornell, and that's when the bond was formed between Cornell and myself. And I was excited about that, but I still was excited about Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] and other places. But that's when Cornell sort of went to the top of the list. Story_ID: 558758 Speaker 1: So, you were the student body president at John Bowne? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a thing. And then, so, when it comes time to graduate then, did you graduate then with special honors or anything? Or did you have any role to play in it, or-- Speaker 2: I graduated with special honors in the sense of the athlete. But I was the student body president, you know, so you have to make this speech, passing the baton and all of that. But my relationship had soured in such a way with the establishment at John Bowne High School [Flushing, New York], that one of the things which I did not get to do was to give the class, like, speech or something. They chose the vice president, my vice president--which was a direct slap in the face--you know, to actually give the speech. Now, I had to, as the student body president, I had to sort of pass the baton to the president elect, you know, or something like that. It was something--they twisted it around, and they would only let me do the ceremonial part. They didn't allow me to speak (gesture). They shut me down, because they knew that they could not control what I would say. So, they let me go to the podium and do whatever I was supposed to do as the president of the student body. And they told me that. And they said Robert [ph.]--and I'll never forget it--the brother who was the vice president, he actually gave the two or three minute remarks. But I was so anti-John Bowne at that time that it didn't bother me. Speaker 1: Now, this is 19-- Speaker 2: Seventy [1970], '70 [1970] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-ni- seventy [1970], okay. Story_ID: 558759 Speaker 1: What was your life like outside of school? Did you--I mean what kind of activities did you do as a teenager? Speaker 2: Oh, I, obviously, you know, I played basketball all the time. Because you know, after the regular season, the people I played with, the Salukis, with Len Elmore and Kevin Stacom, we played after the regular season, like what they talk about now, AAU basketball [Amateur Athletic Union]. We played what we called the Courtsmen League [ph.]. So we played on the weekends, and it was equivalent to travel basketball that the young kids play, and they call AAU today. We played that, and we had a, we won big time, trophies every week. Speaker 1: Now, the name of the team was the Salukis? Speaker 2: Salukis. Speaker 1: That's the same-- Speaker 2: Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], yes. Speaker 1: Whose star was--? Speaker 2: Walt Frazier. Speaker 1: Who became a star with the--? Speaker 2: New York Knickerbockers [New York Knicks]. And where did the name came from? When we saw him play in the NIT [National Invitation Tournament], when the NIT was the most important postseason tournament in college basketball, we saw this team from Southern Illinois that had this great player who played like [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson. He could play guard, forward, and jump center, named Walt Frazier. And they had a nickname called the Salukis, the nickname was the Salukis. And we thought that was just so--he was a great player. And the Salukis--everybody else had the typical Celtics [Boston Celtics], 76ers [Philadelphia 76ers], Pistons [Detroit Pistons], basketball names. And we were the Salukis. And it was just, that just blew everybody away. They couldn't deal with it; they couldn't deal with it. Story_ID: 558760 Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about your decision to go to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], and some of the activities you were engaged in in the summertime, and that sort of thing. Now, did you ever go over to Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I did. I loved, and I used to--and one of my fondest memories of going to Harlem was with my mother [Martha Wilson Story]. And I would take her to the Apollo. And this was when I was in high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]. We would go to the Apollo, and we would go to 116th Street to the mosque [Mosque No. 7; Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, New York, New York] and eat. We would go there and eat, and we'd go to the Apollo. And I remember seeing back in the day [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy when he first came to New York [New York] at the Apollo Theater. But I was, I traveled. I was the type of kid when I was growing up in New York, I really enjoyed New York. And basketball was my way of experiencing New York City, because I played in all the different boroughs except Staten Island [New York]. I didn't play in Staten Island. But we played all over--Manhattan [New York], Brooklyn [New York], the Bronx [New York], and obviously in Queens [New York]. And the biggest thing during my childhood outside of school, was I worked on Broadway between 47th [Street] and 48th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was, you talking about an experience; that was a tremendous experience. Speaker 1: That is, that's Broadway, Broadway. Speaker 2: That's Broadway, Broadway. I worked right there at Duffy Square [New York, New York], 47th Street, where Broadway and 7th Avenue starts come together there at the Palace Theatre [New York, New York]. I worked at a place called Playland [New York, New York]. And Playland was an arcade where you would go play skee ball, Bingo Ringo, Pokerino and shoot the guns, and things like that. And it was, I worked there with my oldest brother [Tom Story, Jr.], God rest his soul. And for three years, every weekend, from my sophomore year up until I--my sophomore year in college. Yeah, I worked there on Broadway in the summer for like five years during the school year. Speaker 1: Now, that was before they cleaned up Broadway. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was tough. Those were tough days. Those were the tough days. It was not, it was a lot of glitter, but it wasn't a positive--it wasn't a family glitter. It was not the family oriented Broadway that it is today. It was the, I tell people it was the Dustin Hoffman cowboy movie-- Speaker 1: The 'Urban Cowboy' [sic. 'Midnight Cowboy'] yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Urban Cowboy,' stuff like that. It was that type of environment. And it was not a place where you would bring your family. The only time you brought your family around was to the Theatre District [New York, New York]. And you would come in for a theater and dinner at 7:30, go to the theater, have a dinner after or have dinner before the theater, and you would leave. But after that, you know, Broadway was a different Broadway. Story_ID: 558761 Speaker 1: Now, did you, just considering what you've done in later life--did you ever, did you have any relationship to any of the hospitals or anything? Did you check them out and how they were being operated? Or were you aware of Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], or any of the other-- Speaker 2: The irony of, well, it wasn't irony. It was a, the sad reality was because of my dad's sickness--diabetes runs in my family--that we were in and out of the healthcare system in New York City [New York, New York]. And once again, the contradiction in my mind was that we left Alabama, the segregated South, for a better quality of life. But two things, two institutions, which we felt that we as a family did not benefit from--that other people would be shocked to hear me say this--was the healthcare delivery system and the educational system. As a child, I believe, and even if I had stayed in the South, I think I would have gotten a better education, secondary education, than I received in the North. Even though I went to a great high school, I think that the high school in Anniston, Alabama would have probably been on par with the secondary high school that I attended in Queens [New York], John Bowne [John Bowne High School]. Without question, the healthcare delivery system in Alabama in my hometown was better than the healthcare system we were exposed to, or had access to. Now, without question, there were obviously better hospitals in New York City than in the entire state of Alabama. But we didn't have access to those hospitals. We had access to Queens General, which was at that time being incorporated into what is now the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation. It was the safety net for the public hospitals, the urban--the Harlem hospitals, et cetera, et cetera. The Kings County [Kings County Hospital Center, New York, New York] where--when my dad was hospitalized he was in a ward with eighteen to twenty-four other men, an open ward. You walked in and you looked. And I was just shocked. I remember as a--because now I'm in junior high school--in high school. Because my dad didn't come to New York until I was in high school. Because the first three years of my stay in New York, I was being raised by my siblings, my older siblings [Velma Story, Mary Story Ware and Tom Story, Jr.] and my [maternal] uncle [Otis Wilson]. My dad got to New York when I was a sophomore. And I remember walking into Queens General Hospital [Queens Hospital Center, Queens, New York] when he was hospitalized and looking at all these men, like twelve beds down one side and twelve beds down the other. It was like something out of the 1930s. I just couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: It's something you wouldn't see in Anniston? Speaker 2: No. In Anniston, when my dad was hospitalized, he was in a room with one other person, a semi-private room. And the nurses knew Mr. Story [Tom Story, Sr.], even though they were all white. They knew Mr. Story, and they called him Mr. Story. And the orderlies and the aides, who were all black, knew my daddy. So he--and I'm sure they treated my daddy just like they treated all the other patients. But he got that personal attention from somebody who was younger than my dad who knew Mr. Story. And we were now thrust into this environment with eighteen to twenty-four other patients, and there was no personal contact. There was no TLC [tender loving care], and that bothered me; that bothered me. And I saw my father, what I perceived as receiving inferior care. Story_ID: 558762 Speaker 1: My older siblings once--my sister and my brother took my dad [Tom Story, Sr.] to the emergency room. And he was a diabetic, so he had become hypoglycemic. And this, it was a similar situation with Walter Payton and his dad [Peter Payton]. And fortunately for us, our situation did not turn out the way Walter Payton's situation turned out, with his father dying in jail. My father was accused of being inebriated, taken out of the emergency room, and told to go with my sisters and brothers to go sit and wait his turn--like meaning go and do your own self-detox (laughter), and then we'll treat you. And that caused almost, as we would say, fisticuffs, between my older siblings and the nursing personnel at Queens General Hospital [Queens Hospital Center, Queens, New York]. Because my sisters and my brother were saying, "Our daddy is sick, he's a diabetic, he's not drunk. And we're not going to take him out of here until he's treated." And that's what my older sisters and brothers--they were just wonderful, they were just wonderful people. Because they sacrificed their young lives at twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two--because they bought the home that we eventually moved into in New York City [New York, New York] when the rest of my family joined us in New York City. And they were no more than twenty-four years old--twenty-four, twenty-three and twenty-one. So, they were the ones that provided the financial stability and the lateral support to me directly, and mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father. Because my mother was a housewife, and my dad was disabled. So they supported, three young people supported their mother and father and the youngest siblings. Velma Story, Tom Edward Story [Tom Story, Jr.], and Mary Alice Story [Mary Story Ware], those three people. And I will never, ever forget what they did. They sacrificed their lives. And my two, my older brother's dead and my older sister's dead. But they worked, they worked themselves. Literally, they worked very, very, hard. Speaker 2: That's quite a story. Speaker 1: Yeah. And I started working with my oldest brother. He got me my first job, on Broadway. I started working with him, and that was great. Story_ID: 558763 Speaker 1: High school graduation is 1970. And you graduate [from John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York], and you're on your way to Cornell [Cornell University]. Speaker 2: On my way to Cornell, Big Red (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ithaca, New York, okay. Now, had you been on campus previously? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did my, you know, visits. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well, what was it like entering as a freshman? Speaker 2: Oh, I was just, it was, I was so excited. I was excited for my family that I was going off to college. I was excited for myself that I was headed off to college, and it was just euphoria. I was just so excited, I was enthused, I was happy, I was proud that I'd gotten into college. I didn't know if--even though I was a good student, I didn't know if I was going to make it, because I didn't have any financial resources. And I was hoping that I would quote, win a basketball scholarship, you know. So, I was just excited, I was just thrilled. Speaker 1: Did your family drive you up? Speaker 2: I, I drove (laughter)--no, that was another thing. Remember, I come from a large family. We never had a car in my family, never had a car, even once we arrived in New York City [New York, New York]. There were twelve of us, no car. So, you know how I got to Ithaca? The Greyhound bus. I had a cab ride, though. I got a cab ride to the subway. I was able to ride a cab to the subway. My mother [Martha Wilson Story] and my sisters and brothers, they were all standing out on the porch waving bye. And I was in the cab smiling on my way. I took the cab to the subway, got the on the train with my suitcases, got on the E train, rode it all the way to 42nd Street to the Greyhound bus station, and caught that stray dog. And that was my--you know, I tell my kids, you know, they're like--when I took my daughter to school, you know, and the cars and all that--flying up. I had two suitcases. I rode in the cab to the subway, got on the subway into Manhattan [New York], bought my bus ticket by myself. You know, nobody, nobody went to Manhattan with me, you know. (Laughter) I just, I was grown (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: That was it; that was it. Story_ID: 558764 Speaker 1: All right. Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], you're a freshman. And so who were some of, were there any special teachers or mentors at Cornell? Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, that was just the opposite. It was, if anything, I felt- I was made to feel, and not just me, but some of my cohorts will tell you the same thing today. We were made to feel like we were not welcome. Speaker 1: In what sense? I mean what--? Speaker 2: Well, I was part of the largest class of African American students to ever matriculate at Cornell University. And once again, this was during the red, black and green days. And that was, it was highly politicized; it was public knowledge. Obviously, the faculty at Cornell University were aware institutionally there had been a decision--a decision had been made to enroll a large number of African American students. So, the faculty was conscious of the decision that the university had made. And I think some of them resented the fact that we were on campus, and actually told some of my classmates the same. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that wasn't very, that didn't make you feel very good. That wasn't a warm spot, you know, in your heart. But I enjoyed Cornell as an institute of higher learning. I just loved being there. And I would even sit in during my tenure on classes that I weren't taking officially, because it was so interesting, I mean, to be there with some of the most outstanding minds in the world. Speaker 1: For instance, what kind of classes would you sit in on? Speaker 2: Well, like, there were some Ph.D. students who were doing research on the moon dust that had--you know, we had gone to the moon and we were back. And I had met some of the Ph.D. candidates because I worked in a delicatessen and I'd become friends--and you know, just some of the research these guys were involved in around moon dust. And the same thing like in architect. Because the school of architect- [Cornell University College of Architecture, Art and Planning, Ithaca, New York], at that time they weren't using computers. Everything was models, you know, you had to cut all your models and glue them together. And some of the structures, they would put together, you know, by hand and cardboard. And then in biology, in biogenetics, I mean, it was raw. You know, you would walk into a classroom and the people would--in genetics--the fruit flies, and doing all kinds of studies and counting. I enjoyed that, I enjoyed that, just to be in that environment, and some of the lectures. Speaker 1: Now, what was your major? Speaker 2: My major was science education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I took, I had a concentration in physical sciences. Because as I said earlier, I was interested in pre-med. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was, I spent a lot of time, in actuality, on the ag- agriculture school [Cornell University College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Ithaca, New York], as opposed to the arts college. Speaker 1: Okay. What was going on in ag school? Speaker 2: Well, I just took more of the physical sciences--biology, biogenetics, anatomy. And the science education program was in the agriculture school. Speaker 1: Okay. Because, you know, when you mentioned the moon dust, this is 1970, a year after men walked on the moon for the first time. Speaker 2: Yeah, this was back in 1974 or '73 [1973], when these guys--evidently Cornell University had been privileged, identified as one of the institutions that would receive some of the moon dust samples to do all these experiments on. And it was just a fascinating place. Like, we were one of the first institutions, I believe, in the country that had the cyclotron, you know, where they were bombarding neutrons and electrons, and all this, whatever they were doing from a physics--and that, at that time, you know, they couldn't--the cyclotrons were underground, and they would run like a quarter of a mile, and things like that. They don't--obviously the technology has advanced over the last forty years. But they built that underground at Cornell University. So, you know, you want--when you heard about things like that, you know, you just--for me, you know, the curiosity--I just naturally gravitated toward that. Story_ID: 558765 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in the sciences [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: I, I did not. I had one teacher who I was--he was the chairman of the biology department. But he wasn't like my favorite teacher, because he didn't teach. In actuality, he was on disability. But he was a great guy. He was the youngest--he was a genius they say. And he, he wrote the textbooks that we used. And he would do, and what he did do during our lab once, he came in and he explained to us why he wasn't teaching; he had had a heart attack. And his name was Keeton, Robert Keeton [sic. William T. Keeton]. And he was a young biology professor who had had a heart attack, and they had put a pacemaker in his chest. And I'll never forget. He came to the lab, my lab, and he took off his shirt, and he let us touch the pacemaker that was keeping him alive. So, he was--and the fact that he was like thirty-four or thirty-six years old and he was a genius, you know, we felt a little closeness, you know, to him. And it sort of stimulated you in that sense that, wow, you know, that his lectures--when he did lecture he made them so real. Because see the age difference, the (unclear) was what, maybe fourteen years, sixteen years. So, he was a great instructor. Story_ID: 558766 Speaker 1: I think we were talking off camera about the freshmen orientation where they had you look left and right, and tell you that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --somebody next to you is not going to be there your next year, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. That was probably the most disturbing thing that happened during my initial days at Cornell. There was, because it was the first week of school. And during orientation, we were sitting in Goldwin Smith Hall [Ithaca, New York]. And it was a Sunday afternoon, and the people that I had, that I now consider my friends, lifetime friends--I was sitting with some people. And the associate dean and the other folks there representing the arts college [Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences, Ithaca, New York]--during the orientation the statements were made that the person sitting to your left or to your right would not get a degree from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. And we were all stunned. Because I mean, we were here four or five days. (Laughter) And we'd made this conscious decision to attend this great university. And this person is standing in front of us saying that the person to your left or the person to your right will never get a degree from Cornell University. And I wanted to say, "But that's why I came." You know, I wanted to raise my hand and say, "Not me." But these are my partners, so I'm sure they feel the same way. And, but that was not as disturbing as the subsequent comments that they made about the fact that Cornell University had the highest suicidal rate amongst institutions of higher learning in America, counting all kinds of schools--colleges, preparatory schools, training schools, military, per capita--however you want to characterize it--students at Cornell killed themselves at a higher rate per capita than any other institution of learning in America. And they made that point. It wasn't something that they just glossed over; they made that point. And we had heard about the term, gorging out because the upperclassmen had talked about, you know, suicides, death, et cetera, et cetera. Because when you left the main campus of Cornell, you would have to cross over the gorge. So, you know, you would walk past, but you didn't think of it. But they, it made such an impression. It was frightening. It really--you know, but it was frightening in the sense that somebody would take the time during a student orientation to share that with such depth, such emphasis. Story_ID: 558767 Speaker 1: Now, was there a black student--well, I know it was. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A black student organization? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you participate in that? Speaker 2: I, I did. You know, I was a freshman. I wasn't that active in the undergrad, I really wasn't. But I was very active in the, in some of my coursework at the black--what we called the Africana Study and Research Center [sic. Africana Studies and Research Center] that Dr. James [James Turner] and Janice Turner were the directors of, the Africana Research Center. And I took several classes there. I had the opportunity--with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, Amiri Baraka, LeRoi Jones. So we had the, you know, you had the exposure, you know, to some great political figures at that time, you know, that came through, you know. That's one of the things that Dr. Turner was able to do. His contemporaries, his peers, he was able to bring those people in as guest lecturers. And because the center wasn't that big, you know, you'd be there with a hundred students, and you're standing there, you know, talking face to face with Nikki Giovanni and carrying on conversations with people like Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]. He would come in from Chicago [Illinois], because he had that relationship with the Chicago intelligentsia. And it was great, it was a great experience in that sense. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we, while we weren't completely, we didn't feel welcome by the status quo, the Africana Study and Research Center was the synergy. You know, that's where we sort of gravitated to in the evenings, not all the time. But you know, that was sort of your resting place, if you will. You know, we were definitely integrated throughout all the colleges at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. But on Friday evening around two o'clock, you know, you would find--if you were looking for somebody, you know, you'd find them over there at the Africana Center. Story_ID: 558768 Speaker 1: Now what about your housing situation [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Did you, was the housing integrated, or did you have all black roommates, or--? Speaker 2: My freshman year I roomed with one of the basketball players who was from Holland, Michigan, Lynn Loncki, he was a Dutchman. And he was a great roommate; we were great friends in our freshman year. He was 6'8", blond, and had never been to New York City [New York, New York]. So, during Thanksgiving break, he visited with me and my family in New York. So, you know, we went to Brooklyn [New York], we went to Harlem [New York, New York]. And you'd see this big man walking down the streets in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and he's looking over everybody, and everybody's looking up at him. So, it was a great experience for him. It was a very positive one, I think. And then he reciprocated, because during spring break I went to Holland, Michigan to the tulip festival [Tulip Time Festival]. And while I was not as vertical as Len, I got just as much attention at the tulip festival as he did. And I got, my wooden shoes were made for me. And he was a great roommate, he was a great guy, and we enjoyed our freshman year together. And then I sort of, the rest of the time I stayed off campus, my sophomore and junior and senior year, with my teammates and basically other basketball players. Story_ID: 558769 Speaker 1: There's a story about the basketball team that we cannot fail to tell. Now, there was a strike. You all--the black basketball players went on a strike and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we boycotted the-- Speaker 1: Boycotted the--now what happened, what happened? Speaker 2: When I was a sophomore, I was part of a great team. I thought we had a great team. And out of the fifteen players, I believe eight were probably black. And there were, out of those eight there were five individuals of African ancestry who were capable of starting, excuse me. The first game, the coach started four of the eight blacks that weekend. And subsequently what happened, was that he got so many telephone calls from the alumni complaining about the fact that he had started four black basketball players at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], that the pressure continued to mount over the week on him. We learned that his job, his job was placed at risk, and that if he ever put four blacks, if he ever started four blacks again, he would probably lose his job. That's what we heard. And once we found that out, we sort of, we started to watch his rotation, substitution pattern, and even the number of blacks he started. He never started four blacks again. And sort of, the problem came to a head when he started a sophomore, who was my roommate, Lynn Loncki, ahead of the black senior, Tom Sparks [Thomas Sparks]. And we knew, and Lynn knew, that he was not a better ballplayer at that time than Tom Sparks. Tom was a senior, and he was the leader of not only the black ballplayers, he was the leader of the team, he was the captain. How do you sit your captain down who's a senior, and start a sophomore who's still trying to coordinate his hands and his feet? So, he did that because he could start three blacks and still win, because Tom was not the best of the four blacks that he started. And we all knew that. Tom was a senior, and deserved to start. He was good enough to start, but he was not better than the other three blacks. One was, two were juniors and one was a sophomore. And that--once we found that out, we obviously confronted our coach, Jerry Lace. And Coach Lace was a very humble man, and he found himself in a very, very precarious situation, and we realized that. And he, he said in no uncertain terms that he was not in control of this team anymore. Now he coached the rest of the year, but he, it was the chairman, it was the athletic director, and the alumni who were actually calling the shots. And they never did start four blacks during my tenure, which was short lived (laughter), ever again at Cornell. And we walked out, and we, we wanted to support our teammates, the white teammates. And we would travel to games that were close by. And one in particular was to Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York]. And we showed up to support, and people wanted to know, "Well if you want to support your team, why don't you dress out?" We said, "Well, we couldn't do that, because that was a contradiction. Because here was a coach saying that he couldn't support starting black players at Cornell." And we said, "Well, if he couldn't support all of his players," meaning blacks and whites equally, "we couldn't go out there and represent and support Cornell. Why should we do that?" You know, once again, we're trying to break these bonds, you know, the slavery mentality--that we need to serve the master while the master is exploiting us as a people. And so, we refused to do it; we refused to do it. Story_ID: 558770 Speaker 1: What was the upshot of that? Did you--were you all suspended or reprimanded, or-- Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: --did the team bend, or what-- Speaker 2: It was, we weren't suspended per se, because we walked away. We boycotted. So they didn't quote, kick us off the team. But they didn't try to keep us. They talked to Tom Sparks [Thomas Sparks] and a couple of other older black players, and tried to convince them to come back as individuals. They didn't want, in particular, the sophomores, that I was a part of. The three or four sophomores; they didn't care if we came back. But we were the future, because we were the ones that they had heavily recruited, and who had a great--we were like twenty-four and two as freshmen. So, we were the core. They didn't care about us. They tried to convince the upperclassmen who were seniors and juniors to come back, and let those rabble rousers, those radicals, those leftists, you know--because they had been--remember, what they were saying to them is, "You've been here at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] for two or three years. These guys have only been here one year. Haven't we always been good to you?" You know, Tom was a senior. J.C., John Coles, was a junior. They'd been on campus for two, three years. We had only been there one year. And they, you know, they tried to label us, you know, just as that, as deviants, you know. But the older, the older team members supported us. They would not go back on to the team unless we all came back. But John Coles came back, because he had broken his leg. And his excuse was that I needed to get back in shape, which he did, because he had broken his leg. And he hadn't been a part of the team during the fall. And he came back in January, and he played and he worked through. We returned at the end of my sophomore year for probably two games, two weekends or two games. I maybe played four games at the end, something like that, just during the end of the season. We had some people to come in from outside the community. A former All-American, black All-American, came in and he spoke to us. Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: Johnson [sic.], Mr. Johnson. He was the ambassador, I believe, to Sweden during the Vietnam War, a very distinguished black man. And with all due respect, he was an All-American at Cornell, and he spoke to us. We were very respectful, we were very grateful for his time. I mean, here was a U.S. ambassador, a black All-American at Cornell in the 1930s, and he wasn't even allowed to live on campus. So, he told us his I story. So, what he was saying to us is, "Guys, if you think you have it bad now, my experience forty years ago, forty years ago on this campus, you know, was just, it was second class. I mean, I knew that I was a student, but I was a second class student at Cornell. I accepted it because there was something greater about this experience at Cornell than me." And his name was Holland, Mr. Brud Holland [Jerome H. Holland]. That's what they called him, Brud, Brud Holland. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, they brought Mr. Holland and Mr. Johnson. They were graduates. But like I said, when you have an ambassador like Mr. Holland, Brud Holland, who was an All-American. But we respectfully shared with him that while we appreciated his time, we could not see ourselves going back, being a part of a team that had openly, blatantly told everybody else that they didn't care if we did come back. Story_ID: 558771 Speaker 1: What you told me earlier is that your scholarship didn't depend on you playing basketball, the way Co- Cornell worked it, right? Speaker 2: Ivy League, Ivy League institutions did not award what we talk about today, in terms of athletic scholarships. When you receive, or when we received, when I received my scholarship at Cornell, you know, it had, it was not predicated on whether I was going to bounce a ball my freshman year, sophomore year, junior year, or senior year. It was a scholarship, it was a contract between Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and myself. Speaker 1: So, as long as you maintained your academic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Academic, that's right. The only condition, you know, the only condition was that I would have to be academically eligible and a good citizen, you know. So, as long as I did those things, and if I performed in the classroom and I conducted myself like the average student in terms of social, moral standings, I was fine, I was fine. So, my scholarship was never at risk. But it was, it was problematic for some of my other classmates, because they really wanted to play basketball; they were really into it. And so, they transferred, they left. And I felt that it was more important to get a degree from Cornell University than to transfer somewhere else to participate, you know, in a sporting activity. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you never played ball again on the team? Speaker 2: I did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After my sophomore year, I did not. Speaker 1: And when you graduated, what was your academic status? Of course, you graduated but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you have good grades? Speaker 2: I had good grades, I had good grades. And I think that one of the things that probably disturbed people was that my best friend, who's from Hough, in Cleveland [Ohio]--his name is Walter Tyree. And he was a government major. And he did not, we did not live together our sophomore year. He lived in another dorm, and I lived off campus. His advisor told him to watch out for me, meaning don't associate yourself with that type of student. And she didn't know that we were best friends. And obviously, the brother came back and told me. He was like, "Man, you know, they're like, they got a dot by you guys' name." Now he played football. And they had some issues with the football team, but nothing to the degree or the magnitude that they had with the basketball players. And she advised him, in no uncertain terms, not to be associated with Otis Story [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], Brian Wright, because those guys are not going to ever get a degree from Cornell University. That's what she was saying, whether it was a direct quote or implied. It infuriated me. It literally angered me. Because here I was nineteen or twenty years, and I was so excited about coming to Cornell and getting a degree. And I was interested in pre-med and the opportunity to learn. And to know that somebody had my name on a list with a dot beside it was--I was humiliated, I was angry, and I got a little scared. Because, you know, I didn't know what they were going to do. Because to go back home to my mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father [Tom Story, Sr.], and particularly my older sisters [Velma Story and Mary Story Ware], who had sacrificed, and my older brother [Tom Story, Jr.] who had sacrificed so much for me to get a college education, that I had compromised that in my mind, and I know it would be twisted in such a way that I compromised this great educational opportunity because of a--basketball. I knew that that wouldn't sit well. My sisters and brothers loved me. They would have supported me. They probably would have helped me get into college somewhere else or done something, but I didn't want to put that out there. I didn't want to put that pressure, or to harm my sisters. Because my oldest sister was like my mother, she raised me. Because I left Alabama when I was in the seventh grade. And all through high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York], if there was--she was the one that signed my report card. Speaker 1: Okay, so it must have been a relief when you graduated? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was. It was a relief for me, but it wasn't anything that I was very proud of. Because I did not even attend the graduation ceremony. I refused to go. Story_ID: 558772 Speaker 1: Okay, we were just talking off camera. Your father [Tom Story, Sr.] passed in '74 [1974] too? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And my dad never, he never had a chance to visit the campus. My father never had a chance to see me play basketball, whether it was in the park, high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York], or at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] in person. One of the good things about my experience and playing basketball at Cornell was that my dad was able to see me play on TV. The games were televised, so he did see me play before he passed in April of 1974. And, but I loved Ithaca [New York], and I loved Cornell. It was just this institution that was trying to push us (laughter) literally over the cliff, or into the gorge, and that, I resented. And it was more personal, because other black students received a tremendous amount of quote, lateral support from the faculty and other parts of the institution. It's just that when we made that decision to boycott those basketball games in my sophomore year that we were put at risk, we were put at risk. Story_ID: 558773 Speaker 1: Okay, so after graduation [from Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] now, what were your plans? Did you plan to--well, you said earlier you planned to become a doctor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, my interest was in medicine. I was interested in being an endocrinologist because of the diabetes. My father [Tom Story, Sr.] was, all of my life, you know, he was disabled. And it was something that was a perplexing disease for me as a child when I was in Alabama--as an eight year old child, to hear somebody had sugar. And I couldn't understand how something as sweet as sugar could be so debilitating. Because that was a big thing then in Alabama, because we'd get some sugar and put it in lemonade and--and my dad suffered. He looked normal the first ten years when he was affected by the disease. It was in the last five years of his life when he started--his sight was affected, his mobility was affected. And then the last nine months of his life his foot was amputated and his leg was amputated, and he passed. So, my dad, the last fifteen years of his life, he suffered. And I wanted to go to school to become a doctor, because I wanted to be able to do research, R and D [research and development], to help figure out how do you deal with this twelve carbon chain of sugar? You know, how do you break this thing up? How do you figure out--how do you get one of these glucose--one's ability to metabolize, you know, glucose so that, you know, you had this engine, you know, that supports one's body. And I was just, literally, it was a way of honoring my father and a service to mankind. I always was committed to doing something in the service to mankind. My mother [Martha Wilson Story] wanted me to be a preacher. You know, I wanted to be a doctor, and I came--and ultimately I decided upon hospital administration. I became a healthcare executive, which is all of that. You know, as a healthcare professional, I'm a part of the healing team. Part of what I do, in terms of human relationships with my colleagues that I work with inside of hospitals and health systems, is to minister. And I'm always committed to the community in which the hospital I work in is located. So, I'm a service to the community, a service to my colleagues, my fellow colleagues, and to the patients and the families we serve. So I think I sort of satisfied, to some degree, all of my aspirations as a young teenager, you know, in terms of what my mother wanted me to do, what I wanted to do, and what I ultimately have done over the last twenty-five years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in healthcare. Story_ID: 558774 Speaker 1: Now, you applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for medical school, right? Is that is (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I just applied to the University of Chicago back in, as we say, back in the day. When I was a junior, some people had suggested that, you know, you start applying to grad school early--some of the older students, when I was an undergrad at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. And so I said, well, since there's a limited number of seats, if I can get ahead of the line, then I should take their advice. And I started applying to grad school. And the University of Chicago had an early acceptance program, and I decided that this would be one of the places that I would apply to. So, I applied to Cornell--I applied to the University of Chicago for early admission, and I got accepted. But I wasn't interested in attending the University of Chicago, because I was still focused on my studies in terms of pre-med. Speaker 1: Now, when you were admitted, what school were you admitted to? For grad school, right? Speaker 2: At the University of Chicago, I was admitted to the school of education. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right. Okay, but, so you decided to defer that admittance in order to study for medical school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. I was married at the time, and I was, you know, as an older student and a more mature student, I started to focus more on my professional post-graduate and post-undergraduate career. And studying for the MCATs, taking additional courses, and waiting for that opportunity for that door to swing open at some medical school. Story_ID: 558775 Speaker 1: Tell us how you met your wife, before we skip over that. So, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well I, my wife [Story's second wife], Ava Denise McNair [Ava McNair Story], was about five minutes from here, at the airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. She was on a business trip, and I was on an interview. I was working at the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] at the time, and I came over to Atlanta [Georgia] to interview for a job at Emory University. And she was on a business trip. She worked for Liberty Mutual Insurance [Liberty Mutual Insurance Company], and she was attending a conference. And we rode on the same van to Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia] from the airport. And conversation ensued, and people were saying, "Well, where are you from?" And I said, "Well, I'm from Birmingham, Alabama." And she mentioned the fact that her uncle and her aunts, they lived in Birmingham. And I said something, a little tongue in cheek. I turned around, and I said, "Well, your uncle must know me, because I'm a hospital administrator at UAB." And she said, "Oh, well, maybe he does, because he's only the county commissioner in Jefferson County [Alabama]." And then I turned 180 degrees and started to apologize profusely, because I knew who her uncle was, Commissioner McNair, Chris McNair. And I knew the history of the McNair family, and I was really embarrassed that I had popped off like that and said that, "Well, your uncle must know me." And so, you know, she gave me a chance to eat crow. And once we got out the van, I again apologized, hoping that she would not call her uncle, who was the commissioner and say that, "You know, I met this guy who's a young hospital administrator, you know, and he was really arrogant, you know." (Laughter) So, I wanted to buy her, I wanted to buy her, you know, dinner to try to make up for my remarks. And she refused, because she was there with all her colleagues on a business meeting. And she said, "No, I have other plans, but thank you very much." And then I said, "Well, I really would like to, you know, see you again, and just buy you a drink or something like that." She said, "I don't drink." So, I had no way--you know, so I couldn't reach out and really try to--I was trying to eat this piece of pie, this humble pie. You know, I was trying to get my foot out of my mouth. And I asked her, "Well, maybe I can join you all, then?" She said, "Well, you can. We're going to be eating at such and such, and if you want to stop by and join our party, I'm sure my business associates wouldn't mind." So, I had an earlier meeting, and they were there at the restaurant. And so, I pulled up a chair and I just sat there. And I tried to talk to her, and she wasn't really that interested. (Laughter) But then she, on a visit to Birmingham, we had exchanged telephone numbers, so she called me. And so, we started talking when she visited with her aunts and uncles in Birmingham. And she lived in Louisville [Kentucky] and I lived in Birmingham. So we started a long term, a long distance, if you will, long distance, but it was long term also. It was a year and a half, because she lived in Louisville. But we had this long term, long distance relationship. I'd write and call, and then we started dating, you know, after about six months, three months. Story_ID: 558776 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I thought you--so, you were married at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: Yes, that was my first wife. Speaker 1: All right, now, that's the one I was talking about, that one, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I don't want to, you know, mess up this story. It is probably the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --better of the two stories, I guess. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. But you did meet someone at Cornell and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --got married, okay. Speaker 2: But my wife [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story], her family had such a rich history in the Civil Rights Movement. Even though it was tragic, it's still a very, very rich and important history, as well as it is difficult at times today. But it was something that, a tremendous sacrifice that her family made. And one of the things just as a, one of the trivial things--Denise McNair, who was the youngest of the four little girls who were killed in the bombing in Birmingham [Alabama]--Denise and I were born on the same day, the same year--my wife's first cousin, who she's named after. So, my uncle and aunt through marriage would call me, which was often difficult for me; initially, it was difficult for me. Because they would call me and wish me a happy birthday, knowing that their child, Denise, was, you know, she was killed, murdered. And every birthday that I celebrated, Denise should have been celebrating hers also. So it was, it's sort of a twist at times, twisted irony, you know. Because Uncle Chris [Chris McNair] and Aunt Maxine [Maxine Pippen McNair], when we first got married, would call me. And I didn't know what to say. And sometimes I would, I would just say, "Thank you, I appreciate it." And I would hesitate to bring up Denise, because I didn't know her, and I didn't know what to say. And Aunt Maxine sometimes would say, "Well, you know, you and Denise would be thirty-two or forty-two years old today." Or you know, "You and Denise would be forty-five." "Denise would be fifty. And isn't that something how you and Denise were born on the same day, and you were born in Anniston, Alabama and Denise was born in Birmingham." And we would have, you know, just maybe a short conversation. But it was, it was always difficult for me to talk about, you know, my birthday with Auntie Maxine and Uncle Chris. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my wife has never talked about her namesake, you know. And we talk about it, you know, around those special days, but we don't--our children [Jasmyn Story, Avana Story and Prince James Story] have been to the church. You know, we go to the church and we go to the civil rights museum [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] which is right across the street, you know, from the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama]. And we, we try to keep them aware. And they're older now, because they're teenagers. So, they're well aware that Denise and their dad, you know, share the same birthday. And we keep her, you know, close to our hearts, Denise McNair. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And we try to celebrate her on November 17th, also. Story_ID: 558777 Speaker 1: Now, okay, now, you're at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] studying for the MCATs, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is 1975, I guess? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976]. Speaker 1: And some friends of yours, some older guys there, who we were talking about earlier, Herb Parker [Herbert Parker] and-- Speaker 2: Henry English. Speaker 1: --Henry English-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Jim Garrett [James Garrett]. Speaker 1: --persuaded you to go on to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] (Laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. They were, I was sitting--I was working, not physically sitting. But I remember I was sitting one evening socializing with the guys. Jim Garrett, Herb Parker, and Hasbrouck [ph.] was there. And I had simply offered to help them move their personal belongings back to Chicago [Illinois]. Because I could drive a truck, and that way they could drive their individual cars and I would drive the truck. And in the midst of that conversation, I shared with them that I'd been accepted to the University of Chicago. And they all looked at me and said, "You have been accepted, or you were accepted to the University of Chicago last year? And you've been here in Ithaca [New York] just working, doing nothing, per se?" And I told them, I said, "Well, you know, I'm trying to get, I want to go to med school. You know, I'm studying for the MCAT. I'm doing something." They said, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], if you get a letter of acceptance from the University of Chicago in anything, you go. You go, you go. You don't, you do not hesitate. You know, you go to the University of Chicago." (Laughter) And I said, "Well, you know," I pushed back. And so the long and short of this--when I drove them to Chicago, Henry English insisted, Herb Parker insisted, Jim Garrett, they all insisted upon me going over the college, the University of Chicago college of education, and to speak with the dean about my acceptance. And I spoke to the dean. I introduced myself, and he gladly sat down and talked to me. And he explained to me that once I received the letter of acceptance to the University of Chicago, that it was good for seven years. And so, if I was still interested in attending the University of Chicago then I should just come back and make application, and I could start in the fall of '76 [1976], the fall quarter. And I was like "Oh, wow," I said, "that's great. I'll do that." I said, "I want to do that." So I told the dean verbally that I was going to initiate the paperwork and make application to start classes, to select my classes for the fall. And this was in the summertime. And there was only one little glitch. There was one little glitch. The scholarship that they had offered me did not carry--was--for seven years. The scholarship that they had offered me to attend the University of Chicago was predicated on my enrollment date. And so, because I did not enroll last year, that scholarship moved to the next acceptable student. But I was still eligible to enroll at the University of Chicago. So what I did, I spoke to Henry, Herb, and the other brothers about what I'd learned--the good news and the bad news. The good news was I still could enroll at the University of Chicago. The bad news was the scholarship that they had offered me, the academic scholarship that they had offered me, was no longer available. They still insisted upon me coming back in the fall and going to the University of Chicago. They told me that you could work, which I knew. You could work a steady job, and that they would help me with housing. So, I stayed initially with Henry English and his family for about a month. I stayed with my dear friends, Betty [ph.] and Herb Parker for about three months. And then I, so I went from Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], Rainbow Beach [Chicago, Illinois], and then to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] with Jim Garrett. So, I stayed probably six months with Jim Garrett. Story_ID: 558778 Speaker 1: That's how I got through graduate school at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], working for Dr. Larry Hawkins [HistoryMaker Larry Hawkins], who ran the program, special office- Office of Special Programs at the University of Chicago. Speaker 2: And Blue Gargoyle [Blue Gargoyle Youth Service Center, Chicago, Illinois], I think it is, was part of what he was doing. Speaker 1: Yeah, he worked at, he--students from Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --where Cazzie Russell grew up. I had taught school, and I taught seventh and eighth graders math, from Altgeld Gardens, all the way out on 125th Street. And Coach Hawkins, as everybody called him, affectionately, Coach, hired me as an instructor in the Office of Special Programs. So, I worked part-time for the coach, and that's how I paid for my food. Because the brothers provided my housing. And I love them, and I need to tell them. I'm telling them right now how much I love them for what they did for me during those days. Speaker 2: Now, what about your tuition? How was that-- Speaker 1: I had to take out loans. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had to take out student loans. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I paid all those off on my own, throughout my career. But the people at the University of Chicago were very supportive in terms of understanding that I had no money to pay for any fees, et cetera, et cetera. And so, they, I didn't pay tuition until probably the second quarter, when I was able to get some loans. So, I literally walked through the doors the first quarter at the University of Chicago owing them admission fees, tuition for the first quarter, and any other applicable fees. But they allowed me to attend classes. Speaker 2: And your major was education? Speaker 1: Science education. Speaker 2: Science education, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And it wasn't until I was able to obtain the loans during the second quarter that I was able to start actually paying my tuition at the University of Chicago. But they didn't say wait 'til the second quarter. You know, they knew that I had the applications and the loans in process, which I don't think would happen today. I don't know if people would be that understanding, you know. I could have been off by maybe a month or two, but I know that I didn't have any money at all to pay for anything. Story_ID: 558779 Speaker 1: So, considering your friends and what was going on in Chicago [Illinois] in those days, did you take advantage of some of the cultural and political life in Chicago? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean being around Henry English, Herb Parker and Jim Garrett [James Garrett], I was--I didn't get heavily involved in any of the ward politics, but I was there with them. And I would attend functions, et cetera, et cetera. And that was good, because it was a good break for me. Because being a graduate student at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was the most challenging, rewarding, intellectual experience of my life. I mean, I loved going to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] as an undergraduate. I enjoyed the campus, which is one of the most beautiful campuses in the world as far as I'm concerned. But the educational experience of being at the University of Chicago--I was there in the fall when they had two Nobel Prize winners, Milton Friedman, Saul Bellow. I mean, to be there in an environment where you could sit in the cafeteria right next to Milton Friedman, walk past the Quadrangle [Main Quadrangle], Saul Bellow. I mean, and it was just unbelievable. And I was challenged intellectually by that, because I was one of the youngest students in the educational department. I had classmates, my classmates at the University of Chicago were from Taiwan, Chile, Canada, South Korea. Obviously, there was a political connection between South Korea, Taiwan, Chile because Allende [Salvador Allende] had been killed, and the Rockefeller institutions, that industrial complex, was now back in charge. And the Rockefeller and the University of Chicago connection was evident. And they talked about that. They talked about the geopolitics in terms of South Korea, Taiwan, and Chile, and the American government. It was no secret; it was no secret that that relationship between the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration and the Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] administration--even when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president. It was quite evident, it was quite evident. And the men and women who were in my tutorial group were thirty-eight, forty years old, and I was a typical twenty-five year old graduate student. And I was just in awe that these folks had these political connections with the University of Chicago and their country. Because they were going back to take over responsible positions in South Korea, Taiwan, and in Chile. Story_ID: 558780 Speaker 1: So, when you, when you finished at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in grad school, what was your plan? Speaker 2: Well, my plan was I wanted to, I was in a doctorial program. But I was married to my first wife at the time, and she was from Ithaca, New York. And that was a challenge, because her mother--her family did not advise us, her in particular, to move to Chicago [Illinois]. They didn't think that Chicago was a place, a quote, a safe place for a family in 1977, '76 [1976], et cetera, et cetera. So, in order to try to keep my marriage intact, I opted out of the doctoral program, accepted the master's [degree], and then I matriculated at the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama], in hospital and health administration in order to keep my marriage together. Speaker 1: Why UAB? Speaker 2: UAB was the, as I sourced the graduate programs in hospital health administration, it was the only program that I discovered that had a defined residency training program that was required, that required a year of study. And I figured that I needed to have--if I wanted to be a hospital administrator when I grew up, I needed to be in a training program. I did not want to go to a graduate program where I would study for two years at a didactic level and then go out and try to find a job. I felt that it would be to my advantage to attend an institution like the University of Alabama, that had this highly structured residency requirement that was for one year, twelve months. And in order to get your degree, you had to complete the residency training program. And I thought, "Wow, that's it for me. It's back home." I thought it was, I perceived it as divine intervention. I wanted to play for the University of Alabama when I was a kid. And that didn't happen, but now here I am coming back home at last to attend the University of Alabama graduate program in hospital and health administration. Speaker 1: So, what year is this? Is this right after the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the decision, it was the decision. It made the decision all right to leave the University of Chicago, because I had been accepted to the University of Alabama (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, this would be 1978? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the summer of '77 [1977]. So I applied because my family, obviously, my family was important to me. And so, I had made arrangements to attend the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right, so this is, okay, '77 [1977]. So, did you graduate in '78 [1978] with this other degree? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Well, that's when the graduation was-- Speaker 2: At the University of Chicago, June of '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Right, okay. But UAB, that's-- Speaker 2: UAB was in '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one, okay [1981]. Speaker 2: I actually received my degree in 1981 from the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Story_ID: 558781 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you did a residency at--for the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama], a degree in health admi- hospital administration in New Orleans [Louisiana] at, is it (pronunciation) Ochsner? Speaker 2: Ochsner. Speaker 1: Ochsner (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) O-X, it's pronounced Ochsner. It's spelled, O-C-H-S-N-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: But it's pronounced Ochsner. Speaker 1: Ochsner Foundation Hospital [Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about that now. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I was, you know, there are moments when you're very proud of your accomplishments. I was in a class at the University of Alabama at Birmingham with--made up of twenty-two students. The residency training program is sort of like a competition. You have to apply to the residency programs. And Ochsner was the most, it was a plum residency training program. Twenty-one of the twenty-two students in my class applied to Ochsner, and I was accepted to do my residency, along with three of my classmates at Ochsner. So, that was a great achievement. And many of my classmates didn't think I had a chance at all, because Ochsner was a lily white, prestigious, highly--high profile academic health science center in New Orleans. They had never had a black residency--resident. And I don't think that they had, I know they didn't have any blacks in management positions. So, they just, my classmates knew that, you know, there was no way they were going to accept me. And I had a great mentor, David R. Page [sic.], who took a big chance, once again, I think to some degree he put his job at risk, unlike the coach I had at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] who was afraid to take a stand. Mr. Pitts, P-I-T-T-S, David R. Pitts, recruited me, and he told me, I'll never forget. One day he told me--he called me into his office because he had got some pushback from the faculty. And he wanted me to know that he didn't want me to feel like I was there alone in this white establishment. That I was--that he brought me there, and he was going to support me, and that he was going to--he wanted me to do one thing for him, "Be the student that I know that you're capable of being. Learn all you can. Take advantage of this great institution, don't let it take advantage of you. Let me fight your battles." He said, "I'm not asking you to compromise your manhood. I'm not asking you to do that, but let me fight your battles. So, if somebody says something to you that's out of line, you handle it appropriately, knowing that I will support you." And then he told me, "I want to know, you know, who are the doctors? What doctor, what department?" And he said, "That's not important, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]." He told me, "That's not important." He said, "You conduct yourself at this level," (gesture). "It's not important. You know who the--you've been here," because I'd been there for a month. He said, "You've met the faculty. You've seen the people." Because every month they would have these continuing education programs for doctors and dentists, and I would go. So, all the doctors were there, all the attendings, 125, 150 doctors. "So, I've introduced you to some people I know will support you, and you've met some other folks. And you've met some folks that you shake, you know, you shook their hands. And they resent the fact that you're here. That's all you need to know, that's all you need to know. But you continue to shake their hands, and don't try to figure out is this the person that's complaining about the fact that you're at Ochsner to Mr. Pitts," and that's all. He was a great man, he was a great man. And so I learned a great deal, and it was a great experience for me. And once again, race relationships and human relationships all come into play. Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there a certain point when you became interested in hospital management that you--? Speaker 2: Back in my childhood, the point that sort of pushed me in that direction towards healthcare and medicine, et cetera, et cetera was when my father's [Tom Story, Sr.] medical condition-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we talked about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's medical condition. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that was it, my father's medical condition. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So, I never sort of got off track. Speaker 1: So you graduated in '81 [1981]. So, what did you do after graduation from UAB? Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was thrilled that Mr., Mr. Pitts saw fit to give me a job as a, he hired me as a junior administrator. So I stayed on at Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation [Ochsner Health System] as the first black administrator in the history of the foundation. So, that in itself was another crowning achievement. Story_ID: 558782 Speaker 1: How did you like New Orleans [Louisiana] compared to some of the other places? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved New Orleans. New Orleans was just great--the culture, the people. And one of the ways that I sort of got to know New Orleans was through my, the work. I had some wonderful people, black and white, that I worked with in New Orleans. And at the time I was separated and divorced, subsequently. And that was, those were, my friends were my sort of ambassadors, if you will, goodwill ambassadors. And they introduced me to the culture of New Orleans. For example, Bishop Paul Morton [Paul S. Morton], who is a great minister here in Atlanta [Georgia], was a music, was the director of music at Greater St. Stephens Baptist church [Greater St. Stephen Missionary Baptist Church] in New Orleans, he was the minister of music. And Andrew Jackson [ph.] invited me to church, and that's how I got to know Bishop Paul Morton, who eventually became Bishop Paul Morton. So, it was individuals like that, like Elizabeth Meredith [ph.]. She was involved in politics in New Orleans. And she got, she introduced me to Senator Sherman Copelin. I met at that time the governor, you know, of New Orleans through political connections. And-- Speaker 1: Did you know Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial]? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and his son [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His son, his son. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His son, I will never forget when his son was first running for office. And he was over near North Robertson Street outside the (Unclear), walking around as a young man--because he's younger than me--handing out flyers. And I met, I had the great pleasure of meeting Mayor Morial, because he was one of the keynote speakers at one of the doctors' dinners that I talked about at Ochsner. They invited him as a keynote speaker. And sitting in the auditorium with all of these white men--because this was a very conservative institution--they had very few--out of probably 150 doctors who were the attendings, they probably had three to five females on the faculty--all white men. And I remember that the white female doctors did not even attend. For whatever reasons, I don't remember them attending the doctors' meetings on a monthly basis. And Dutch Morial, who was a very, very powerful, eloquent speaker, spoke directly to those men about what they should be doing in terms of all the poverty and the poor healthcare, lack of access to healthcare for people of lower socioeconomic status in Metropolitan New Orleans. And they were sitting here at one of the premier healthcare delivery entities in the world surrounded by all of this poverty. And he said in his closing remarks to them, "Physicians, heal thyself." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Work on your soul." And they stood up and gave him a standing ovation. Speaker 1: Now, did you know his chief of staff [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley]? I think it's the brother who's now the head of Meharry medical center [Meharry Medical College] in Nashville [Tennessee], a young man. What is his name? Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about, but I did not know him. Speaker 1: Okay. He wasn't a doctor then, but he was, that was his aspiration then. Speaker 2: Oh, that's very interesting. Speaker 1: He told us in his interview that he was the last person to speak to Dutch Morial on his deathbed, because they were that close, you know. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: But most of his stories are about, you know, the mayoralty of Dutch Morial. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was powerful; he was powerful. And he was--and for him--and I was like--there were only two--there were three black men in that auditorium--his bodyguard, Dutch, and myself. And I was just stunned that, you know, a black man would stand--would speak with such authority to over 125, 150 white men of stature. I mean, this was Dr. Alton Ochsner, the namesake, who was still alive. He was sitting in the middle. The leadership of the Ochsner Clinic [Ochsner Foundation Hospital; Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] all sat, the founders, in the front row. And then everybody else, based on your status--so you know where I was sitting--all the way in the back. And it was just all the residents--the attendings, the residents, da-da-da. It was a class system, like most medical centers were at that time. Story_ID: 558783 Speaker 1: It occurs to me that hospital administration requires an administrator to speak to individuals who are considered by many to be the highest ranking citizens in our society, the doctors. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And to be able to-- Speaker 2: It's very prestigious, it's very, very, important. And in the business aspect of healthcare, the business of healthcare the relationships are predicated--your success, your professional success, is obviously predicated on your ability to work with the white coats, as I call them. And that was something that I just, from my residency. Because Ochsner [Ochsner Foundation Hospital; Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] is like the Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota] of the South. And it's a very, at that time, thirty years ago, it was a very elite club of academic health science centers--Mayo, Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio], Henry Ford [Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan], Lahey [Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, Burlington, Massachusetts], Ochsner, and Lovelace [Lovelace Medical Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico]. And these were, they were the big six clinics. And between the six of them, I bet you they didn't have ten black physicians at that time on their faculty. I don't think I'll be wrong if I said that. But what it did for me was--having a great mentor like Mr. Pitts [David R. Pitts], working on human relationships, human relationships, and in particular working with physicians. And that's one of the things that I learned the most about that experience-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was working with doctors, and how to develop those business relationships. And you only--working with physicians, you know, it's like most people, but especially with physicians--trust, integrity. You know, you don't have the opportunities, especially hospital administrators, you don't have the opportunity to lose and gain--lose and regain their confidence and their trust. So it's very, very, important, even today, for me as a healthcare executive to be able to maintain the highest standard of trust and integrity. And I tell young people that today, that there's a big difference between being honest and having integrity. Integrity is so much more important than honesty. Honesty is a component of integrity. Integrity has so many moral, the moral fabric is all wrapped around integrity. Honesty is just regurgitating, telling the facts, or sharing something. Integrity is so much more than that. You know, you reach, it's like reaching down into the soul of honesty and saying this is what it really means. So, it puts a great deal of pressure on an individual when you talk about maintaining one's integrity. Because everybody can talk about their being honest, or state the facts. But you have to go beyond that. You have a moral obligation, in terms of, when one talks about integrity. Because honesty is not enough, honesty is not enough. So, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --that's what I try to share with young people today in my--and if anything, I'll talk about cost accounting, operation improvement, revenue cycle, systems improvement, you know, strategic planning. That's, those are all tools that one uses. Because if your integrity is not intact, it becomes a challenge for you as a human being. Story_ID: 558784 Speaker 1: Looking, reflecting back on the experiences of your father [Tom Story, Sr.] in the healthcare system in New York [New York], and comparing the one in Alabama, what--do you have a philosophy of service as a hospital administrator that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: Did that come out of school-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --or after practice? Speaker 2: It came out of my own family experiences--what my mother [Martha Wilson Story] and father and the church that I was raised in, Gaines Chapel A.M.E. [Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church, Anniston, Alabama]. Those were the real lessons that I learned in life that really formed the fabric, you know, of my well being. My moral status, my moral structure is that, with respect to healthcare, is you treat the patient and the family as a unit of care. You know, grandmother might be in the bed, she's the one that's horizontal. But grandmother has a son or a daughter, or nieces and nephews that depend upon grandmother, or have certain feelings or expectations about this person who is debilitated now. And I've always felt that it was important for us as healthcare professionals to recognize that while grandma has a disease, there's some abnormality, we need to be conscious of grandmother's surroundings, who's surrounding her at the bed and who's not at the bedside. And that's why I've always felt that you treat the patient and the family as a unit of care. And as a child growing up, that's what we did in our church. You know, it was always--if something's wrong with Miss Smedley [ph.], then you know, go across the street and see what's wrong--if the twins are all right. Or, if somebody needs to go to the house, or if somebody needs to rake the leaves out in front of the house because they know that Miss Smedley can't do it. But she likes who--you know, she lives a certain way, so you want to make sure that you maintain that quality of life for that existence before Miss Smedley's life change, whatever that life change is, occurred. So, that's what you want to do. You always want to look at Miss Smedley's condition as a friend, as a family member, as a neighbor. You know, you want to make sure that you do what's best, you know, for Miss Smedley, not because she asks you to, but because it's the right thing to do. And that's the way I was raised, because I saw my mama and daddy do that. The church I was raised in, Gaines Chapel, did that for the community. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: That's part of that servant/leader. That's where the servant part comes from, from my mama and my daddy. Because they were servants, they were good servants (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 558785 Speaker 1: I would imagine the challenge of hospital administration would be to try to balance that service idea with-- Speaker 2: The balance sheet (laughter). Speaker 1: The balance sheet, yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Because, say, you know, the first time I saw the little phrase, "No margin, no mission," I was in a Catholic institution in Birmingham, Alabama. And sitting behind that phrase was a nun who was running St. Vincent's Hospital [St. Vincent's Birmingham]. And here was a sister who had taken a vow of poverty saying, "But Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], understand. If I can't pay Alabama Power [Alabama Power Company, Birmingham, Alabama], if I can't pay Alabama Gas company [Alabama Gas Corporation, Birmingham, Alabama], if I can't pay South Central Bell [South Central Bell Telephone Company; BellSouth Telecommunications, LLC], I cannot run St. Vincent's Hospital." So, she gave me a little lesson in terms of the economics of healthcare, and balancing one's mission with the economic reality of being a good servant. And all the sister was saying was that, "They're going to come into conflict sometime, Otis. They're going to come into conflict. But if you don't do this, you won't ultimately be able to serve your mission. But you work real hard at doing the margin part, so that your mission is never compromised, it's never compromised." Because she said, "We as sisters have accepted that vow of poverty, we've done that. So, we're very clear on that." And so, she was sharing that with me as a young man. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. So when you, you were at Ochsner [Ochsner Foundation Hospital; Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] until-- Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], okay. And then you come back to Birmingham, right? Speaker 2: I come back to Birmingham Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Full circle-- Speaker 1: And you-- Speaker 2: And I worked there, and that's where my met my wife, Ava Denise McNair [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story], in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And we were married there. And then I took my next job in New York [New York]. And so that's how my career sort of launched from there. And I got on the--because all the moves after that was, you know, it was, you now, progression. Story_ID: 558786 Speaker 1: Now I hear that because of your position at UAB, at UAB, you were able to help your sister out of a medical crisis? Speaker 2: Well, that was, boy, that's, yeah that was a--and that's what I wanted to do. You know, you always want to serve mankind. But this was my little sister, and she was a brittle diabetic, she was a brittle diabetic, and she needed a kidney transplant. And I was able to make arrangements for her to be flown by air ambulance from Staten Island, New York to the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] where another sister, who was a better match than anyone else in the family, was able to donate a kidney. So, you're talking about things in life that you'll never forget is watching two sisters going pre-op, going into surgery. Not one, but two sisters--medication drips already going. And you're standing there, a major surgery, major surgery, two of your younger sisters. And I tell you, yesterday I was in Anniston, Alabama, my hometown. The sister who donated the kidney, I was with her while she was receiving her chemo, her third chemo therapy treatment. Now, our younger sister who received the kidney didn't make it. She died, she rejected the kidney. But when my sister was--yesterday I was in the treatment room with her--for the first time, for the first time in almost twenty-five years, I saw the scar where they cut her. Because when they remove the kidney, they eviscerate the donor, literally. The recipient at that time, it's just a pouch. You know, it's like you just cut them and you sit the kidney on top. It's like the bench technique, so to speak. So the person who donates the kidney--all I'm saying, has the--suffers physically the greatest trauma. And I saw that scar on my sister's body yesterday when she was receiving her chemotherapy treatment. So, it's, it's what I wanted to do. You know, I love, I love my sisters and brothers, I love my wife [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story]. But I've always wanted just to serve, just wanted to be helpful. Story_ID: 558787 Speaker 1: In 1990, you became the administrative chief and operating officer at the University-- Speaker 2: UMDNJ [University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey] in Newark. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was my first big job. That was the big job, yeah, that was the big job. I was the chief operating officer in a very political environment in Newark, New Jersey, very political. The first big job. Speaker 1: What was the political climate? Speaker 2: Well, it was the politics of control. I mean, it's a half a billion dollar operation and, you know, with Newark being Newark, a lot of contracts, you know. And the unions were very, very influential. And the city council representatives--a lot of demands about jobs, job opportunities, job creation, providing services to one segment of the market versus another segment. And it was a government run entity. It was a state institution, so everybody felt that they had, or should have, some say in how the institution should operate, how its funds should be dispersed, who should be hired, and who shouldn't be hired. So, it gave me a chance to--as opposed to when I was a young administrator, trying to figure out how to keep the lights on, the floors cleaned, in service training programs for radiology techs, respiratory therapies and procedures, et cetera, et cetera. Inside the bowels of the organization, also I found myself just the opposite--spending more time outside the bowels of the organization and talking about reimbursement, and the politics of Medicaid in the State of New Jersey. So, it was different. Speaker 1: And did you enjoy that job? Speaker 2: I did, I did, I did. Because that was, the people I met, and the pictures--and Bishop Tutu, Desmond Tutu, you know, having a chance--because once again, this job took me outside. My congressman, Donald Payne [Donald Payne, Jr.], he was the congressman for the Central Ward [Newark, New Jersey] where I was located, and getting to know him. And therefore, because of Donald Payne getting involved in the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus], going down every year being involved in different activities around the Black Caucus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All the city council representatives, you know, Ron Rice [Ronald Rice], Donald Bradley, because that was your external, you know, board. Because Newark, once again, very political, you had to--and I'll use the word cater and I did cater to them. You know, Mr. Amato [Nicholas R. Amato] whose father was head of the Democratic Party in the State of New Jersey, Democratic Party in the State of New Jersey, Mr. Amato. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, having to go and meet him, you know. And all of those were very interesting experiences. And you hear about things on TV, but then to actually go and sit with your city council representatives and those conversations which are very private, and talking about the relationship between the Democratic Party and what they do for you and your hospital. How funds are allocated depend upon relationships, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], you need to understand," and people explained it to me, that I needed to understand the relationships from Trenton [New Jersey], city council, state representatives, political forces in your community. The unions, going over to Bloomfield [New Jersey] sitting in a little restaurant talking with union leaders; somebody driving you over there and dropping you off, and saying, "I'll be back to pick you up in forty-five minutes, just be standing outside. But these gentlemen inside want to talk to you about what's going on with the union workers who drive the ambulances." Well, I was able to succeed because I wasn't intimidated. I was impressed by some of it, but I wasn't intimidated by it. And when I would go to those meetings, I would listen to the men, they were mostly men, men of Italian ancestry. And black women in the unions, I would listen to them. And at the end of the day, I would always say, "I am here to take care of the people, who take care of the people in your community. That's all I'm trying to do. And if I've done anything wrong, you know, charge it to my head and not to my heart, because I'm here to serve." And they would, and at the end of the day I found myself hugging and shaking hands with all these people. And they were very gracious and very kind to me. And I say that today, you know, with all due respect, with all due respect. Story_ID: 558788 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Otis Leon Story, Sr. [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]. The first name is O-T-I-S, the middle name is spelled, L-E-O-N, and the last name is Story, S-T-O-R-Y, Sr. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is November the 17th, 1951. I was born in Anniston, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. And Sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Healthcare executive. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 27th, 2017. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Midtown Manhattan in Times Square [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now, we are finishing an interview that we started in 2007. We picked up again in 2012, and now this should be the finish today-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in 2017. Story_ID: 558789 Speaker 1: We left you in 1991, and you were in this area in New Jersey, and you were getting ready to be married. Speaker 2: Yes. I had met the love of my life, Ava Denise McNair [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story], and we were married in 1991 and we relocated to eastern Pennsylvania while I was serving as the chief operating officer at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, University Hospital [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, she's related to Denise McNair, who was a victim of the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham [Alabama], right, back in 1963 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct. I married into the McNair family, and my wife was named after Denise. Denise was the youngest of the four little girls who was killed in the bombing. And my father-in-law, my wife's father--Denise was the center of his life before my wife was born, she was his joy. And after Denise was murdered, my father-in-law named my wife, his first daughter, after Denise. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's a story that still resonates in the family. So, anyway, so you got married in '91 [1991], and you're still working in New Jersey. And you'll be here until 1996, right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Story_ID: 558790 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what was going on in the '90s [1990s] here in New Jersey. Speaker 2: Well, at that time, healthcare in--not only in New Jersey, but in the Northeast in particular--there was an epidemic involving two diseases. One was AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and the other one was crack cocaine. And the University Hospital is located in the Central Ward of Newark [New Jersey], and unfortunately, it--and fortunately, it was there to support the community, which had one of the highest incidents of AIDS of any other community in America outside of the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]. And so, our challenge at University Hospital in the '90s [1990s] was to obviously provide optimal patient care for those patients who were afflicted by AIDS and AIDS-related diseases. And the other disease was the associated violence, the trauma associated with crack cocaine and those related issues surrounding the violence, and that was a major, major, issue for the community of Newark at that time because-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --there were many blunt and penetrating wounds that we saw in our trauma center. We were the only Level I trauma center at that time in Essex County [New Jersey], so all of those victims of this senseless violence were seen and treated at the University Hospital. Speaker 1: Now, correct me if I'm wrong, but crack is some kind of boiled down version of cocaine. You make a rock out of it, and the high is so intense that the users of it have a desperation that is almost believable in terms of their need to have some more. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And while the disease--the synte- you know, the synthesizing or the cooking of cocaine to make crack cocaine was problematic from a behavior perspective. Once again, our problem was with the violence that was associated with the distribution of crack cocaine in the community. And-- Speaker 1: So, there was a lot of black gangs-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who would act as middle men, I mean for-- Speaker 2: Control of the market. Speaker 1: Yeah, the market, and with a market that was basically desperate for more. Speaker 2: Absolutely desperate, and it was a market that was--just like here in New York [New York] you have the Diamond District and you have the Garment District. Well, the Central Ward at that time was the crack cocaine district, and customers--like customers who travel to New York to go to the Diamond District--customers came from outside of the black community to purchase this drug, and control of that market was one of the residual effects of the violence that we saw as healthcare professionals in our community. Speaker 1: Yeah. There was a--I remember being in Newark in those days, and I've never seen a worse looking city as it did in 1990, as it looked in 1990, '91 [1991]. But-- Speaker 2: That was the sad reality. The impact upon not only the young black males who were victimized on both ends from addiction as well as the violence associated with the distribution and control of cocaine, but it was the innocent babies. We had at the University Hospital in the neonatal intensive care unit, we had several babies who were born addicted to crack cocaine. And it was just--those are the forgotten stories, or the untold stories, the victims--the most innocent of all victims in this epidemic associated with AIDS and crack cocaine. I worked with a gentleman, a doctor named Dr. Oleske [James M. Oleske], who was the first practitioner in America, to my knowledge, to identify AIDS in utero, and he treated the first pediatric AIDS patient up until her death. She was about, she lived to be about seven or eight years old of age. So, we had the youngest of the young in terms of AIDS and crack cocaine, and we had the older ones who were victims, and those that victimized others as a result of AIDS and crack cocaine. So that was our market, infectious disease and behavioral health issues. Story_ID: 558791 Speaker 1: Well, you know, as a healthcare professional, what--did--can you remember what the government policy was in regards to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and crack cocaine in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, the AIDS was--once it became known as a--that it was pervasive that--pervasive throughout our community, that it wasn't just a drug related disease--initially when it was--AIDS was identified as being a black disease, or it was disease associated with heroin addicts, it was something that was--there was a great deal of focus. There was research done, but it wasn't until it became a white male disease that a great deal of research and attention was paid to AIDS and its related diseases. And we see the same thing if you fast forward twenty-five years. We see the same thing that's playing out today with respect to drugs. We have near an epidemic in America around illicit drugs, but you and I know that we had an epidemic in America in the black community twenty-five years ago around drugs--illicit drugs, et cetera, et cetera. And the reality of it is that we had certain--I won't say antidotes, but we had certain treatments that was available to the crack cocaine addicts and the heroin addicts twenty-five years ago that now that it's become a white middle-class issue. People now are talking about Narcan and Tramadol, you know, and ways in which you can address, you know, overdoses. Those drugs were available, you know, twenty-five years ago. We had Narcan on first responders, you know, carrying them on the ambulances. But now today, people in the suburbs are talking about passing legislation where they're funding police officers, first responders, and mandating that they carry, you know, Narcan, you know, these drugs, so that when somebody overdoses, you know, you give them an injection and bring them back, you know, or you retard, you know, their demise, if you will. So, it literally, you know, brings--it saves--and it's a good thing, no doubt about it. It's a wonderful thing, but the contradiction, once again, in the eyes of black people, is that if you had that drug available twenty-five years ago, why wasn't it made known to the communities, to the general population, and why wasn't it shared to save lives of people of color twenty-five years ago, as we now are promoting it to save lives of young men and women of the majority? Speaker 1: I believe the response of the government in those days was to increase the sentences for the possession of crack cocaine (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Vis-a-vis other drugs. Speaker 2: And now we have a governor in the State of New Jersey [Chris Christie] who wants to build dorms as opposed to prisons for young adolescent addicts. But twenty-five years ago, they were given twenty-five years in prison for possession of crack cocaine. And now, we're talking about putting them in dorms as part of their rehabilitation. Speaker 1: Now, maybe you can answer this question. I've thought about it, and I'm sure anybody watching this may have thought about this, too. It's that crack was such a plague on the community in so many ways. I mean the addicts and then the violence all around it, surrounding it, it doesn't seem to be the number one problem anymore, as it once was. Is it because the people that were using it are gone now? Or, what is it? Or, they're in jail or gone? Speaker 2: I think the big issue is that it is not--it's the violence has subsided in the majority of the inner cities, excluding Chicago [Illinois], of course, today. But the drive by shootings, the street corner marketing of the drug--all of that has changed. It has gone underground, and it's like--it is being marketed like meth is being marketed in a market today. It's who you know. It's not anything that--it is almost like people can function. It's like some people who are alcoholics, they, you know, function; every day they go to work. You have functional alcoholics. You have people who smoke crack cocaine and meth, and they function; they live what is perceived to be a normal life. We know it's not, but the perception is that they're living a normal life, but they're just getting by on borrowed time, from my perspective. Story_ID: 558792 Speaker 1: So, now this is, this is at--you were at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey [Newark, New Jersey] until 1996. And now, are there any stories you need to talk about before I move you to Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: I think that, for me, personally, it was just that my own professional growth and development really occurred at the University Hospital, because prior to that, I had been operating as a hospital administrator, responsible for the management of several departments on a day to day basis. The opportunity to serve as the chief operating officer at University Hospital in Newark [New Jersey] was the first time that I had greater responsibility across the board, but also it introduced me to activities of an executive outside of the four walls of the hospital. I got involved in politics. I had a chance to meet with elected officials and grassroots community leaders, and that was something that was new to me. And I was educated by my mentors at that time, Mrs. Mary Mathis-Ford and Mr. Leroy Smith [Leroy F. Smith, Jr.], who he claimed to be the last white man in Newark. Both of these wonderful human beings took me under their arms, and so they helped with my growth and development as a healthcare executive outside of the table of organizations inside the hospital. So, I went from managing a hospital's day to day operation to managing relationships with community leaders, elected officials, educators in the community, and looking beyond the four walls of the hospital. Speaker 1: Do you think that's essential to, you know, being a hospital administrator or CEO? To be able to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, absolutely. And as my career grew with different experiences, it was paramount. It was things that--lessons that I learned twenty-five years ago, I still rely upon them to get me through the day, in 2017. Because so much that an executive does at any level, I believe, is predicated on his or her ability to manage relationships, to build and manage relations. It is so important that those constructs were in place, especially in the healthcare arena today when defunding for hospitals--from Medicaid, Medicare, and even negotiating with other third party payers. It's so important that those skills that one developments, or has developed, hopefully, once they get to this level, that they're able to utilize them to identify funding sources in particular for your institutions. A lot of the work that I do today is based on my ability to develop contractual relationships, business relationships, joint venture relationships, and business deals with other healthcare related institutions; individual practitioners, doctors, large doctor groups. All of that is outside of the mainstream of the actual running of the hospital on a day to day basis. It's not about the radiology department, it's not about nursing, it's not about respiratory therapy; this is about relationships with government officials and community leaders. Story_ID: 558793 Speaker 1: How did it, how did you come to leave the University Hospital in New Jersey [Newark, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to join the Health Alliance of Greater Cincinnati [UC Health], which was at that time managing the University Hospital, which was the University Hospital [University of Cincinnati Medical Center] at the University of Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio]. What was occurring in Cincinnati at that time was that the University Hospital was being privatized. It was a city/state entity, and its government structure--governing structure was changing. It was no longer--the plan was that it would detach--or some would tell you that the Cincinnati was the jettison to the University Hospital, because the cost associated with operating the University Hospital was draining valuable resources from the university as a whole, and the decision was made by the leadership of the University of Cincinnati to separate itself from University Hospital. And that caused a great deal of consternation and anguish and political infighting within Hamilton County [Ohio] and the Cincinnati area, because some elected officials and the unions and community leaders felt that the university was shunning its responsibility to the University Hospital. That as long as the University Hospital was making money and funds were flowing back to the University of Cincinnati medical school to support R and D [research and development], and it was an opportunity to maintain high levels of the training programs, et cetera, et cetera, then it was okay to be associated with the University of Cincinnati, but once the reimbursement mechanisms and the structure changed around the funding sources, the revenue streams started to dry up, then the University Hospital was expendable. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the community reacted to that, and the community was the unions, in particular. So labor, organized labor and grassroots politicians, and some elected officials were pushing back on this transformation, and they resisted the transition. My experience that I had developed in Newark, New Jersey working with unions was one of the reasons that I became the preferred candidate, because I had worked successfully with several major unions in Newark, New Jersey; in particular the Teamsters [Teamsters Local 97] and the Nurses Union [New Jersey Nurses Union]. Those entities--labor, were the ones who were pushing and resisting the change, because they saw a public asset, a public good, if you will, a state hospital being given to a private corporation, the Health Alliance of Greater Cincinnati, which was a private not-for-profit, but nevertheless it was a private corporation, and the community felt that they would not any say so, any input, now that the University Hospital had been privatized. So, I was brought in as part of a recruitment effort to help with the transformation of University Hospital from a government entity to a private one. So, once again, my work outside of the hospital was more important at times than my work inside the hospital in managing human and capital resources; it was managing relationships with those who were resisting the transfer of assets from the University of Cincinnati to a private corporation called the Health Alliance of Greater Cincinnati. Story_ID: 558794 Speaker 1: So you were there for two years, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, what actually happened? It was transferred, right? Speaker 2: It was. It was. It was transferred--the assets were transferred to the Health Alliance of Greater Cincinnati [UC Health]. Many of the operational programs were integrated into the Health Alliance of Greater Cincinnati. I had responsibility, and one of the things, one of the other things that attracted me to this opportunity at University Hospital in Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] was that this was the first time I had real corporate responsibilities across multiple hospitals. I had responsibility for driving the integration of our laboratory operations throughout the six hospitals. I also had responsibility for imaging across our six hospitals. So, for me being a relatively young healthcare executive, that was a great step forward for me, because now I was working not only outside of my primary hospital, but I was working with six other hospitals and my peers to develop this corporate initiative around laboratory--clinical laboratory services. This initiative around imaging services for corporations--we had six hospitals and, that, to me, was a significant challenge and something that I looked forward to doing, and I was excited about that opportunity. But after two years, my family, I had a young family, we weren't comfortable in Cincinnati [Ohio], and this opportunity came to go back south. Speaker 1: Now, there's a pregnant question there. You were uncomfortable in Cincinnati. What was the discomfort? Speaker 2: Well, it was--I--the community of Cincinnati, there were a lot of dedicated black leaders. I mean, I'll never forget, Pastor Lynch [Damon Lynch, Jr.] comes to mind. But I didn't--the synergy--outside of the religious community, there was nobody else driving, you know, change, or providing the support for the community, and we know from the Civil Rights Movement that the church played a vital role in the South in the Civil Rights Movement, and this church was playing a vital role in trying to ensure that access to appropriate quality patient care would be available to people of color in Cincinnati. But there wasn't this--it was this synergy, and I sort of sensed this lack of lateral support, personally and professionally, and I just sensed that for my own personal growth and development it was probably time for me to, just to move on. Story_ID: 558795 Speaker 1: So, you went to, you went to Savannah, Georgia, right? Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is the Quorum Health Resources [Quorum Health Resources, LLC], Memorial Health University Medical Center [Memorial University Medical Center] in Savannah. Speaker 2: And I worked for Quorum Healthcare Resources. Quorum was, this was a, this was a paradigm shift in my professional career. I literally moved from working on the nonprofit side of the business. Throughout my career, I've worked always in academic medical centers. That was one, and these were all private not-for-profit academic medical centers. And here was an opportunity for me to work for a proprietary for-profit corporation to manage an asset called Memorial Health University Medical Center. And I was extremely excited, once again, about this opportunity, because all the things that I had learned on the didactic level, particularly in finance, I was going to have an opportunity to apply without all of what we say are the little P or the big P, politics. Now, I was entering into an arena where I would be able to manage a healthcare facility like a business, like a real business, that we would--the goals and objections were the same as in the nonprofit side, but without all of the quote, interference. The focus was on the bottom line in terms of financial liability, and at the same time, quality. So, it was productivity and quality. So, just because I was now working for a private for-profit corporation did not preclude my interest, my strong interest, in quality patient care, and ensuring that the services, the clinical services that we provided at Memorial Health University were not equal or superior to the other institutions in our markets. But we had an opportunity to manage things from a business acumen, and that's what I was excited about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That we could drive this hard. We could make decisions in a timely fashion instead of taking three months, or whatever the life cycle was on the nonprofit side, and we could cut it in half, and we did. Story_ID: 558796 Speaker 1: So, Quorum [Quorum Health Resources, LLC], you worked directly for Quorum though, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is correct. Speaker 1: And Quorum manages a number of different health facilities around the-- Speaker 2: In particular in the Southeast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this was the second largest asset that Quorum managed at that time. The first one at that time was Jackson university--University of Jackson Hospital [sic. University of Mississippi Medical Center] in Jackson, Mississippi, and Memorial Health University [Memorial Health University Medical Center; Memorial University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia] was the second largest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it was a great opportunity, once again, to grow. So each one of these opportunities to reenter the job market, you know, it was a growth curve; you know for me, it was another experience that was unlike any other that I've had before. And in this opportunity, you know, being able to manage a hospital like a business was extremely exciting, because the other opportunities that I had in the past, even at the University of Alabama [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama], we started--we talked about joint ventures. We actually developed joint ventures with physician groups, and that was something that was just on the rise at that time in the late '90s [1990s], and physicians' practices, for example, were being purchased by hospitals, so hospitals were getting into the physician practice and ownership business. In particular, at Memorial Health, we did a joint venture with a group of orthopedic surgeons where we capitalized--we built the surgery center and they managed it. And that was, to me, that was an exciting adventure, and we were looking at other ways in which we could do business with our physician partners. Story_ID: 558797 Speaker 1: Now this period of time, the late '90s [1990s] or, well, the beginning of the '90s [1990s] into the late '90s [1990s], was a period where the country is changing in terms of the rise of personal computers and the Internet (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: And there are all kinds of things going on now that never happened before. Speaker 2: Y2K [Year 2000]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Y2K was the buzzword. Speaker 1: As we were approaching--yeah, you were at--in Savannah [Georgia], I guess, when Y2K-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: --happened. Were you concerned, and was there anything to be concerned about? Speaker 2: Absolutely, because, you know, there were those who predicted doom and gloom; that we wouldn't be able to use our telephones anymore; that TVs would stop working, and that Armageddon was upon us. We were particularly concerned because at that time we had first started to embark upon digitizing images, and we were relying tremendously upon technology in our diagnostic world inside the hospital. So, all of our information was now being uploaded, you know, to tapes, you know, and that was a particular concern, because our telephone system was at that time digital, and information was being managed, you know, through these new computer systems, and that was of particular concern. We had all kinds of forensic audits where people made a lot of money, who came in and did assessments. Speaker 1: A Y2K assessment, in a way? Speaker 2: Absolutely, to evaluate our readiness over and over again. I never will forget the night, December 31st [1999]. We were all--my team was in the hospital [Memorial Health University Medical Center; Memorial University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia], and so when it crossed over to 2000, we were all standing there, and nothing happened. We stood around for about an hour and a half or two hours in the morning; this was midnight, and nothing happened. So, we all looked at each other and said, "Okay, we spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on Y2K readiness. What was the real value in any of this?" (Laughter) And most of us didn't want to do a look back or a critique of the dollars, because we, I think we all sensed that we probably spent a lot of money unnecessarily. But, once again, you couldn't take the risk, because it was the fear of the unknown, and it was an insurance policy, and from a job perspective you wanted your board to know, as the executive vice president and chief operating officer working with the CEO and the other leaders at the university, that we had done our due diligence and we had vetted each of the products that we had purchased, and that this was an insurance policy that we could not afford not to have, because we had stepped away from paper, in actuality, and we didn't use paper as a backup in our laboratory operations, for example. Everything was ordered online, so there was not a hard copy. We would back up at night, tapes et cetera, et cetera, on the weekend. We did all of that, but if this quote, computer decided to take over the world, then we would be lost, we would be handicapped. So, we wanted to avoid that. Story_ID: 558798 Speaker 1: So, in Savannah [Georgia], was there a crack problem in Savannah or Cincinnati [Ohio], or was--had that subsided by then? Speaker 2: It wasn't--very interesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], or, you know-- Speaker 2: The violence in Cincinnati was not nearly as pervasive as it was in Newark [New Jersey]. The issue with AIDS was there, and we managed that patient population appropriately through our ID clinics, infectious disease clinics. And once I relocated to Savannah it was something that was there, but there wasn't this, it wasn't dominant, you know. Yes, there was a crack problem, a crack cocaine problem, but once again it was contained within the black community. So, was it a problem for Chatham County [Georgia]? Yes, but it was a more indirect problem as opposed to in your face problem, because all the violence was contained within the black community. Speaker 1: Yeah, there actually was a movie made ['Traffic'] based on a British movie [sic. television series, 'Traffik'] about the production of--the files of production of cocaine. The British movie followed up from Afghanistan to London [England], and I think the American version of it, which starred Michael Douglas I believe--yeah, they had Diane Feinstein [sic.] in it and other people--Michael Douglas was actually a congressman from Cincinnati in this movie. Speaker 2: Wow (laughter). Speaker 1: And it followed the cocaine from Colombia to Cincinnati, where it was confined to the black community. And his character, the congressman, didn't get excited about it until his daughter actually went over to the black community and was kidnapped, and then, you know, turned into an addict, you know, and a prostitute, as a result. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: I can't think of--what is the name of that? But it was out in '98 [1998] or '99 [1999] or 2000. Speaker 2: But that's--once again, as we speak about the AIDS epidemic and the crack cocaine epidemic in the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s], as long as it was contained in the black community, or within one segment of AIDS with white males in particular, homosexuals, you know--it wasn't my problem. It was out of sight, out of mind, and there was very little concern. And that was the same situation in Cincinnati and in Savannah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was contained. Speaker 1: But I imagine though that health costs was still, was a problem-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --in all these places. Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was a challenge, reimbursement. And we were very fortunate when I was in--going back to New Jersey--because there were funds available that were dedicated to the University Hospital [Newark, New Jersey], so there was a revenue stream there. And in Cincinnati we addressed the issue when we would--the good news there is it wasn't that--it was true; the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] could not afford to subsidize now the University Hospital [University of Cincinnati Medical Center]. And the major problem that the University Hospital was facing in Cincinnati was its lack of access to managed care contracts. The private contractors would not do business with the University Hospital, and for a variety of reasons. Most teaching institutions, it goes without saying, in our industry it's not as cost effective. They utilize more resources, and so they cost more to operate, and that was the premise behind, you know, moving the University Hospital away from the University of Cincinnati. It was too expensive to operate, especially without the managed care contracts. So once those became available, then the University Hospital in Cincinnati became a viable entity, and the Memorial [Memorial Health University Medical Center; Memorial University Medical Center] in Savannah, Georgia we had access to disproportionate share dollars, DSH [disproportionate share hospital] dollars, which, once again were dedicated dollars that were targeted for safety net hospitals. So, there were these significant revenue streams that helped sustain organizations like the University of Cincinnati and Memorial Health through these special funding sources. Story_ID: 558799 Speaker 1: Now, in 2001, you leave Savannah [Georgia] and you move to Jacksonville [Florida], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how did that happen? Speaker 2: A promise. Somebody made me a promise and I accepted it, and, you know, I had a contract. The promise was that I would take the job initially at Shands Jacksonville [Shands Jacksonville Medical Center; UF Health Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida] as the chief operating officer, and then would, I would then assume responsibility for that facility as the CEO. So, the succession plan was a very logical one, as was conveyed, and we discussed and negotiated, if you will, that I would after some period of time--six months, nine months--I would become the CEO. And while this was not cast in stone, it was memorialized in my contract, and I knew that the person who hired me was moving on to the system CEO position. So, whether it was six weeks, six months, nine months, I didn't care, because my boss was transitioning--ascending to the corporate CEO role--and I would assume the CEO role of the Shands Jacksonville hospital. So, I was the--once again, if I had to do it all over again, I would beg to make sure that that was--I would negotiate. I shouldn't--I wouldn't beg, but I would negotiate that as part of my onboarding; that would have been written into my contract. Because what happened was that the gentleman who hired me did not get the job as the system CEO. So, that made a very precarious situation. Speaker 1: So, were you functioning as a CEO even though you weren't the CEO? Speaker 2: I did for a defined period of time. But the new leadership made decisions, you know, which impacted my life, you know. So, I was forced to reenter the job market again. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I was not part of his team; he did not make the promise. The gentleman who made the promise to me was no longer there. Story_ID: 558800 Speaker 1: So, this time--this takes us to Grady [Grady Health System] in Atlanta [Georgia], I believe, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It takes me to New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I decided that I needed to go back to the proprietary side. Speaker 1: So this is 19--this is two thousand and-- Speaker 2: One [2001]. Speaker 1: And '1 [2001], okay. Speaker 2: So I just, I decided to join a private consulting firm and to stay away from, you know, once again, the politics of hospital operations. Because here, once again, it just shows you how you can easily be, easily be manipulated on the nonprofit side, because the focus is not on the bottom line. There's not much focus being placed on the bottom line as there should be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I left and started working as a consultant in Camden, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. You were an independent consultant? Speaker 2: No, I worked with a firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I worked with a company called Endeavor, The Endeavor Group [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And the wonderful thing about--you know, as long as you have contracts, it's a beautiful thing; it's a great thing, because you're generating revenue for the company and you're working, et cetera, et cetera. And you don't have to worry about titles, because somebody has asked you to come in and help fix a problem that the hospital is having, whether it's around revenue cycle, supply chain management, labor and productivity, quality issues, or it could be contracting with physicians--business development initiatives, et cetera, et cetera. So, when you sign a contract with a board, there's the scope of works. So, whatever the SOWs call for, you negotiate that pricing with the board and a timeline for the deliverables, et cetera, et cetera, and you go off and achieve. And if the board changes its mind, that's fine; you still get paid, because you have a contract. So, if you come in to fix something and the board says, "Oh, no, you're moving too fast," you say, "Fine." Speaker 1: You have a contract (laughter). Speaker 2: I have a contract. I'll slow down, but you make sure that you pay the invoices in a timely fashion, you know, that I'll submit to you on a monthly basis. That's the big difference in working on the private side in a proprietary setting in management, a management contract, as opposed to being there on the nonprofit working as a CEO or CCO, et cetera, et cetera, on a day to day basis where people can vacillate, you know, as opposed to a defined objective. And the objective in running any business is that you have some defined outcomes. In this case, our ultimate outcome is to provide optimal patient care in a cost effective way, you know. You want to make sure that the quality of care goes up and the cost of providing that care goes down. You know, they have this inverse relationship that you want to manage. And I enjoy doing it, because all your skills, the things that you learn on the didactic level, you can apply them more freely and willingly, as opposed to when you're working on the nonprofit side, the board or someone in community or politics might say, "Well, you know, we don't really want to change that fast, and we really don't want to make that big of a difference right now." But, you know, on the proprietary side it says, you know, "Here's the scope of work. If you agree upon it, we sign off on it, and here are the price points." And it's just like any other business--making cards, making cups--you know, there's a unit price associated with that product. You put out a thousand an hour at a certain cost, and you sell them at another price. Story_ID: 558801 Speaker 1: And that's the mentality that, you know, the healthcare industry was starting to adapt, because there were limited resources; the dollars were shrinking around reimbursement. Speaker 2: Do you have a philosophy about it yourself, about what--? Speaker 1: I do. I think that mine is I believe--because I made a decision many years ago to get into this business because it was personal to me. My dad [Tom Story, Sr.], as you know, was afflicted with diabetes, so I consider myself a good servant, and this is part of my own personal mission. But I believe--as the first interview that I ever conducted in healthcare I interviewed a nun, a sister, who was the hospital director at St. Vincent's Hospital [St. Vincent's Birmingham] in Birmingham, Alabama. And the sister that I was interviewing simply pulled out a plaque and she gave it to me, and she said to read it. And it simply said, "No margin, no mission." So, here was a Catholic nun saying to me, "Otis [HistoryMaker Otis. L. Story], we cannot serve those we love appropriately, we cannot take care of them appropriately if we can't generate the capital dollars to pay the expenses associated with operating St. Vincent's Hospital and have enough dollars to reinvest in capital projects for St. Vincent's Hospital. So, while there's a great deal of passion, and I show compassion for those I serve, I have to run St. Vincent's Hospital like a business." And that's what I've learned and I heard for the first time when I was a graduate student from a nun. But throughout my career, I was constantly being challenged to say, "Well, we don't really need to do that right now. Let's back away from that because Dr. So and So, or this person who has some political influence or relationship with a board member or someone, we don't need to do that right now. Let's go ahead and pay above fair market value for this product, because we want to help So and So, whose business might be struggling in the community right now. So, we're going to make this deal with this vendor as opposed to vendor B." And so, those become awfully frustrating at times. And so the business--when you're working on the proprietary side, you hone in on your productivity and your quality, and you try to maintain that balance; but you want to have good clinical outcomes at the best price. And so, I live my life--as you say, what do I do? I focus on the patient experience at the lowest cost. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's what I--even today, my focus is on the patient experience; meaning quality outcomes at the best price, lower costs, and that the experience around that patient is a good one in the family (simultaneous). Story_ID: 558802 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about the Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] health proposal of the early '90s [1990s]. I think she tried to get a bill, you know, through Congress or help shepherd one through Congress in 1992 [sic. 1993-1994]. Speaker 2: Absolutely, as soon as her husband [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] became president. Speaker 1: Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: And she was battered (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she was roundly criticized and battered, as you say, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was absolutely on target. But once again, the dynamics of the politics come into play. She was taking a step towards, once again, more towards universal coverage and advocating healthcare as a right, and that we needed to provide better access to all Americans through a more universal or organized fashion along the lines of Title XVIII [Social Security Act of 1965, Title XVIII] and XIX [Social Security Act of 1965, Title XIX], which is Medicare and Medicaid. And the U.S. Congress was not ready to adhere to that, and it refused to align themselves with her. There have been attempts throughout history to do the same thing, and she was the one who was soundly, you know, chastised for that. I mean, we know today that what we call Obamacare, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], he was successful, but the blueprint is the same blueprint basically in theory as what Ms. Clinton was advocating for in the early '90s [1990s]. So, the blueprint of the Obamacare, what we call Obamacare today, is basically was birthed years ago, even before Ms. Clinton. Because, in actuality, it was, from my perspective it was birthed under the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration, believe it or not. Speaker 1: Okay. Really? What, in--? Speaker 2: Back in 1974. Speaker 1: Okay. That's just before he had to abdicate. Speaker 2: And we would have been so far ahead as a country if we had adopted what then President Nixon was advocating for in his healthcare plan. And the irony of that today is that if you would go back--the late Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], probably three months before he died, he wrote an op-ed piece. In actuality, he was apologizing for killing the Nixon healthcare plan. Because, if the Nixon healthcare plan, which was basically the substrate for the Clinton plan and what we now know as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act--because he was moving in the same direction that the Clinton administration and the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration ultimately moved in. Speaker 1: Okay. And it was later on a Republican, Mitt Romney, who creates-- Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a healthcare act for the State of Massachusetts. Speaker 2: Absolutely, the same substrate. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This substrate that was being advocated on the behalf of the Clintons in 1994, it's the same thing. You know, we're trying, we're taking baby steps, and sometimes a circuitous route for its universal healthcare coverage, which most developed nations have some form of. So, we're continuing to vacillate here in America on addressing the obvious, and the obvious, from my perspective, is that we should have a system that provides easy access to all Americans. Now, people will argue that, "We have access, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.], to healthcare for all Americans," and in theory we do. Because anyone in America today can go to a hospital and present themselves, and there's a law, the EMTALA law [Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act of 1986], that says that you have to assess, evaluate, treat, and make a disposition to that patient. So, all we're saying is that you can use the emergency room as your healthcare system, which is grossly too expensive. But, we want to set a system up in place where people can go and have a primary care provider, so they don't have to wait until they're deathly ill and then go dragging into an emergency room and waiting to be treated, as opposed to what we talk about today in terms of wellness and prevention and population health--that we should be managing community health needs better than we're managing them today. Story_ID: 558803 Speaker 1: --Hospital in Atlanta [Georgia], what happened? Speaker 2: This was a wonderful, exciting--this was my retirement job, this was it. I was going to work at the Grady Health System [Atlanta, Georgia] for seven years and retire from being a practicing administrator and become an educator. You know, I've always enjoyed working with students, young people, and I saw the pathway for me, personally, as one in which I would help with the transformation of the Grady Health System and get it on its feet and work my way back to the University of Alabama [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama] graduate school in hospital health administration as a faculty member over the next seven or ten years, and then fully retire. Unfortunately, that didn't happen. What I didn't realize is that the political dynamics--I mean, this was Atlanta, and I walked into a hornet's nest. I did not have, or did not understand, the history, the recent history of the Grady Health System in terms of the political changes that were blowing in the wind. And they were such that I got consumed and literally flattened; ran over and literally almost run out of town as a result of my decision to accept the job as the CEO. And what I mean by that, very quickly, is that the Grady Health System was struggling financially and organizationally, and there was certain factions, two factions, in the community, and you could very easily claim one was white and one was black. The black one was the Fulton County- Fulton-DeKalb County healthcare system, which operated the Grady Health System. They were politically appointed board members from Fulton County [Georgia] and DeKalb County [Georgia]. So, they were all political appointees. This was a government entity which was operated by political operatives. There was a faction of the white community, the white business community that was frustrated with the way the Grady Health System was being operated from a community perspective. That was their talking points, and this struggle for the control of the Grady Health System had escalated by the time I arrived there. And it was $250 million that the white community--white leaders, business leaders, who were all predominantly white males--who said that if you change the governing structure of the Grady Health System and make it a private entity, create this 501(c)(3) entity, we will provide the $250 million funding that is desperately needed to recapitalize the Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, the games had started before I arrived, and I sort of walked right in, and it was a very thin line that I was trying to walk. We all know in life that you can't sit on the fence all day long; you're going to have to declare. You're going to have to declare, because if you don't declare, you're going to lose anyway, and that's what happened to me. I didn't declare, and I lost out anyway, because there was $250 million out there that was saying to the politicians who were operating the Grady Hospital--the Fulton-DeKalb Hospital Authority, that if you change your governing structure, we will provide the $250 million in capital that you need to recapitalize this institution. Because Grady at that time was trying to survive off of Medicaid dollars, Georgia Medicaid, and what we call disproportionate share dollars, which was the federal match, and it just was not sustainable. It was not sustainable, but it was so important to north central Georgia. It was the Level I trauma center; it was the major burn entity; it had the largest clinics. These were the AIDS/HIV [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome/human immunodeficiency virus] clinics in the State of Georgia. So, we managed the entire AIDS patient population through our 340B program [340B Drug Pricing Program] through Grady. So, when you look at that in the grand scheme of things, you had these major clinical initiatives: trauma, burn, and infectious disease, and you had two dynamic medical schools [Emory University School of Medicine and Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] whose students and residents utilized the Grady Health System. Story_ID: 558804 Speaker 1: To some in the community it was deteriorating, and the only way you could stop the bleeding or the potential closure of the Grady Health System [Atlanta, Georgia] was to change the governing structure and accept the $250 million from the private community. People had pledged $250 million. The Fulton/DeKalb County governments provided roughly 18 million from Fulton [Fulton County, Georgia], 6 million from DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] as a subsidy, which was unfortunately not enough, because the Medicaid dollars--every time--and this is what I used to say in public speaking--that it cost me, for every time I saw, every time I treated a Medicaid patient, it cost me thirty-five cents, because I was only getting paid sixty-five cents on a dollar. So, my costs were here, and I was being reimbursed here. It's not sustainable, and the business community realized that. The medical schools, Emory [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], realized that. Their faculty and their students used the Grady Health System as an institution where they could teach the material. So, it was imperative, from their perspective--from an education and research perspective--that the institution remain viable. And the black community, once again, like the black community in Cincinnati [Ohio], felt that they were losing something if they gave up control of the Grady Health System, and I set there on the fence and did not survive. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's an article in the Atlanta Tribune about the Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] is on the verge of financial collapse. Were they, were they in as bad a condition as--? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had no access to capital. For example, if I wanted to buy just beds, just beds, patient beds--at that time patient beds were three, four, or five thousand dollars apiece. We were operating seven hundred beds. Could I go out and buy a hundred beds? I couldn't. I didn't have the means or the dollars to do that. Speaker 2: So, Grady privatized, right? Speaker 1: They agreed to--after I left, the business community and the $250 million guarantee was on the table, and ultimately the governance structure changed. The Fulton and DeKalb County boards of commissioners relented. They capitulated and they agreed to vote to privatize Grady Health System. Speaker 2: Okay, and that's after you resigned? Speaker 1: After I resigned. Speaker 2: You knew it was going to happen? Speaker 1: It was coming, it was coming. Speaker 2: And so, it was reported different ways. But this is now at--you actually sued--you sued them, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, because my contract, they didn't want to honor my contract. Speaker 2: So, it was less than a year's pay or something that was at stake (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's correct. That's correct. Speaker 2: And this was resolved. How long did it take to resolve it? Speaker 1: It took about fifteen months to resolve. Speaker 2: Okay, that's not as bad as I would have thought. But (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 558805 Speaker 1: Where do you go next? 'Cause I--I'm assuming you consult, but I'm not going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went, you know, I went back to the propri- (laughter) proprietary side. I went back to consulting. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And this is around the time, too, of the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] being-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --formulated. And they were trying to-- Speaker 2: And approved. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so it didn't--it got approved when? Speaker 2: Twenty ten [2010] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 2010, okay. Speaker 2: It was promulgated actually in 2011. So, it was a very exciting time. Speaker 1: So, what did you think about it? I mean did you think it was--I mean were you one of the ones who didn't want it at all? Or were you someone that thought it might be a good compromise? Or did you want single payer? Speaker 2: I was an advocate for it, because I knew that we weren't ready for single payer universal coverage. But I think that, as I said earlier, this was a step in the right direction. And it was, once again, as I said, it was built on what Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had, his health plan from 1974, the healthcare reform act under his administration that Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] built upon in 1994, and that was ultimately enacted and passed into law under President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration. Because it, to me, it was a balance. You know, it wasn't going from zero to a hundred. It was going from zero to sixty or seventy, in terms of access, better access, so that we could allow all Americans to have a card or a resource, you know, based on your income; that you had a resource so that you didn't have to wait until you become deathly ill to access the healthcare system through the emergency room. And now, what we're saying is that you could go out and you can purchase healthcare insurance on the exchange, et cetera, et cetera, through Medicaid, and you can go and develop a relationship with a primary care practitioner or an internist or a doctor. You had a doctor now that was responsible for your care. That you had the subject ready expert that would help you manage your healthcare, and not somebody who was called an emergency room physician. So, to me that was the step most appropriately in the right direction. And plus, the conditions that were--the essential healthcare conditions that were built into the bill, like mammography, maternity care, you know, pre-existing illness. You know, those things were critical, are critical, to every American; the twenty-six, age limit for children and young adults to remain on their parents'--but the biggest one that I think we all think about is when we talk about pre-existing illness, the coverage there. So, I think that in that sense we have a product that, like anything, can be refined, can be enhanced. And that's what government's responsibility should be, to enhance the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as opposed to talking about its demise. Speaker 1: Right. Was it, do you think the criticism of it was completely political? I mean in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely political, as everything in Washington, D.C., you know, is political. I think that one of the things about the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act, was that it was not only political, but it had racial overtones, you know. So, that added to the furor and the angst around this product. Because if what Richard Nixon was proposing for [U.S.] Congress to act upon in 1974 had passed, as I said earlier, we would be--as a country, from a healthcare perspective, the cost would be lower and access would be greatly improved. And as I referenced earlier, President--excuse me--Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] in this op-ed piece that he wrote in The New York Times where he was almost apologizing--he was apologetic, because he was instrumental in voting down the bill (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Nixon's-- Story_ID: 558806 Speaker 1: You wrote an article ['Preparing Safety Net Hospitals for Healthcare Reform,' Otis L. Story] in March of 2011 advocating the need for safety net hospitals, right? And that was published in-- Speaker 2: Becker's [Becker's Hospital Review]. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't have the name of it here, but it was published where? Speaker 2: Becker's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And once again, it's the crying out that--access, access, access, access. It is so important that people, all people, have a source where they can go and at least be associated with a healthcare entity, whether it's a clinic or a hospital, or in this case a safety net hospital, where people can manage their healthcare in concert with healthcare professionals. And that gets into what we talked about in the last ten years, in terms of population health. How can we improve the health status of the communities that we live in, whether we live in New York City [New York, New York]; Jacksons Gap, Alabama; Dayton, Ohio? You know Americans should have access to care, better care, than what they've had in years past. And the support of the safety net hospitals is something that I think is critical. Today we call them--a dear friend of mine, you know, Dr. Siegel, Bruce Siegel, is the CEO of Essential Hospitals [America's Essential Hospitals] in Washington, D.C., and there are probably about a hundred and twenty five or a hundred and thirty Essential slash safety net hospitals around the country. And Dr. Siegel can more eloquently than I articulate why such entities are so critical to those who live primarily in underserved communities, because they're the safety net. You don't have safety net hospitals in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you know. You don't have them up on the East Side of Manhattan [New York]. You have them in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]; you have them in Washington, D.C. in the inner city. They're there for a reason, because of the lack of access; the connectivity is not there. So, that's what, you know, I was advocating for, because too many people who live at or near the poverty line die prematurely. One of the issues that we have in this country today is with diabetes, metabolic diseases. We have too many people who lose digits at an early age. And when you start removing people's digits, whether it's their toes, and then their foot up to the ankle and then below the knee, the mortality within five years, in some cases it's like almost like 88 percent, it's a sad, sad, commentary. I mean, these are facts that we all know and we've known for years. So, by improving access to healthcare, we can retard some of these developments. Story_ID: 558807 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the Azul Health Group [Jacksonville, Florida]. Now, where was it? Now, this is before you wrote the article ['Preparing Safety Net Hospitals for Healthcare Reform,' Otis L. Story]. I don't know how it got skipped over, but this is 2009? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was, that was, it was a private--that was a company that a couple of, two friends of mine, we formed. And the intent was, again, to try to build the business by going out and getting contracts, and so we worked with small businesses. We had a couple--for example, I was responsible for working in Birmingham, Alabama. I was hired by the Jefferson County [Alabama] commissioners to manage the closure of Cooper Green Hospital [Cooper Green Mercy Health Services, Birmingham, Alabama]. Now-- Speaker 1: Cooper Green was a-- Speaker 2: A safety net hospital (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A safety net hospital. Speaker 2: Yeah, I walked right in to that one. Very good, very good. But it was, it was a safety net hospital that was suffering, not because of access. Well, I shouldn't say the hospital was suffering. It wasn't--the community wasn't suffering because of an issue around access. There are several hospitals--there're a multiplicity of hospitals in Jefferson County. The problem, as I saw it, with Cooper Green is that it had outlived its usefulness, and it would cost more money to try to bring it up to community standards, as opposed to taking the same dollars and develop a healthcare network which would serve as the de facto safety net; not a safety net at an acute care hospital, but serve as the safety net by developing these medical homes. I don't like to call them clinics, medical homes, out dispersed in the neighborhood, which would increase access from a logistics perspective. So, in Jefferson County where you have over a million people almost, having to come downtown to one place--my plan that I suggested and presented to the county commissioners of Jefferson County was to close the acute care operation, not the ambulatory piece of the urgent care, but to develop an urgent care. So, what I suggested is close the hospital, the acute care, expand the clinic operation, transform the emergency room into an urgent care center, and develop these medical homes throughout Jefferson County, so that the people who live in Smithville [Alabama], Avondale [Birmingham, Alabama], Ensley [Birmingham, Alabama], and Bessemer [Alabama], would have a healthcare resource in their community. So, instead of having to take an hour and a half on the bus to get to downtown Birmingham, they could either walk, take transportation on one bus, twenty minutes to a healthcare resource that was embedded in their community, called a medical home where they could receive primary care. And if they needed to be hospitalized, I had developed contracts with the major acute care hospitals that were dispersed throughout Jefferson County so that the doctors in the medical home could refer a patient, admit a patient to St. Vincent's [St. Vincent's Hospital; St. Vincent's Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama], Brookwood Baptist [Brookwood Baptist Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama], Baptist Princeton [Princeton Baptist Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama], UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama], et cetera, et cetera. So, my way of thinking was that we take these dollars, these tax dollars, and instead of putting them into a hospital that was deteriorating because it didn't have enough doctors and it didn't have enough money to recapitalize the hospital, that we could take these dollars and utilize them more appropriately. So, close the acute care hospital, expand the ambulatory operation, and transform the ED [emergency department] into an urgent care center on steroids. Make it the most active operation. Provide additional services that other urgent care facilities do not provide. Make it the prototype of urgent care service, and develop the medical homes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: That, to me, was a better option. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, was that, is that what happened? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The good news today is that in Birmingham the ambulatory setting is still functioning, and the urgent care, and they have developed these medical home sites, or clinics, if you will, outside, and working with the University of Alabama [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama] to provide the subject matter experts. Story_ID: 558808 Speaker 1: Is Cooper Green [Cooper Green Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama] still--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it's still operating; it's still--the name is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. But it was changed to-- Speaker 2: Mercy. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, they put--it's the Cooper Green Mercy health system [Cooper Green Mercy Health Services, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And they've actually--because they have not--because they have not been operating a hospital, they've had the opportunity to take some of those dollars, those limited dollars, and they've invested in the physical plant; they've done some renovations. They were trying to run a three hundred bed hospital, you know. So, now that's done. They don't operate a three hundred bed hospital; they run an ambulatory clinic, and those clinics have some of the best doctors in the world. Because one of the things that I had done before I left was to establish these contracts with the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] for the sub-specialists: pulmonology, dermatology, endocrinologist, cardiology; across the board, orthopedics. So, you had some of the best doctors in the world providing care in the ambulatory care setting. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, has that model been picked up by other hospitals in the same fix as those hospitals (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so; I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because this was--the university hospital [University of Alabama at Birmingham Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama] and the medical school, UAB medical school [University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama], had always been invested, heavily invested, in Cooper Green. So for me to walk across the street, literally, to develop these contracts was to me a no brainer. It was just the structure. And you agree, once again, on the scope of work, and the price point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the medical--the faculty, they didn't consider it a burden or a challenge to work at Cooper Green. So, for me to identify those who would be willing to work, my pathway was somewhat already paved for me. It had already been created because of the teaching programs that were in place. Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. Speaker 2: So, in other words, we went from teaching clinics to contracts with doctors in and outside of the medical center. Because I was willing to contract with any physician who was willing to provide services in our ambulatory care setting. So, some of the doctors that I contracted with were not on the faculty at the University of Alabama medical school; they were outside private practitioners. And I did that because I wanted to send a message to the community that this wasn't a takeover by the medical school of Cooper Green. Remember the issues that they had in Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I was trying to tap down some of the political upheaval around the closure of Cooper Green, which was considered a black hospital. And when it opened, it opened as a de facto black hospital. And the history of it, which I found very interesting once I started working in it, is that Cooper Green was built on--the site it was built on, a black church had sold the property to the county to build this black church, moved out during the civil rights era. It was very interesting. Story_ID: 558809 Speaker 1: You're consulting basically as an interim CEO, or as a--? Speaker 2: No, I had been--prior to taking the job at East Orange [New Jersey], I'd been doing consulting work (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: I had worked with the folks, like I said, at Cooper Green [Cooper Green Hospital; Cooper Green Mercy Health Services, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was hired by the county commissioners there. I did some other small jobs at Tampa General [Tampa General Hospital] in Tampa, Florida, and I had an opportunity to go to work for Prospect Medical Holdings [Prospect Medical Holdings, Inc.] in 2015 as the chief transition officer. Once again, a private corporation located in California, and I was back into my sweet spot on the proprietary side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a private corporation that today owns twenty hospitals. Speaker 1: Okay, wait a minute. I don't want to get too far ahead. So, we'll get the story--all right, we'll pick up in 2015 later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Well, go ahead then (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I'd been doing small consulting jobs, and I had the opportunity to join with Prospect Medical Holdings, which is a proprietary company that owns, today owns twenty hospitals, ten east of the Mississippi River and ten west of the Mississippi River. And I was hired initially by Prospect in August of 2015 to serve as the chief transition officer. They were looking to purchase an asset in East Orange, New Jersey called East Orange General Hospital, so I was brought in to work on the development of that transition plan. And unfortunately, before my company was able to acquire the hospital, the hospital slipped into bankruptcy. So, we were able to purchase the assets out of bankruptcy after six months. After we purchased it, I became the chief executive officer in March of 2016. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's the current position I hold today, as chief executive officer. Speaker 2: All right, okay. East Orange is right outside of Newark [New Jersey], right? Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, it sit rights there. It's a juxtaposition of Newark, East Orange, South Orange [New Jersey], and Orange [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And West Orange [New Jersey]. All of them are juxtapositioned. And-- Speaker 2: I've actually been to East Orange once, and I mean it seems like a bedroom community-- Speaker 1: It is. Many years ago it was considered a bedroom community, but now it's more urban than it was, you know, thirty-five or forty years ago. You can imagine, the demographics have changed. It's largely made up of residents whose family origin is the Caribbean. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Haiti, Jamaica, Guyana. And there are some folks who live in East Orange--a significant number of folks who live in East Orange are from Africa. So, it's a very diverse community in that sense, that you have the different ethnic groups from the Caribbean, including Hispanics, Central America, et cetera, et cetera. And it's now--we're in a position now where we're--we've been at it for a year, so we're turning the corner on its transformation. So, I'm really excited about that, where we are headed with this entity. Story_ID: 558810 Speaker 1: It doesn't have the same needs as the hospital in Birmingham [Alabama], as Cooper Green [Cooper Green Hospital; Cooper Green Mercy Health Services]? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And the difference between Cooper Green and East Orange General [East Orange General Hospital, East Orange, New Jersey] is that Cooper Green was surrounded by many hospitals. East Orange is the only asset in East Orange [New Jersey]. There are sixty-five thousand residents, documented residents, in East Orange, and some folks will tell you that there're probably between ten and fifteen undocumented residents. So, you can have a population between sixty-five and seventy-five thousand residents without an acute care hospital, if Prospect [Prospect Medical Holdings, Inc.] had not been successful in its bid to purchase the asset out of bankruptcy and operate, continued to operate as an acute care facility. And that's what we've been doing over the last year, is reinvesting millions of dollars in the asset. Once again, Cooper Green did not have the millions of dollars to recapitalize it or to operate the facility. The Grady Health System in Atlanta [Georgia] had a $250 million check sitting out there, saying that if you change your governing structure, you can cash the check. What we have said--during the bankruptcy, my company said to the bankruptcy judge and the administrative lawyer is that we're willing to invest $52 million in capital to revitalize and to operate this institution a guarantee five years if we're selected as the preferred purchaser. We're willing to sit with the attorney general and the department of health of New Jersey [New Jersey Department of Health] and develop a list of conditions that we will operate under, and they will monitor us, and we guarantee that we will honor those conditions for the next five years, on top of the $52 million investment that we're willing to put into this hospital. So, that's what we're doing here. Speaker 1: Okay. And the prospects look--? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Good? Okay. Speaker 2: We sort of came out the gate a little slow, but I think that, you know, the key to driving any clinical transformation and saving a hospital starts with the white coats. You have to have a medical staff that's invested in the institution, and we've been able to recruit and build relationships I have with some key physicians. For example, in East Orange, where I just shared with you that there are sixty-five thousand residents, on one of its main streets called Central Avenue where the hospital is located, if you would drive a mile north or a mile south, you could not locate an OB/GYN [obstetrics/gynecology] practitioner on the main thoroughfare. Sixty-five thousand plus, or seventy thousand people, half of them are female, more than half of them are female, so there's thirty-five thousand people, and you don't have a women's health center in this bustling, robust, women's health initiative. Speaker 1: No clinic or anything? Speaker 2: They have doctors in private practice. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you don't have a comprehensive women's health initiative in the community where a woman can go in and she can see a provider for a mammogram, bone density, ultrasound; just some of the basics that all women--comprehensive women's programs have. Look at breast centers. You know, we talk about how many women die prematurely from breast cancer and cervical cancer. So, you don't have an oncologist working with the other practitioners in a comprehensive breast center, women's center, in a community where you have over thirty-five thousand females? Story_ID: 558811 Speaker 1: And one of the things that is rather interesting about East Orange [New Jersey] is that they have a large retirement community, believe it or not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In the urban--people who have made decisions to downsize, but remain in East Orange. Speaker 2: Are they mostly homeowners? Speaker 1: They were former homeowners who have gone to condos. Two of the newest properties in East Orange today, one is fifty-five plus. A $40 or 60 million asset is being built; it's a beautiful eight or ten story building, two of them, gorgeous. So, what we're seeing is that seniors are opting to downsize, but they want to stay in their community. They want to be around their children, their grandchildren, their friends. And it was very interesting talking with Dr. Rae [Norma A. Rae-Layne], who's an OB/GYN practitioner [obstetrics/gynecology], about the needs of older women for GYN care, and that in nursing homes we seem to have forgotten that they're still women, even though they're over seventy years of age. Then we have gerontologists in geriatric medicine--geriatric physicians practicing geriatric medicine, I should say, but they're not GYN practitioners. And you have women who are seventy-five, seventy-two, seventy, sixty-eight, who still want to be able to see a GYN practitioner, not a geriatric. Because they say, "I'm not that old, you know. You know, I'm seventy-two, I'm seventy-five, I'm still active. I need to see a GYN practitioner." So, we're trying to identify clinical programs that add, that meet the needs of the community. Story_ID: 558812 Speaker 1: We completed our company- community health needs assessment this winter, and our focus is on behavioral health, women's health, and metabolic diseases. Speaker 2: Now, behavioral health, are we talking about mental-- Speaker 1: Mental illnesses. Speaker 2: --illnesses. Speaker 1: And most of those come with what we call dual diagnoses. They have some mental issues, but they also have some health related, some other clinical need. And, you know, does the clinical issue predispose them to the behavioral health, or does the behavioral health predispose them to the, you know, to the clinical? And we see that with people who have mental illness. They use--they abuse substances, mostly illegal substances, and then their body starts to break down, so then they develop these comorbidities like heart disease and diabetes. Speaker 2: I think I mentioned, David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] when he was surgeon general to--you know, mental health was of the big issues that the black community does not really deal with very well, or we'll not dealt with very well in terms of-- Speaker 1: Most communities, until the last five or ten years we all shunned, we all looked the other way in terms of mental health. Now, we talk about behavioral health. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We changed the word gradually, right. We talk about--we don't talk about--you don't hear people talk about mental health. We talk about behavioral health, because mental health, for so long in this country, carried with it such negative connotations. Speaker 2: Like the crazy uncle upstairs or down in the basement (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, don't bother with--you know, that's Uncle Joe who's beating on the wall. Yeah, well, we need to let Uncle Joe out and come downstairs, and we need to work with Uncle Joe and treat Uncle Joe, because Uncle Joe could be a diabetic, and Uncle Joe could have some other, you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --clinical diagnosis. So, what we're trying to do in our community of East Orange [New Jersey] today is to address those dual diagnoses around behavioral health, and reach out to our young adults, reach out to those who are still abusing substances, illegal substances in particular, but legal in a lot of cases, you know, that are causing them all kinds of problems. And I tell you, when I walk through our behavioral health unit [at East Orange General Hospital, East Orange, New Jersey], there are a lot of sad things that you see in a hospital. You go to a burn unit, go to a pediatric unit, go to a cancer unit, and you see young and old victims. But when you walk into a mental health unit and you see somebody who looks just like yourself--dressed, casual, neat, not dirty--but had no control of their mental faculties and is at risk to do harm to themselves or someone else, but who could sit down with you and have a conversation for fifteen or twenty minutes, and then all of a sudden they'll tell you, "You know, that trip to the moon last night, I was just so angry. I'm so angry I could just kill somebody." Then you're like, "Oh, okay." We were just talking about, you know, what's going to happen with the Knicks [New York Knicks], you know, and then all of a sudden they just--you know, it's just really sad. Because, you don't know. You treat them medically, you know, there're therapy groups, et cetera, et cetera, but it's just such a challenging disease, such a challenging disease. And you see young and old, and they just, like I said, they look just as normal as you or me. Story_ID: 558813 Speaker 1: So as, as the years go by, more of these hospitals are closing. I don't know, they may have made--I know Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois], Provident [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], you go on down the line, you know, with hospitals that once served, you know, the underserved community and the poor community, you know, going by the wayside. What's the future--so does the future look like what you're doing--what you did at Cooper Green [Cooper Green Hospital; Cooper Green Mercy Health Services, Birmingham, Alabama] and what you're doing in other places? Speaker 2: (Cough) I absolutely believe we have to do something like that or similar to that, or some enhancements to that. For example, I'm networking in Essex County [New Jersey], the same county that I worked in twenty-five years ago. And at that time Orange Memorial Hospital [The Hospital Center at Orange, Orange, New Jersey] was open, United Hospital [Newark, New Jersey] was open, St. James Hospital [Newark, New Jersey] was open, Columbia Hospital [sic. Columbus Hospital; Columbus Hospital LTACH, Newark, New Jersey] was open, and Irvington General [Irvington General Hospital, Irvington, New Jersey] were all open. Five hospitals in Essex County have closed over the last--in particular the last fifteen years. And this hospital [East Orange General Hospital, East Orange, New Jersey] was in bankruptcy and another hospital a mile or two miles from it was also in bankruptcy in 2016 and 2015. So, when you think about what is happening in terms of access to acute care, absolutely the numbers are shrinking, especially in the more densely populated communities. I believe that the alternative to that is the development of these medical homes; we say clinics, but I prefer, once again, the nomenclature around population health in terms of medical homes, so that access to care is readily available. You mentioned Dr. Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], who happens to be from my hometown of Anniston, Alabama. I believe, as Dr. Satcher and Dr. Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] did, that, you know, we have to be able to create these medical models so that we can intervene in people's lives earlier. It goes beyond just when I talk about episodes, because hospitals treat incidences--episodic, you know, if something happens, you go to a hospital. But what we're advocating today is healthcare, that it's continuum. It involves nutrition, wellness components-- Speaker 1: So preventive health and maintenance. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and exercise. So, you know--even jobs, you know, helping people. Many healthcare--the more progressive healthcare professionals will tell you that their patients are sick because they don't have a job, they're sick because they don't have a job, because of their mental well being; not that they're crazy or anything like that, but they're depressed, they're disheartened because they don't have a job. They're nutritional intake is compromised because they can't buy fresh vegetables, et cetera, et cetera. They can't, they're not on a gluten free diet, you know. They don't shop at Whole Foods [Whole Foods Market, Inc.] or Trader Joe's [Trader Joe's Company]. They can't do that, because those facilities are not in their community. So, once again, when you talk about access to care in terms of population health, it is this--it is something that is pervasive throughout the individual's life; it's everything that makes us whole. And that's what healthcare needs to be about. What are all the things that make us whole, from an educational perspective? You know, because I have a responsibility as an individual to take care of myself, but if I don't have the resources, meaning the subject matter experts--if I don't have a partner or provider who can help me along this healthcare highway--I mean I know how to drive from Anniston, Alabama to 42nd Street and Broadway [New York, New York]. But somebody, my [maternal] uncle [Otis Wilson]--there was a roadmap that was given to me. If we don't do that for Americans regardless of their socioeconomic status, they're going to veer off to the side; they're going to run off into the ditch; they're going to become stagnated; and then they're going to wait until it's stage three or stage four cancer. That's why we have to, in my way of thinking, drive this whole concept around improving access to care. We have to optimize around what we can do to create these opportunities at every level, whether it's in the school system or in the outside in the churches. That we need to be able to create these access points where people can go to receive care. Story_ID: 558814 Speaker 1: Now, do you see yourself staying in New Jersey, or do you see yourself, I guess going back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, our company [Prospect Medical Holdings, Inc.] has a commitment, and I share that commitment that we will--a five year--we signed an asset purchase agreement, an APA, and it was signed with the attorney general of the State of New Jersey. So, it is a legal, binding document that we're obligated to honor by law. And the attorney general of New Jersey I trust will-- Speaker 1: Sure, I'm just asking about in terms of your career. Would you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would love to be able to finish my career in the next three years or the next four years working right in Jersey on the transformation of East Orange General Hospital [East Orange, New Jersey] into a more comprehensive healthcare entity. Speaker 1: And after that do you see yourself going back to Alabama, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I'd love to go back to Alabama, to Anniston [Alabama] and Birmingham [Alabama] to be involved in the educational aspects of healthcare and volunteer work. I would love to be able to join the folks as an adjunct faculty member at UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama] or even in my home county back at Jacksonville State [Jacksonville State University, Jacksonville, Alabama], somewhere in the classroom where I can continue to lend my support to the next generation of healthcare professionals. Story_ID: 558815 Speaker 1: You think we're any closer to single payer [single payer healthcare]? Speaker 2: We will eventually, I think in the next--it will start to accelerate because of the issues around the cost of healthcare. The cost of healthcare, even under the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration, is still rising. So, there has to be some corrective, there has to be some correction, and repealing the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] is not correction; that's destroying a product, and I don't think that that's the answer. The answer, in my mind, is that we have to adjust it, make some adjustments. Bring other people back into the fold. The biggest challenge to the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act is practitioners, physicians, physicians. If we can develop models of care where we don't strain the limited resources--these medical homes with--we have a lot of mid-levels of nurse practitioners and physician assistants. If we can create more providers and create a better model around population health, we'll be able to tap down, I believe, this ever increasing cost of healthcare, because we'll be intervening in our collective lives earlier. Speaker 1: So everything won't be a catastrophic crisis (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. They won't be running to the emergency room. There are three areas in a hospital which are very expensive: the emergency room, the operating theater, and our intensive care units. So as we go forward, I believe in our industry, hospitals are going to be designed around those three entities: emergency medicine, perioperative, and ICUs. Story_ID: 558816 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would change or reverse if you could, in your career? Speaker 2: In my career. I think I would have--I moved around a great deal. The first three jobs--I spent six years at the Ochsner Clinic [Ochsner Foundation Hospital; Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The next job was at the University of Alabama [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama], I spent five years there, and I spent six years at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey [Newark, New Jersey]. If I could do it all over again, I would have loved to have stayed at the Ochsner Clinic for ten or fifteen years. And if that was not the case, I would have loved to have spent ten years at the University of Alabama. If that was not the case, ten years at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. I just, in my--those first three jobs, I wish that I'd made the decision or had the opportunity to spend at least twice as many years there. They were great institutions, they're great institutions today, and I think that I could have been able to grow more in each one, in either one of those three settings, and I would have been able to, probably would have been able to provide more care in those communities. I think I would have been more beneficial outside the hospital. Because I haven't--one of the things like church--I would have--I have a sense that I would have had a greater responsibility from a social/religious perspective if I had opted to stay in one community longer. Speaker 1: We started on that note when you were talking about the relationships outside of the hospital (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --being more important than the ones inside. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And I think that if I had remained in any one of those communities as I developed as a young administrator, then my outside relationships-- Speaker 1: Would be more seasoned? Speaker 2: Absolutely, they would have been more seasoned, and I would have been able to add more value as a healthcare professional internally in the hospital, and I would have been a value added asset, I think, to the greater community, because I was involved in things like the Red Cross [American Red Cross], the transplant program in my community, school business partnerships; I was a member of different social organizations. And like, I love sports, and when I was in Cincinnati [Ohio] I worked with the coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers, who was the first black football player that was recruited by the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] by Bear Bryant who's from Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, John [John Mitchell]. So, I would have had an opportunity to sort of--my roots would have been deeper in the community, and I think that you grow those roots when they're more than three to five years. You know, to really have a solid foundation in the community, I think you need to be there, you know, seven, ten--you know, fifteen years. Story_ID: 558817 Speaker 1: So, we always ask this question too. When you look back over your body of work again, and your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, that's a very interesting question, because I think that throughout my career there have been opportunities where I have been able to reach out into the community. And because I'm not a practitioner, you know, I don't eviscerate; I don't operate on people. I think that what this job has created for me is a platform where I can reach out into the community to help elevate and create access to better care for others. And I think that I had that opportunity at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey [Newark, New Jersey] where I was more involved in reaching out and embracing the community in which I served. And that, to me, was the one time in those six years in my career where I was able to embrace the community that I served, because I spent those six years, which were long years, but I did things in terms of the transplant program I got involved in, and reviewing grants with the federal government because of diabetes in my family, and being involved in diabetes and school business partnerships, looking for that next generation of health care professionals. And these were middle school students. We had a comprehensive program with the Newark board of education [Newark Public Schools Advisory Board]. So, it was creating avenues like that. Like, we had the baby boarders. Those were the babies who were born addicted to crack cocaine. Being able to reach out and create opportunities to get those boarder babies--we called them boarder babies because they were boarders; they were healthy children. We had one whose name was Omar [ph.], who was about two years old and had never seen natural light, because he was a ward of the state and we couldn't take him outside. We were chastised by the state department of health's division of youth and family services [State of New Jersey Department of Health Division of Family Health Services] because the child was taken outside one weekend. So, I would say my experiences with the women and men who I've worked with at the University Hospital in Newark, New Jersey was probably the most pervasive, you know, of my career, because I was able to do a lot of things that--. We built. I had access to capital, so we built and renovated the hospital; we had new modalities. So, I had a tremendous amount of impact on the care that we were providing internally as an administrator, because I had the power of the pen. I could hire certain people, and we could develop certain technologies. Like, we had, at that time we had one of the first intraoperative cancer programs, where right inside of the cancer center, we had an operating theater. So, you eviscerate the patient and you could radiate the tumor right there. You didn't had to take the patient to the operating room and then bring them back to the cancer center. So, we were doing innovative things like that in Newark, New Jersey on the clinical side. Story_ID: 558818 Speaker 1: And from a public relations or human relations perspective, I was able to reach out into the community. We had large health fairs. We had programs with the church. You mentioned the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], Reverend Watley [William D. Watley], Reverend Watley at St. James [St. James A.M.E. Church, Newark, New Jersey] and his noon service--being able to reach out and build that construct. Because the violence was so pervasive throughout the Newark, Essex County [New Jersey] community, Dr. Bruce Siegel [sic.]--Dr. Siegel, John Siegel [John H. Siegel], who's the traumatologist--I was able to go and bring people in to our hospital and say, "Look what we're doing in terms of blunt and penetrating trauma. Here's a young man who's been in the trauma center twice in the last eight months with bullets penetrating him. We have to stop this senseless violence." So, I was able to do more than just be a provider of care, episodic care. We actually were focusing on population health back in the early '90s [1990s], trying to improve the health status of the host community. Things that we advocate today we were doing in the 1990s, early 1990s, and not calling it population health, but community health fairs, hiring young mothers who were coders. You know, one of the things that we are challenged with is hiring subject matter experts. So, I was working with a gentleman by the name of Mr. Ottobotta [ph.] in the North Ward [Newark, New Jersey] who was taking young mothers, single parents, one or two kids. He had a daycare center, so while the mothers were learning to do coding, the kids were being taken care of, and we hired them. So, it was all about the circle of life. And that's what I found was so meaningful for me personally, and rewarding for me personally, was having an opportunity to serve that community during some very, very, difficult times because of the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic and the violence centered around crack cocaine. Story_ID: 558819 Speaker 1: That I was able to develop programs that actually, I believe, were impactful. Speaker 2: And you had the latitude to do it. Speaker 1: I had the latitude to do it, because I had access to resources. I had dollars, as a young chief operating officer, the people that I worked for--the president, Dr. Stanley Bergen [Stanley S. Bergen, Jr.]; the CEO; Mark [ph.] and Bill Vasquez [William L. Vazquez] that I worked it--I had the latitude to run University Hospital [Newark, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I built the trauma center; exp- I developed--we built and expanded our trauma center that's still there today. It was one of the first--you see it on TV. It's on TV on these shows, et cetera, et cetera. What we did--very quickly, it was the state of the art. You come into one of the trauma bays, there's probably four of them. The doors behind the patient--if the patient had to go to the CT scanner or an MRI, you just pushed them right through; you didn't have to go down the hall or anything. We had a helicopter, a helipad, on the roof. We had a dedicated elevator, so when a patient, if they were flown in off of Interstate 95--they were flown in and got off, and got on the elevator right down into the trauma bay. Innovative, you know. I worked with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] back in the early '90s [1990s]. The issues centered around terror incidents, et cetera, et cetera. Unfortunately, some of the people were those identified with the World Trade Center [New York, New York]. If you look at the first bombing of the World Trade Center on any news report, that evening there were lights that were lighting up the World Trade Center garage. Those were lights from my hospital. I purchased those lights as part of our--we had a very, very, robust first responders program. And you say well, wait a minute, you're in New Jersey. The World Trade Center is located in Manhattan [New York]. Because of the alarm that went out when the bombing occurred, the first responders north of 34th Street were caught in traffic. Speaker 2: Right. I think I remember hearing that. Speaker 1: I can come--my folks could come right out 78, Interstate 78 right through the Holland Tunnel and make a right turn and we were there. So, we were the first to set up. So, we built programs like that. Our first responders were state of the art. Story_ID: 558820 Speaker 1: What did we do with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]? The FBI came to our hospital out of a tragic situation. It was friendly fire where a young ATF [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives] officer was shot by a Newark [New Jersey] police officer, but his life was saved, because of that golden hour of trauma we were there first. So, in a meeting that we had with the special agent in charge in Newark, Dr. Tortello [ph.] and others were sitting around just having a casual conversation. So, we said, "Oh, so, this golden hour thing, it's real?" "Yes, it's real." Medical intervention immediately will save anybody's life. That's what it's all about, intervention. So, we developed a training program for the FBI, with the FBI, for and with the FBI in Quantico [Virginia] at the Marine base [Marine Corps Base Quantico]. And we trained in Pennsylvania, Quantico, and in Newark with the FBI, and we committed to have a first responder team that consisted of a PGY-3 or a fellow, a resident--not a first year resident or a second--but at least a third or fourth year resident or a fellow as part of the first responder's team. So, when the FBI went into make an arrest or a raid, we were on the scene, and we agreed that they would notify us. All we needed was one hour, because obviously they would not reveal anything more than that, because it was confidential, you know, information, because it was the element of surprise. To maintain the integrity of their raids, they couldn't share information. We couldn't have any more lead time than an hour. And those individuals were identified, put in an ambulance, and drove to a certain spot, told to go to a certain spot. And then the FBI would then escort them to the scene. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So when they made the raid, if there was a shootout they were right there; not ten minutes later, not five minutes later, but instantaneously they were there to treat. So, it was a great experience, the six years I spent at UMDNJ [University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey]. It was, I did a variety of things. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I worked with Sharpe James. Sharpe James, his vision for the City of Newark, I witness that today for myself. He talked about how this city would be transformed, because when I stood with Mayor Sharpe James on the medical school roof some twenty-five years ago, he pointed to all the projects, these high rises that would disappear, and he said that, "Single family homes will be there one day, Otis [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]." They're there today. But those were the communities that we served, health fairs and different activities and school business partnerships. So, I think that my years in Newark, New Jersey from 1990 to 1996, my first professional experience, I think they were the most impactful in terms of service. Story_ID: 558821 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. You have children, right? Speaker 2: I have six children. I have three--I have intergenerational children. I have three boys and three girls. And my younger children--because of my delay today, I happened to have lunch with my youngest daughter [Avana Story] in the Atlanta airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], because she was coming from UNC Chapel Hill. She's a graduate of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and she's studying at UAB [University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama] and she's going to be a pediatric orthodontist. And my youngest son [Prince James Story] is a freshman at the University of Alabama, Birmingham, UAB. So, my two youngest children are both in Birmingham [Alabama] studying at the University of Alabama in Birmingham. My middle daughter is Jasmyn [Jasmyn Story], she's all Jazz. She has her own foundation that she established last year for colored people, a foundation for colored people. She's into restorative justice. She's a graduate of the college of London [University College London] in London, England. She's lived in London and studied there for a year. She studied in--she speaks Italian. She was embedded with an Italian family in Florence, Italy her junior year. She's a graduate of Skidmore College [Saratoga Springs, New York]. Her first job she got on her own in Pittsburg, California, which is outside the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area] near Concord [California]. So, I'm very proud of her. And she works very hard to create, to help young people create options in their own life, other than violence and drugs, you know, or other illicit or deviate behavior. And she works very hard as a young educator in an alternative school in the Bay Area. So, I'm very proud of what my young children are doing today. And my older boys, my oldest son, he's in Atlanta [Georgia], and my next oldest son is in Jacksonville [Florida], and my oldest daughter is in Kansas City [Missouri] with my grandsons, who, the baby boy, my youngest grandson, he'll probably play on Sunday. He's five years old, but he's a baller. Speaker 1: Oh, really (laughter)? Speaker 2: He's a football player. (Laughter) So, and my wife [Story's second wife Ava McNair Story] is, what she does in her mission is that she's been a sales director with Mary Kay cosmetics [Mary Kay Inc.] for over twenty-five years. And she loves working, not just with women in enriching and helping women to develop their greatness, but with other people. You know, she (cough), she has never hesitated to offer her love and support to other people. But in her business at Mary Kay, that was her ministry; that was the pathway. And she's still in Mary Kay, but that's what she's done over the last twenty-five years in helping women to enrich and expand their own being. She talks about the greatness that's always inside all of us, and that it will be--you know, if you find that peace, it's easy for that greatness to manifest itself. So, she works with women who--single parents in challenged relationships, and she does the same thing with men who are in challenged relationships. She'll offer, you know, her love and support, her counsel and her guidance. And, that's her greatness. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She enjoys, you know, helping others, you know. I do it through healthcare, and she's done it over twenty-five years through Mary Kay. Story_ID: 558822 Speaker 1: Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Simply as a caring person, just a caring person, just caring. You know, we have to just care. You know, we don't have to get fancy; we just got to care, care about somebody other than yourself. Just care about somebody. Care about the world in which you live. You know, I was raised, you know, to respect your God, respect yourself, and respect the world in which you live. So, just care about, you know, your spiritual well being. Care about yourself, I mean the way you look, the way you dress, and the people around you. You know, I'm from the South. Say, "Good morning," say, "Thank you," "Yes, sir," "No ma'am." Care about somebody other than yourself. And that's what I try to do, just to care. I look, and I travel. A lady--because I believe--as my mom [Martha Wilson Story] and daddy [Tom Story, Sr.] raised me--my greatest education was in Gaines Chapel A.M.E. Church [Anniston, Alabama]. Miss Julia Weeks [ph.], you know, was my Sunday school teacher who was a Sunday school teacher for twelve of the Story children, all the Story family. I come from a large family, and we lived right next to the parsonage. So, Miss Julia Weeks probably touched all ten of us, because we went to the same church for years. But we were raised--you know, just respect your God, respect yourself, and respect the world--everything. My daddy would tell me when I would go out and sweep the yard, "Don't just sweep in front of your house, Leon [HistoryMaker Otis L. Story, Sr.]. Sweep Miss Crook's [Sara Crook (ph.)] yard." She was the lady who owned the place that we lived in. "You know, not for money. Do it. Miss Crook is single. Yeah, she's a schoolteacher. You know, she didn't ask you to do it, but you do it because you care what your front yard looks like." We lived in a double shotgun. It was twelve of us on one side, and it was only her on one side. She had the same square footage, it was just her. And she was a schoolteacher, so she had more material things than we did, but that didn't matter to my dad. My dad--it was important that I understood that I was a part of something that was greater than myself. I cared about that. "Fear no man, only your God. Fear no man, only your God." And he lived that way. He didn't worry about--I was sent to New York [New York] as a child when I was twelve years old because my mother did not want Emmett Till--you know, that legacy, for Leon. My mother made that decision. My daddy said, "You can stay here, son. Because, you know, we don't go out looking for trouble, but you don't let anybody put their hands on you, nobody." And that's just the way he was. "You don't look for trouble, but nobody puts their hands on you. You defend yourself." So, all I'm saying is that we talk about Black Lives Matter. Black lives have always mattered. My mama--black lives mattered. My grandmamma [Lois Wilson (ph.)], my uncle, Otis [Otis Wilson], who I'm named after--you know, in the 1920s black lives mattered, yeah. So, we know that. And that's what I want to be able to do, is just to keep saying that. I say it over and over again. I'm a humane man. All lives matter to Otis Story, all lives matter. Story_ID: 558823 Speaker 1: And anytime I get an opportunity to breathe a breath, I want to be able to do something to make a difference in somebody's life. I got off a plane today at LaGuardia Airport [New York, New York]. I had my Metro card, but I didn't know how to check how much money I had on it. I asked the young lady--there was another lady standing there who didn't have enough money to get on the bus. And she asked the other young lady, "Do you have change for a dollar, and I'll just pay." And I said, "No, don't worry about that." I said, "Here, I just put money on my card. Put her card in there, and I'll put money on there." So, I put money on her card so she could get on the bus. It so happened we both were getting on the same bus. When I got out to the curb, I did not know that you have to put your card into the machine and get a receipt to get on the bus. I was standing there and the bus was getting ready to leave, and she said, "No, don't leave him." She got off the bus, and she stood there at the door and said, "Don't leave him." She was telling me to push the button, and I couldn't comprehend what I was supposed to do. She got off the bus and she stood there in the doorway and came back and said, "Don't leave him," and she came back to help me. That's the way I was raised, that you don't look for anything in return, but if your blessings are given freely, my Lord and Savior Jesus says, "I'll bless you more than you could ever, ever think." And my wife [Story's second wife, Ava McNair Story] says it all the time, because she's an absolutely true witness that God will, if you do the right thing. And so, I'm learning still. And that's why I love healthcare, because I'm trying to build something in East Orange [New Jersey] that will add value--a women's health initiative, behavioral health--to help people who are trapped in their own mind--metabolic diseases. We see so many young people today in our community of East Orange who are coming down with Type 2 diabetes at the ages of twelve; Type 2, not Type 1. They're twelve and fifteen years old. So, we're trying to build in our metabolic program things that add value to the lives of those we serve, just because I care. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That's all. So, that's where we're focused. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Yes, sir, thank you...