 Story_ID: 169393 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Yvonne Scruggs-Leftwich and it's spelled Y-V-O-N-N-E, and the last name is hyphenated. It's S-C-R-U-G-G-S,-L-E-F-T-W-I-C-H. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Niagara Falls, New York on the 24th of June in 1933. Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Uh, I am a political scientist, I am an academic. I am a professor at the National Labor College but I also have spent ten years until a couple of months ago as an executive director and chief operating officer of the national advocacy and policy organization called The Black Leadership Forum. So I think I would probably describe my occupation as policy analyst, public intellectual in advocate in the field of political science and institutional change for civil rights. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 1st of August of 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time and you don't have to give your present address? Speaker 2: We're in my home in Wheaton, Maryland, which is one of the closest end suburbs of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169394 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, I see. I don't have to answer. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Corn (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: White corn, fresh picked, cooked in milk. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, actually my favorite color is black, but I also like orange and red, but my favorite color is really black. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yeah, fall, autumn. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere it's cool. I do not like hot weather, so I'm inclined toward the more rustic, bucolic places that do have indoor plumbing and central heating, but I don't like camping out, but, otherwise, places like New England, upstate New York. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Keep it simple, stupid. (Laughter) That is one of my favorite saying. My husband says that is my very favorite saying, but also I guess that's probably--friends of mine say that I always ask for the bottom line, that I'm not overwhelmed by a lot of extraneous detail, but well, I guess that's consistent with keep it simple, stupid. Story_ID: 169395 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family and about your mother and about your father. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Geneva Ellen Byrd and, of course, Scruggs was her married name. I guess Byrd is B-Y-R-D. She was from Virginia and there is some historic relationship between the Byrds of Virginia and the Byrds, of which my mother was a member of that family. Speaker 1: (Unclear) the Senator [Harry F.] Byrd--simultaneous-- Speaker 2: That's right, unfortunately, it's them. And she was born in Windfall, Virginia. Speaker 1: Windfall? Speaker 2: Windfall, near Lynchburg. Speaker 1: And what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace her side? Speaker 2: Well, we have a family tree in fact. We can go way back. My mother spent a lot of time building the family tree and so it goes, just in my recollection, I guess it may go further back than that, but what I can remember from the chart that I can remember, it goes back to her grandmother and there may be some of her great grand ancestors there too, but as far back as her grandparents the family tree goes that she had designed and everybody's filled in, so they are probably people about whom something was known that go further back than that, but I can't remember. Speaker 1: So your mother was born in what year? Speaker 2: She was born in 1906. 1906. Speaker 1: So her grandparents would take us back into the nineteenth Century, right? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you know her grandparents? Speaker 2: No, I didn't even know her parents. They both had died by the time--well, that's not true. Her father had died before I was born. Her mother I did know, but I was very young when her mother passed. I did not any other grandparents; although I did know a granduncle who was a minister and lived in Syracuse, New York. We used to go visit him. We called him Uncle Richard. As a matter of fact, he may have been a grand cousin, not a grand uncle, but at that age, he was Uncle Richard. And I did know him. Most of her--I knew both of her sisters. There were three girls and one of them is still living. My Aunt Anna is ninety-three, and her older sister died some years ago, but I knew all of three of them in my adult memory. Story_ID: 169396 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about your family that go back to those old days in Virginia? Speaker 2: Oh Lord, yes, this is a tight family, so, in my growing up and in my history, there has been a lot of getting together and reconnecting, and the stories. I was remembering--I was thinking the other day about a story that is told about one of my mother's [Geneva Ellen Byrd] ancestors, and I guess I would have to look at the family tree to remember which one this was, but this was during slavery and this was when the emancipation occurred; and there is a story about a woman who was--and I don't remember her name, but I could look it up in the family tree, she cooked the family breakfast--I guess she was the cook, the kitchen maid, and she came down the morning after everybody found out that there was no more slavery, and she was doing what she normally did, which was fixing breakfast. And the master of the house said something un-toward to her and she had a plate of hot biscuits that she had just buttered in her hand; and she slammed them in his face, and they never saw her--and she ran away because she said, "I'm not taking that anymore. I'm free." And so there are all sorts of stories like that. Speaker 1: That's when you know it's all over, right? Speaker 2: That's right. That's when you know it's all over whether it's over or not, it's over. So there's that story. Well, there are stories that I sometimes use in my speech. My mother--my father--my grandfather was a minister, an itinerant minister, he was--and he taught at that time at the Virginia Seminary [Alexandria, Virginia], which was a seminary for African-American ministerial students, but he was also a farmer and he owned a farm. And there is a story of a moral of which is you should not be so particular that you let yourself starve and you don't take help; and there is this man named Jeb who lived up the road from my grandparent's farm. And one day they were sitting-my mother and her sisters I guess were sitting on the front porch, and they looked up and the poor wagon was coming down, which was something that went and picked people up and took them to the poor house, was coming down the road and Jeb was in the back of the wagon, and my grandfather called out to the driver, who we knew, "Where you taking old Jeb?" And the driver said, "I'm taking him to the poorhouse." And my grandfather said, "Why?" And he said, "Well, cause he doesn't have any food, and he doesn't have anywhere to live." And my grandfather, who farmed and had produce, he said, "Well, he doesn't have to starve. I can give him a load of corn and Jeb then rose on his elbow--he was lying down apparently in the back of the wagon-- and he looked at my grandfather and said, "Is it shelled?" (Laughter) He said, "Of course, it's not shelled;" and he turned around and said to the driver, "Well, drive on then." So we often, in our family, when we're talking about no-count people, who won't do what they're supposed to do, we say, "Yeah, right, is it shelled?" So everybody knows that story. Story_ID: 169397 Speaker 1: And then there are stories about--oh, I guess it's true of every African American family, there are stories about the process of working to go to school. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] went to St. Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia] and she worked--simultaneous-- Speaker 2: In South Carolina? Speaker 1: No, in Virginia. Now, I know where St. Paul's is--now, I can't remember--in Lawrenceville--in Lawrenceville, Virginia Speaker 2: Was that in the Episcopal school? Speaker 1: Yes, it was. Yes--simultaneous-- Speaker 2: I thought I heard that's what it was-- Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely, absolutely. It was an Episcopal school. All three of the girls went there. My aunt married, and that was the end of her education, but my mom was an educator. She was a substitute teacher in Buffalo [New York], but she was mostly a social worked. She did, in the group work vein, she was a director of recreation at a couple of recreation centers; and in fact, her last job was as the director of the John F. Kennedy Recreation Center, which is one of the city recreation centers in Buffalo, New York. And she went to St. Paul and she was gonna be a doctor. Her younger sister, my aunt, was a surgical nurse, and was a graduate nurse. She went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. She went to Freedman's Hospital Nursing School, and then she went back to school and got a master's in Library Science and she became a medical librarian. And the process of going to school in the days of my mother and her sisters and getting their education, of course, depended upon you being able to have enough money to go, and, while my mother's mother was a teacher of teachers and she taught both in Virginia and in New York, she spent a lot of time in New York City [New York] teaching teachers in, I guess, normal school. My aunt, my mother's youngest sister, was born in New York City, but all of those things depended upon being very frugal and having a number of different jobs. And the jobs that were open to Afro Americans in those days were service jobs or, if you had enough education, you could teach in the segregated schools, and so there are stories about being in "private family" as it was referred to and working between school sessions, between what we now know as semesters and they were terms. They called them, "terms" then to earn money to pay for school for the next term. So there are a lot of those kind of stories, but when you have lived as long as I have, there are lots of stories. It's hard to separate them out which ones belong to me and which one belonged to my mother and her sisters. Story_ID: 169398 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father's side of the family. What is your father's full name and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My father's name was--neither of my parents is living now. They both passed away. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] passed in 1981 and my father in 1969. My father's name was Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr. I have a brother who is Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Jr. and I have a nephew who is Leonard Andrew Scruggs, 3rd, so that name is passing down. My father went to Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Raleigh, North Carolina. He was born on Shaw University Campus. His father was a physician, and he was teaching and practicing medicine in Raleigh. And he was the associate dean of what was the Shaw Medical School at that time, which really meant he was the dean because in those years, this was the 19th century, in those years the African American were not heads of any department or any schools even the segregated schools like Shaw and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. I mean you remember Mordecai Johnson was the first black president of Howard University and that's in our memory, but my father was born in Raleigh and then, as I said, his father was a physician, and he died relatively young; my father, I think, was thirteen when his father died. And my father then went to Bedford, Virginia to live with his mother--my father's mother died when he was very young, when he was three; and she was a teacher. And then my father's grandmother helped to raise him; and then when my father--his father died, he moved with his grandmother to Bedford, Virginia, where another son lived, his uncle John. And he grew up in Bedford, Virginia, and then he went to Ohio State. He was going to medical school also, but he couldn't afford. He ran out of money. The only way--it was really hard to make money for a medical education in those days. So his father--Ohio State had a school of undertaking and embalming, which was part of the medical school because everybody took anatomy and certain kinds of courses together and then the doctors went on. And my father then finished his education as an embalmer, as an undertaker, and he went to--he lived in Cincinnati [Ohio] for a while and then he went to Niagara Falls [New York] and opened a funeral parlor. Story_ID: 169399 Speaker 1: And that is where he [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] and my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] met--and my mother had come to Niagara Falls [New York] to work in--she had finished St. Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], and she was going to go to medical school, so she had to work to earn money, and her sister, her older sister, was living--don't ask me how she got to Niagara Falls, that's part of the story. If I knew, I don't remember, but she was in Niagara Falls and my mother went--and was working in Paterson, New Jersey with a private family. She was working as a maid. Her sister got sick, and her sister had two children, I think, then, and my mother went to be with her sister to help her take care of her children while she was ill; and she met my father, and then they married and lived in Niagara Falls. Story_ID: 169400 Speaker 1: And my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] continued as an undertaker, but then the [Great] Depression came, or the depression really was in full force, and the African Americans couldn't pay for their burials. And it was before anything was done to supplement anybody's income. If you didn't have a job, you didn't have any money; and the soup lines and those kinds of things are part of our current memory, our recent memory. And so he also--he was very bright--and he did things well that had to do with math and stuff like, and he somehow became--I know what happened, he did what so many black men did in that time who had education, they either worked for the post office or they worked on the railroad as a Pullman porter, and he went on the road as a Pullman porter, and met--or somehow got involved in electrical work. And the long-short of that story is that he went on and became a master electrician, joined the Electrician Union and worked for many years including during the Second World War [World War II] in the airline manufacturing industry as an electrician. He wired planes. Then, after the war, wired Pullman carts and worked in Buffalo [New York] at the trains. Buffalo used to be a big terminal between Chicago [Illinois] and the south or in New York [New York], and the New York Central trains used to go there to be serviced and repaired; and he worked as an electrician wiring and repairing the electrical wires in the cars in the trains in the New York Central Railroad. And he retired from that. Then he opened a store and ran a store, a neighborhood grocery store, and then he became ill and sold the store. And as I said, he died in 1969. Story_ID: 169401 Speaker 1: What do you know about his side of the family? I know there's a rich history there. You got a grandfather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. I had forgotten, my grandfather, who was the physician, went onto, the three years before my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] was born, my father was born in 1896; for whatever reason, and of course, you can read and see, but he wrote a book called, "Women of Distinction," based on interviews, which he completed, some of them in person, but a lot of them having been written and returned questionnaires I guess with--and I say I guess because he didn't talk about his methodology he's just got all this information, and he does talk about the problem of collecting some of this information, but he's profiled in this book ninety-one African American women. And he said he wrote the book because he got tired of seeing disparaging, detracting gossip and other kinds of rumors in the train station as he traveled around about how trifling and noncontributing black women were, and he refers to these women as "African American Women," and this is an era where we were sort of dealing with colored and other kinds of labels, and he, throughout the book--simultaneous-- Speaker 1: So the title again is?-- Speaker 2: --is 'Women of Distinction,' it's got a longer title, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: And he refers to them as--simultaneous-- Speaker 2: African American Women. Speaker 1: Okay. Not Afro-American, but African--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: African American Women. And he says that the schools, the orphanages, the foster home systems, the church--various social programs in churches had been created by African American women and he set about to profile women who had done all of these things and in the process, I think there is one lawyer, there are a couple of dentists in the book, many, many teachers, but also he has people in there who are very familiar like Harriet Tubman and Sojourner Truth, but he also has people in there that many of us have never have heard of since, but those who have studied the period, like yourself, recognize the names. And he also has women in there who helped create foster homes out of the churches they belonged to. He has a profile in there of several of schools, Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] of course, St. Augustine's College [Raleigh, North Carolina] at that time. He talks about a couple of the churches that were prominent churches in that period. It's kind of like he both talks about the women and their contribution as well as the institutions that they helped to build; and he also was working on a book about the World's Fair in Chicago [Illinois]. He went to the World's Fair in Chicago and I have his notes, where he went to the Pavilion, and he went to the Women's Pavilion. He talks about how rich the contributions were of women, in general. In his notes, he talks about how he was going to write a book about the Women's Pavilion--I mean about the World's Fair in Chicago. So that is my father's heritage. As I said, his mother was a teacher, and she died when my father was very young. Speaker 1: What was your father's father name? Speaker 2: My father's--my grandfather's name was Lawson--Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs and you find the book in college libraries of historically black colleges and universities. It's in the Library of Congress. A lot of work has been done on African American women, has bibliographies, in which his book is cited. And I've run into people who say, "Oh, is that your grandfather? I was looking at his book the other day," so that's great fun. And I think it's part of our conscious history because we have a copy--we have one of the original copies of the book. And my brother has it because he is the one whose name is still Scruggs, so we said he can be the custodian of it, but I am longing--I look in the used book stores. I haven't come across one yet, but I always put the word out, if you know a library that's got a couple of extra copies and wants to sell one, I'd love to buy one. And I've been talking to John Wiley [John Wiley & Sons] about reissuing the book because it's fascinating. It's written in that florid-style of the 19th century, but it's got great information in it; and that someone would write a book another century ago about black women in the context of contributions, much like this effort here, contributions that people are making about which people normally don't know, and trying to make sure that that's conveyed and shared. Story_ID: 169402 Speaker 1: Are there any other stories? Now, he [Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs] became a, he was a doctor. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He must have a story. Speaker 2: Oh, he was born in slavery. He was born in slavery. He was very young obviously, but he--Josephine Turpin Washington wrote the forward in the book; and she tells the story of his having to study in those days, you know, you didn't have to go to medical school. To become a doctor, you were apprentice with a doctor and you took the exams and you got licensed and you were a doctor. And it talks about his education, which was partially in school but partially, very much, self-taught; and when you read, he's an extremely articulate person. And she talks about how difficult it was for him to-and he was older too--he was in his twenties when he was then becoming a doctor. And she talks about the hardship that he endured. A lot of that--a lot of the knowledge of what his life was like is very oral because he doesn't talk about it in the book, and, of course, he died long before I was born. And my father--my grandfather had two marriages, and there a girl child of my aunt, whose was from his first marriage, who is considerably older than my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.], and she lived in St. Louis [Missouri]. She was a teacher, but we didn't see a lot of her. She would have been the one who had remembered a lot of the stories about my grandfather. My father was so young when his father died that there were not a lot of stories about my grandfather; and I know that he, like most physicians, was very successful during his life, but my father said that when he died, there was this trunk of bills that people had not paid because--oh, there's another part of the story that I didn't--my grandfather founded, as far as we know, the first sanitarium for tuberculosis patients--for African American tuberculosis patients in Southern Pines, North Carolina; and, you know, the treatment for tuberculosis for many years, and maybe still is, isolation of the patient, and open air environment, somewhere there's a lot of trees, and very rustic and bucolic. And this is what the sanitarium was like in Southern Pines. I have never seen it. I've tried to find where it was. It burned down. Story_ID: 169403 Speaker 1: And you know, I've been fascinated as I looked at the history of black people in the African American community history in general. For example, I was a Founder's Day speaker at Voorhees [College] in South Carolina. Speaker 2: In Denmark--simultaneous-- Speaker 1: --in Denmark, South Carolina; and so I had to read about the woman [Elizabeth Evelyn Wright] who founded Voorhees and about how she walked miles and miles and collected money from contributions from people just to build this college and how every time, for about five different times, she got a building, somebody gave her a building, and she was able to collect enough money to furnish a classroom and buy books, it would burn down. And I was--in my speech, I talked about the phantom fires that have plagued progress of blacks in this country. Every time you turn around, if you really look, when you look at the history, there is an institution that is being built and that's progressing, and then it mysteriously burns down. Story_ID: 169404 Speaker 1: Okay, I was talking I guess about my grandfather on my mother's [Geneva Ellen Byrd] side who was an itinerant minister and a circuit rider I had said and the process of ministering to the flock meant you got into a buggy with the horse and you rode to wherever this church was and he had three or four locations, so he'd go alternate weeks to some, but also he had to go to prayer meetings and so, and he was a Baptist minister, and this was a Baptist seminary where he taught. My mother, of course, was an Episcopalian, which--and it's very interesting, I'm not sure how that happened. I knew she grew up Baptist. Speaker 2: Is it because she attended the Episcopal school? Speaker 1: I know, but they--her parents sent her to the school, so it's very interesting. Speaker 2: Maybe the opportunity to go--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Could of been. She was growing up in Lynchburg, Virginia and St. Paul's College is in Lawrenceville, Virginia. They're not far away and there were very good standards. Everyone talks about the fact that St. Paul was a very good school because, of course, the teachers were part of the Episcopal structure and the hierarchy, so they were well-educated. That's probably why she and her sisters went there because they could get a good education; and whatever passed for accreditation in those days was probably what St. Paul was at that time, but she went on--my mother went on to become--she remained an Episcopalian, even though my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] was a Baptist, and I think that came from his Baptist background, more with his uncle, and his grandmother--his uncle, aunt and grandmother than with his father because his father [her paternal grandfather, Lawson Andrew Scruggs] was off in Southern Pines [South Carolina], and his father was in Raleigh [North Carolina], his father was practicing medicine; and in those days, you went to where the patients were, so it was a lot of visiting the patients. And I didn't--I don't get the impression that there was transmittal of those kinds of values from my grandfather to my father. Speaker 2: Your grandfather died rather early. Speaker 1: My grandfather died when my father was still a teenager--was a young, young teenager. Story_ID: 169405 Speaker 1: So that everything having to do with those socialization values came from his [Scruggs-Leftwich's father, Leonard Andres Scruggs, Sr.] grandmother and his Uncle John. And he spoke highly of his uncle John who was also a farmer there in Bedford [Virginia]. And his aunt Ruby, who was actually my father's cousin, was uncle John's daughter, was really much, much more like a sister to my father. And until he died, he would journey to Bedford where she continued to live until she died, he would take a journey. He would go to Bedford to visit Aunt Ruby, and then he would go onto to St. Louis [Missouri] to visit Aunt Goldie [ph.] who was his half-sister; and he would never take me with him because he said I would get both him and me hung because he was going south; and I have always been encouraged to be very honest and to not--and to have a good opinion of myself, and not to--to take umbrage at not being treated with respect. And my father used to say I would beg him every year because I was an only child until I was ten. And I went to a lot of places with my father, and I would beg him every year to take me with him and he said, "Absolutely not, I want to come back alive. You're staying here." And I would not--I never went south until I was in college. Story_ID: 169406 Speaker 1: I went to school in Buffalo, New York and graduated from a high school called, Fosdick-Masten Park High School. Speaker 2: Now let's not get too far in that for right now. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I want to take you back to childhood. What's your first memory? Speaker 1: Of the garden between my godparents' house. Like my godmother was named Clementine and I called her Aunt Clemmy [ph.] and my godfather's name was Henry so Aunt Clemmy and Uncle Henry's house was the front house; and my very first memory is playing in the sand box under the grape arbor at the back end of the garden. And I remember that I had the sand box because I didn't like mud, and somebody gave me these little molds that most children used to make--they looked like little pie dishes and different things, and somebody gave me a set of those, and I didn't want to play with them because I didn't like playing in mud and you had to put water in mud to make these things, so somebody--either my godfather or my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.]--built me a sand box. And I remember being in the sandbox--playing in the sandbox. I was very young. I also remember going to nursery school. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd]--among her many talents--my mother is an extremely gifted person, and one of her many talents that she had studied dietetics in college because everybody took home economics, and she liked to cook. She was a very good cook, so that when she and my father married and settled in and moved into the home in Niagara Falls [New York] on Ashland Avenue, my mother--and the Depression began to catch up with everybody--my mother took a job as a dietician for, what was in effect, the nursery school for the Franchot Tone children. And you may remember Franchot Tone was a movie actor, and they were related to the people who owned what has now become Niagara Mohawk Electric. The original founder was named Shellcroft [ph.] and the Tones were a part of that wealth--energy wealth, and my mother was a dietician in the nursery school for the children of the Tones. And one of the things that-one of her benefits was that she could bring me with her to work; and I remember the setting of that nursery school and the little tables and chairs. There were not a lot of children. I don't remember any of the children except there was one bully boy who chased me under the table, and I remember that. And I remember my mother was quite outraged and told his mother that he would have to behave in school or he would have to go home, but the children from other families, apparently wealthy families, came to that nursery school because it was a school. They had this outfitted school I guess because I remember there was a classroom with desks, books, and chalkboards and things like that. I remember that. I remember driving with my parents from when we moved--actually I was still four when we moved from Niagara Falls [New York] to Buffalo [New York]. And my parents played bridge--belonged to a bridge club, and had friends in Niagara Falls with whom they had longstanding relationships. The son of one of my parent's friends was my intern. He is a young lawyer and he interned with me, working for me, so it's sort of a long history, but anyway they would drive from Buffalo back to Niagara Falls--my father had this--I think it was a model T-Ford. I know it was a Ford. I guess that was all anybody had and I would ride--yeah, he called it "Lizzie." I would stand up behind the seats where my parents were sitting and driving and we'd drive to--from Buffalo to Niagara Falls and they would play bridge, and I would go to my godparents', and I was still pretty young then-- Story_ID: 169407 Speaker 1: I remember the first day of school. I remember my first day of kindergarten. Speaker 2: Now, what school did you attend? Speaker 1: I went to school number seventy-five [P.S. 75], which was down the block from my house in Buffalo [New York]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --in Buffalo-- Speaker 1: In Buffalo, right. And I went to kindergarten; and I remember the first day of school. I remember my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] taking me to school. I just remember that. I think I've always liked school, so it's not a traumatic memory; it's a very pleasant memory. And I remember--I have always read. I understand I learned to read very early, so I don't remember. Speaker 2: Did you have a favorite genre of book that you had read other than children's books? Speaker 1: Children's books. I remember when I was older though then-when I was reading this--the series of stories about girls, 'Elsie Dinsmore' series; it sort of like 'Little Women,' but it was you know well way before that, I would read everything. I would read books. I didn't like mysteries especially. Speaker 2: You didn't like them? Speaker 1: I didn't like mysteries especially. Speaker 2: Why not? Is there a-- Speaker 1: I don't know. They bored me. It was about--I liked books about things that might in fact happen. I loved historical novels. I loved historical--I was older, but when I think back about what had attracted me about the books I did read--it was that they were about--the people they were written about could be real people, and they could be having real experiences. And I wasn't much interested in figuring out who shot somebody and whether or not the butler did it. I was much more interested in adventures, you know people who went places and did things. I remember taking piano lessons. I remember taking dance lessons. One of my parents' good friends was a dancer and a dance instructor. Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: His name was Mr. Fred Jones. He was a tap dancer. You know, he went away and danced in places. And I liked dancing, and I much wanted to be a dancer. I was certainly discouraged from that. I was permitted to take tap dancing from Mr. Jones, and that was all well and good, but when I started talking about that's what I wanted to do for a living, that was not--that was not encouraged; and I think that was consistent, that it wasn't that there was anything wrong with being a dancer, but it was that I could read, write and think, and I could obviously do other things. And I think in many African American families, it was felt that if you had options, you ought to exercise those options. A lot of accomplishment occurred through the entertainment industry, but it was a rough industry and I think my parents were sophisticated enough that they understood that the cost of success was often extremely high and particularly for women, and so I was not encouraged to do this for a living, but I was encouraged to do it for my own cultural enrichment, and I was rewarded for it. I mean I wasn't discouraged from doing it. It was just that that wasn't supposed to be my life work; and it was probably just as well because I don't think that I'm like--there are people who have become very skilled in their sport, and then they realize--or in certain artistic endeavors, and then they realize they're not as good as the ones who are really going to get ahead; and they ought to find another line of work. And I think that that would have been the case with me, but from early on, I must have been four or five when I started taking piano lessons. My mother could play the piano, so we always had a piano, and I--you know, and I remember when we moved from Niagara Falls [New York], we didn't have a piano, but then my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] bought a piano-- Story_ID: 169408 Speaker 1: I remember always having pets, not cats. I have cats now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You had cats and dogs? Speaker 1: Dogs. I always had dogs. Speaker 2: What was your dog's name? Speaker 1: Well, my first dog's name was Peggy. And Peggy was a chow--a chow and water spaniel mix, so she wasn't big like chows are. She was small. She was very territorial and extremely protective of me, and she was very smart. And I had Peggy until after my brother was born. I was ten, going on ten, when my brother was born; and Peggy didn't like my brother because she was jealous of him, but she wouldn't let anybody get near him. And when he could walk, we had a long driveway that went down beside our house, and somebody left the gate open, and, Peter, my brother is Leonard, but we called him Peter. Peter was high-tailing it, and he must have been fifteen-sixteen months old, high-tailing it down the driveway toward the street, and Peggy saw him; and she barked and ran and caught him in the seat of his pants, and pulled back, and just held him, and growled, and growled and growled. And, of course, we heard her growling and came, and she was holding my brother, keeping him from going down the driveway. She saved my brother from several things. And so, I always--I remember always having pets. I remember when I got Peggy as a pet. Story_ID: 169409 Speaker 1: My memories of my childhood are extremely pleasant. Speaker 2: So you were a happy, little girl. Speaker 1: I was happy. I was happy. I had--I remember, I was thinking the other day that I've been working on my memoirs and I write a lot, and I've just written on issues--I don't write nonfiction. Somebody told me that I had real problems suspending disbelief. That's very true, very literal, but I have begun sort of putting together things for my memoirs of such a rich line. And it just occurred to me very recently within the last month that I would probably call this volume that I'm working on now is "Beloved" because I always felt loved, protected, and cared for and encouraged to be whatever it was I wanted to be as long as it wasn't going to get me in trouble. I think that--I remember--I don't really remember it except I have this image of being held and looking in a mirror; and I remember that. I had told my mother once, "Yeah, I remember. Did you hold me in front of a mirror? I have this image of being held--" And she said, "Yes, we used to hold you in front of a mirror and say 'pretty, pretty, pretty." And I thought, gee that's fascinating that somebody would do that. I said, "Why did you do that?" She said, "So that you wouldn't have to establish that you were all right and you could go on and do other things." And I think that was absolutely what happened. I had sort of no real feeling about my appearance one way or the other. I was fine. I didn't ever feel not acceptable. I was always was interested in what I could do with my head, and what I could achieve, and was I going to win something, or the oratorical contest, the Jesse Ketchum medal in grammar school? It's the medal that was given to the student with the highest grades. And my cousin--we all sort of lived in that general area around school number seventy-five [P.S. 75, Buffalo, New York]; and my cousins from my father's side of the family went to school number seventy-five as well. They were all older than I was. And one of my cousins won the Jesse Ketchum medal, and so that was the beginning of a tradition. We were supposed to win the Jesse Ketchum medal, which I did not 'cause Luther Lee won the Jesse Ketchum medal, but it was that kind of competition, that sort of thing that I always felt free to do and encouraged to do. Story_ID: 169410 Speaker 1: Now, did you have any favorite teachers in grade school that encouraged you? That you-- Speaker 2: Well, I liked the kindergarten teachers, you know, Ms. Baumgarten [ph.] and Ms. Tremble [ph.] and I may remember them because they taught all four of us. They taught my brother and my two sisters. They were sort of an institution at school number seventy-five [P.S. 75]. You went to kindergarten and you had Ms. Baumgarten and Ms. Tremble. Mr. Geiger [ph.], who was the band teacher, I liked. I played clarinet in the band in grammar school and in high school; and I played string base in the orchestra in high school. I remember--I really don't--I really don't remember that I particularly liked many of my teachers. We had a very adversarial relationship with a lot of them; on the one hand, my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] was a substitute teacher who would periodically be called and asked to come teach there, so I was a part of the internal operation of the school, but all my teachers were white. And there was some real hostility and resentment among many of them about my abilities and I knew this; and my mother did not tolerate it, meaning if I seemed to be unhappy about the way I was being treated in the class, my mother would go to school, and there would be a discussion about it. I remember once a teacher, in those days, you got grades for the academic stuff, and you got an evaluation of A through whatever F I guess for behavior. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't A through F. It was satisfactory and improving, and unsatisfactory. And I remember I got an I--a couple of Is for something. I don't remember what it was, and I was outraged because I didn't misbehave in class; and once the teacher had accused me of chewing gum. And, of course, chewing gum was unacceptable as far as my mother was concerned, so you didn't chew gum in public. If you were gonna chew gum you did it at home; and when you were going out, you'd spit it out. Well, I wasn't chewing gum. I would certainly never chew gum in class and she accused me of chewing gum; and I said I wasn't chewing gum, so she accused me of swallowing it. And I can't remember how it came out that particular day, but she gave me an I because she said that I had been chewing gum and I had denied it. And, of course, I was outraged. I didn't mind--I didn't always get As, but I always got 90s. I never got 80 anything. And so if I didn't get 100, or I got a 98, or I got a 90, so that was whatever the performance had been, and I knew enough to know that most of it was on merit. I mean they gave you a grade and you could see whether or not you had earned the grade that you had gotten because they gave you tests and you had the papers, but the character side was something that was so subjective. And so I was prone to be abused if the teacher didn't like you. She could say that you had been disrespectful, that you had talked in class, or whatever it was that kids do, you could be penalized for that. And so I was particularly sensitive to not getting bad character marks because there was real no excuse for that. You know, school's where you went to learn, and you may not like the teacher, but if the teacher respected you, you ought to do the same. So--and there were instances like that throughout my educational career in-- Story_ID: 169411 Speaker 1: I never had an African American teacher--full-time teacher. Speaker 2: You never all through grade school? Speaker 1: No. No. I went to a high school [Fosdick-Masten Park High School, Buffalo, New York], which was an academic high school. I did not go to the high school that was in the district where most African Americans--black students went. I went to a high school that was in another district, so that there was a mix. There were not a lot of black students, but there were black students there. I had no black teachers throughout my grammar school or high school experience. I didn't really notice it because my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] was a teacher, my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] was good at math. My father taught me anatomy and the circulatory system, so I didn't pay attention to that, and I knew there were black teachers. And my mother was always going to school, so all the abuse was kept in check. It would get out of hand every now and then, but it was kept in check. And everybody was aware that if you bothered with Yvonne Scruggs, her mother would come to school and you don't want that, and so it's like my children used to say to me, "Mommy, please don't go to school, don't go to school." because I think having children understand that they have dignity and they are valued, and when they perform well, they ought to be rewarded for it is very important. And I learned that from my own experience. When I was high school, there were a couple of teachers, you know, with whom I had a decent relationship, but I never--in high school or in grammar school, I never really bonded with any teacher after Ms. Baumgarten [ph.] and Ms. Tremble [ph.]. And I sort of went through and did what I was supposed to do, but I had a lot of activities, so school was simply one of them. Story_ID: 169412 Speaker 1: Did you begin to think about the position of black people in the world at that time? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Speaker 1: And did you worry about school was the way it was and why church was the way it was, and all these things? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean we talked about it. It wasn't--my parents [Geneva Ellen Byrd and Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] weren't like many parents were, you know, you don't talk about that because after all it's embarrassing. They didn't think it was their fault. They thought it was the fault of racism and segregation; and said so, that's why my father wouldn't take me south with him because it was a negative, dangerous environment for black people. And he had relatives who lived there, yes, but he didn't want to stifle my ability to express myself or to treat myself with dignity, so he didn't take me with him. That's all. Walter White was a household hero, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: I met him once-just, you know, I didn't really know him, but Crisis magazine was in our house every time, you know, whenever it was published. Speaker 1: Did your father have--did they ever talk--well I don't know if anybody in your family ever-did they around the Niagara Movement (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, they were not there then. You see--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1906 and my father was born in 1896 and they were born and lived someplace else. My mother was growing up in Virginia and my father was growing up in Virginia. --simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: They were kids. Speaker 2: They were children. They were children. And they came to Niagara Falls [New York] in the 1930 or '31 [1931]. They married in '32 [1932], so they came to Niagara Falls in 1930 or '31 [1931]. And they--but I don't remember them talking about that specifically, but they were race people They were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Now what did that mean in those days (unclear)--? Speaker 2: That meant that you paid attention to how black people were being treated, and you took every step you could to make sure that those abuses weren't visited on you or anybody you knew. Like my parents, who were educated, you would take up fights on behalf of people who weren't, for whatever reason, able to defend themselves, people who were less fortunate than you. My parents and my godparents belonged to these community centers. I remember we would be involved in making sure Christmas packages were done for the poor black kids and taken to the poor black neighborhood and that when we went to the black neighborhood, which we did not live in. When lived in Niagara Falls, we were the only black family in an Italian neighborhood, and that was in part because my godfather, who is African American from Washington--he was born in Washington, he worked at Hooker Electro-Chemical. He did not pass. He was a race man, but people looked at him. He had blue eyes. They thought he was white, so nobody asked him anything. When he went to buy this house, nobody said he couldn't have it. And, of course, they were very much involved in the black community. Their black friends came over to the house. Of course, pretty much in those days, in an Italian communities people didn't care. They were friendly with their neighbors. Their neighbors came over at Christmas time and on New Year's Day, there's an Italian tradition that the first person who visits you in the new year should be a man--don't ask me why, but my godfather and the men would go around and visit each other's houses in the morning of New Year's Day, so you would have good luck that year. So they were members of the community, but by the same token, it was abundantly clear and articulated in our family that there were certain things that you could do safely with your neighbors, but you needed to protect yourself at all times because you could not tell when somebody would abuse you because you were a negro. Story_ID: 169413 Speaker 1: Just another word on that--race, as a race woman or a race man, it was in addition to being very adamant about what you're entitled to and trying in every way you could not to let people take advantage of you or abuse you, it was that it was expected that you would find opportunities to speak out, and that you would interpret behavior toward you that was sort of subtly offensive, as behavior that ought to be challenged because as my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] used to say, "If they will treat me like that, just think what they will do," and then she would name somebody who couldn't read well or who was very self-effacing and who was used to being subjugated, "Think how they would treat Ms. So and so. They would understand that that was not acceptable." My mother--as my husband says, "My mother left no wounded in the jungle and took no prisoners." And she was not straitened. She was extremely refined. She rarely raised her voice. She did not swear and curse. She did not drink. Neither of my parents drank; so that their strategy for dealing with indignity was always to do it out of a context of pure, unadulterated compromising dignity. And they demanded other people with whom they were in contact have that same respect visited upon them. I cannot tell you how many times people would come to our door in the middle of the night because somebody had been arrested or somebody was missing, and would want my mother or my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.], depending on who it was that came, to go with them to negotiate with these hostile institutions. You know, people--I lived up on the Canadian border. It's hard to get further north than that, and yet there was prejudice and discrimination. When I was growing up, there was a slightly different kind because we lived in a neighborhood when we moved to Buffalo [New York]. We lived in a mixed neighborhood. Across the street were Irish people. Upstairs--my parents owned the house and the tenant upstairs was a Jewish woman and her daughter. There was a German family that lived diagonally across the street from us; and one of my mother's very best friends was a German woman who lived up the street, so it was a real mixed environment. There were a lot of black people who lived in there and they lived next door, but that did not mean that there was not institutional racism. Story_ID: 169414 Speaker 1: Because that's the same environment in which when my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] began moving up because he was such a good electrician, there were all kinds of efforts made when I was in high school to stifle his progress. And, in fact, during the war when so many soldiers--my father was a little older than the draft age--and as people were being drafted and these vacancies were occurring within these industries where blacks had been hired in menial/entry level jobs, blacks were moving in and filling those positions while my father and his friends were electricians. And when they moved up because they needed supervisors in these departments, both of them were suddenly have found to have spots on their lungs in the medical examination; and therefore needed to have treatment for tuberculosis--and were not permitted to--they went to sanitariums. My father was in a tuberculosis sanitarium for a year. Speaker 2: Hum, just to keep him from--simultaneous--? Speaker 1: --just to keep him from being a supervisor in a department at--I was hesitating because I think it was Buffalo Arms where he worked, but it could have been Bell Aircraft. I don't remember, but those were the kinds of examples of racism and prejudice that existed, and my father was a mason. He was a mason who was one of the masonic leaders, and so he was always interceding on behalf of one of his brothers for something or other because he was due a job and didn't get it, different things that required--in the north, where you weren't supposed to be discriminated against, required the intercession of somebody who knew the law, and knew the rules, and who knew how to get publicity for or get attention for the concerns that they had; and you know, it was a daily battle. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] used to say, "You know, I get up in the morning, and I say I'm going to have a peaceful day. I'm not going to have an argument with anyone, and then I go out my front door and I've not gotten down my front steps before someone says something to me that sends me off on another mission." And, of course, being off on another mission meant that she was then going to get in her car and go downtown to City Hall and complain or whatever it was that needed to happen to get attention to the situation that she was concerned with, but I grew up in a family that believed that you had a responsibility to take up--you should use your gifts, they were gifted, and being able to be educated and coming from an educated environment background and you had a responsibility and an obligation, and you needed to use it on behalf of African American people so that the system did not crush us anymore than was unavoidable. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169415 Speaker 1: What were your experiences in high school? Did you get involved in high school clubs and activities and stuff? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. I was very active in everything. I signed up for the newspaper as soon as I got to high school, and Sylvia, who is my best friend and I went to work on the newspaper, and the woman who was the advisor to the newspaper was racist, and so we would continue to write articles. We did not get any of the positions that were available through the freshman that year, but we stayed in the newspaper. We went to the meetings. We knew she didn't like us, but didn't have anything to do with our working in the newspaper and writing stories. I signed up for the Debate Team--and I should have remembered her. The woman who was the teacher, who was the advisor for the debating team, was pretty decent. And I had been doing public speaking for many, many years. I started out remembering--reciting poetry and then doing oratory, and I would speak at the various functions, Children's Day and Parent's Day and all this business, so I signed up for the debating team and I was very good. And students and their parents complained that I shouldn't be on the debating team. And the first marking period, I got a 98 because I beat everybody. And then the school forced me to drop Debate. Speaker 1: The school forced you to drop? Why did they? --simultaneous-- Speaker 2: --Yes, because they went to some record somewhere that showed that you needed a prerequisite for Debate and that freshman who just got there couldn't have that prerequisite, so I was forced to drop Debate. Speaker 1: Were you allowed to pick it up later? Speaker 2: I didn't wanna pick it up later. I didn't want to help them win anything. By then, I was competing in the Elks Oratorical Contest. I was winning--half of my college tuition was paid by a scholarship that I won through the Elks Oratorical Contest. I wasn't remotely interested in doing something--I didn't like doing things in which there was such arbitrary behavior, and although there was arbitrary in this, believe in the oratorical contest because you got to remember this was a period of time when women didn't win stuff either, so here I am in the Elks Oratorical Contest constantly having experiences with the guys who were not as good as I was, and who couldn't remember their stuff winning, and I would get second place. And I won the year that, through the hierarchy and coming up winning, you know, at the locals, my opponent was another woman, was another girl. So we got to be judged on what we really did, and she was really good, but apparently the judges thought I was better. And it was interesting because you had all kinds of stuff going on. I remember once I was debating--I mean I was doing--your oration had to be ten minutes long, and there was a time-keeper. And the time-keeper stood up at nine minutes, so that you would know that you had one minute to finish. And they had used all kinds of things to keep people from winning that they didn't want to win. In this particular oratorical contest, I think I was the only girl who was giving an oration, and the time-keeper stood up at something like six minutes; and people caught their breath because everybody knew that he had stood up at half time, but I remember like it happened yesterday, my head turned the pages and I was racing because you had to remember the stuff. And the way I remembered things is I visualize it, and I see it; and I just turned the pages until I got to okay this is the page before the last page, and picked up right there. And, of course, when he sat down, I was through. And my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] said, "What did you do?" I said, "I just thought of where the pages were." And I knew he stood up, but there was no point--I couldn't stand up and argue with him then, but what I did was what I had learned from her and my dad, my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.], was that you're always prepared--you be well enough prepared that if somebody throws you a curve, you can respond. There were those kinds of experiences in which had to do with gender. So the thing about growing up in that period was that if you were an African American, there was the issue of race, but there is a terrible issue of gender; and I remember in high school, this continued to be a problem 'cause there were stuff that girls weren't expected to do 'cause girls just didn't do that. Part of the problem in debate was that girls just didn't do that very much. Most of the team--most of the team members were boys, so it was that problem. And then here I am a black girl too, and I'm beating other people, so. Story_ID: 169416 Speaker 1: I remembered that, but I also--I was on the yearbook staff in high school [at Fosdick-Masten Park High School, Buffalo, New York]. As a matter of fact, I have pictures of me working with the high school yearbook staff. And the friends I had were much like I was. They were going to take full advantage of everything that was going when they were in high school, so they played in the orchestra. They competed in sports-- Speaker 2: Did you have a mixed group of friends? Speaker 1: Yeah, I had a mixed group of friends, but we--my best friends were African Americans. I was friendly and there are still some people who I see who were friends in high school with me, but my close friends were African Americans. And I think it was clear by the time we got to high school that there was just too much tension in trying to figure out what people's brothers and sisters and parents were gonna do if you went home with them or if you were their good friend, and that was probably the greatest impediment. There were a lot of white kids who were friendly and you know they were great people, but you always had to worry about their parents, or about some brother, or somebody saying something. It wasn't worth it, so you were friendly in school, and you might do things together, but they were neutral things, you know, things were--you weren't vulnerable. You didn't sleep over. Speaker 2: No. So was your social life in high school rewarding? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah! It was fun. I belonged to Hi-Y. I belonged to the Hi-Y was a youth organization for high school students in the Y. I guess it was YM and YW, but it was in the segregated community really, so the Y that the black students went to was the YMCA. And we all went there. We had sock hops. We played--people who were interested in basketball, played basketball. We had--I belonged to the Hi-Y, which was a social action group in high school. I ran track when I was in grammar school, so I would do track kinds of things. I was a fast track runner in those years. I was in the Junior Olympics. I came in third in the Junior Olympics. Speaker 2: Where did you run, in the 100? Speaker 1: In the 100, yeah. And--oh and the Hi-Y was city-wide organization, and they had a youth-end government program which went to Albany [New York] every year. And we would go to Albany for a couple of days, and we would take over government. And there was a governor, and there was a speaker of the house and there were all the other officers; and I was a reading clerk in the house, of what is now the Assembly, first black to ever to be reading clerk. The year that I was reading clerk, the governor was a black guy from Nyack, New York. And--oh, I had a very full life, very full social life because I was an academic student. I was going to college, so that always came first, but I had close friends. There were girls that I was friendly with and we would do stuff together. We all belonged to the Y. Some of them belonged to the Urban League. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd]'s friend was the president of the Urban League, and a lot of my mother's friends were social workers. And several of them worked at the Urban League. I went to the Y. I never really was an Urban League person; and it had nothing to do with anything except I loved the youth director at the Y. She was just really great, and the executive director of the Y was a member of a Buffalo [New York] family, the service family, and Jean Richmond [ph.] who was the girl's worker was just terrific. They were influential. And, of course--by then I had a brother and two sisters, and so I had a family who were considerably younger than I was, so I babysat them, and I did a little of mother's helper work for the wife of one of my mother's business colleagues. She owned a store and Mr. Lewis [ph.] had a stroke, so he couldn't get around very well, and I would help out a couple of days a week. I would go--in the summer, I had a job that I would go to there and worked in the recreation department between in the summer, getting ready for school, for college. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169417 Speaker 1: Now, how did you decide what college you were going to? Speaker 2: I wanted to go where my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] had been born and where my grandfather [Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs] had been the associate dean, and that was Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina]. And that's where I wanted to go because I was going to be a civil rights lawyer. I had grown up in this race family; and my family wouldn't take me south with him, and I kept saying I don't know how you think I'm going to be a civil rights lawyer if I can't go south, how am I going to know what I'm talking about, so they finally said, "Okay." So, I made a deal with them. I had been accepted at Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio]. And I said I really wanted to go south to school. And the deal was I would go to an accredited school, and I would go for a year or two and then I could transfer to Western Reserve or Antioch. I really wanted to go to Antioch too, but I really wanted to go south so I had to choose. Speaker 1: But why Antioch? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: --because there is a part that is missing in the story. I began teaching dance and doing other things--I knew there was something. That was another one of my high school activities. My mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] and I did this for free. There was no money involved. My mother was by then directing recreational programs and doing group work for the Catholic diocese. They had these wonderful schools, and they had this great program; and my mother worked as the director of recreation for St. Mary School [sic, St. Mary's High School, Lancaster, New York] and a couple of other schools. She was in the recreational department of the city, and the city had a contract or something they provided a lot of the staff for the schools for the private sector of social service agencies. That's what they were. And so I taught dance there, ballet, at St. Mary's a couple of days a week. And the workers--social workers who came were students on work study from Antioch. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were all races and they were just really gifted, wonderful people; and they told me about Antioch, and my mother had all these college books, and I looked it up. And they had directories back then about the colleges and whether or not they were accredited and what their programs were. And I just really wanted to go to Antioch, but I also wanted to be a civil rights lawyer, so I figured I'd better go to the south and figure out what all this civil rights activity was because by then, late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s], there was a lot of stuff going on. I mean people act like the Civil Rights Movement began in the '60s [1960] you know, but there were people fighting that battle for decades before, and having sit-ins, and protests and stuff trying to get attention. Story_ID: 169418 Speaker 1: So when we got the information from Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], it was not up to standard. I mean I applied to a lot of places to see where I could get accepted, and one looking for scholarships, so I knew what to expect. You got a catalogue, you got the application form they sent you other stuff; and Shaw was really on its uppers as they say, and the stuff was mimeographed, and it was not comparable to the information I was getting from the other colleges. Plus my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] then went and checked and found out that it was not accredited at the same level that the major schools were. And my parents said I couldn't go there. So I'm thinking all right well I want to go to North Carolina. That's where my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] was born, that's where my grandfather [Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs] lived. And my mother went and did some research, and she found out, well, two things: North Carolina College ["NCC," later, North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and a friend of mine I saw who was in college with the others reminded me that when we went to North Carolina, it was called, "North Carolina College for Negroes," that other stuff university, central and all that business came much later. He said--he was from Washington, and he said I walked through that gate and there is this big sign, "North Carolina, College for Negroes," I said, "You're right, that's what it was called." Anyway, she found out that it was top-rated, rated A, competitive with all the other colleges in the country. The second reason was that Helen Edmonds, Dr. Helen Edmonds, who is no longer living, but she was the first African American delegate to the United Nations from the United States, appointed by the Republicans. She was a Republican as my mother was. Helen Edmonds was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This was in the '50 [1950]? Speaker 1: --in the 50s [1950]. Speaker 2: In the early '50s [1950]. Speaker 1: No, this was in the '40s [1940]. I went to college in 1947. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: SO, but she was--I think it was later when she became a UN [United Nations] representative, but she was on the faculty there. She had been in school with my mother, and had gone on and had gotten her Ph.D. and she was the chair of the history department there. So my mother called Helen Edmonds and said--my nickname is Bonnie--"wants to come to North Carolina." She said, "Send her right down here. We'll take care of her." Well, Helen Edmonds was there. There were just--Coach Riddick [Herman H. Riddick] was there, Walker [L.T. Walker], who is the guru of the Olympics now, Coach Walker was there. I'm just trying to--Caulbert Jones was there; Dr. [W. Edward] Farrison--They had tremendously bright faculty members there; and as my mother did the research, and we did it together, it was clear that this was a good place to go. It was right down the street, right down the road from Raleigh [North Carolina] if I wanted to be near Raleigh, they had a law school--an accredited law school. That's where Maynard [Jackson] went, North Carolina Central University Law School. Um, so I then said, okay, I'll go to North Carolina College and if I don't like it, I can go to Western Reserve [sic, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio]. I've been accepted to Western Reserve. It was a little bit more difficult with Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] because Antioch was a whole program, you couldn't kind of come in the middle. You started out with a work study assignment before you ever got there, and then you took courses and you went back; and it was a well-rounded program. And I was either going to go to Antioch or not go to Antioch. I certainly wasn't going to be permitted to sort of drop in in the middle of that. Speaker 2: They're both interesting schools, both Western Reserve and Antioch. Speaker 1: Yeah. So I decided okay Western Reserve was the one I put on the side. I got accepted to other places I just don't remember 'cause I really wasn't interested in them, and the plan was that I would go to NCC and if I didn't like it, you know, I could transfer, and I had a place to go. Story_ID: 169419 Speaker 1: So the first year, I loved it [North Carolina College, later North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I was very active and I was elected the freshman representative to women's student government, which resulted in my being president eventually of women's student government. I started working on the newspaper, become news editor my freshman year, became editor-in-chief in my junior year. You know, it was just--it was clearly--and the thing about that that will resonate with me always and really incenses me when people talk about historical black colleges and universities have outlived their usefulness. I could go and be smart any place. I could not go anyplace and know that I could pay attention to learning without having to worry about whether or not someone was going to be offensive to me or was going to sabotage me because they were racist. And I knew that people have all kinds of idiosyncrasies, so personality conflicts are inevitable, but I knew that one of the things that I didn't have to worry about in North Carolina was whether or not I was being told something because they didn't like me because I was black, so I could hear criticism, I could learn without being defensive and paranoid, and that was just a brand new experience. And in my freshman year, I was successful socially. I was thespian queen, did plays. I did plays with Ivan. You remember Ivan Dixon? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ivan and I were classmates. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was starred in 'Nothing But a Man.' Speaker 1: Yeah, he was on television. Ivan was just remarkably gifted and we were both from New York. There were not a lot of people from New York in North Carolina in those years, so we automatically were friendly because people would say, "Well, you know, your home boy." Well, Ivan was from New York City, and I was from Buffalo, but people then--I mean distances were great then. People didn't know. People would come up to me and say, "I got a cousin. You know my cousin?" Where does your cousin live? "Brooklyn." "No, I don't know your cousin." People had no idea. So Ivan and I became friends 'cause we were from the same part of the world. Story_ID: 169420 Speaker 1: So after doing all the drama and being a butterfly on campus [at North Carolina College for Negroes, later, North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and also doing very well. I made straight As first semester, which people don't understand, but that's very important when you in college and on a campus because if you make straight As for a semester, you don't necessarily get a pass, but people expect you to perform well and they don't look for reasons that you're not performing well, so that was really important. There was a talent show that everybody was warned about. You were told to prepare if you had any talent, you will be expected to be on the talent show, so I learned an extremely difficult piano piece, and the Revolutionary Etude--Beethoven's Revolutionary Etude, and it's all chords up and down the piano and stuff. It took me forever to learn it, but it was a big hit and that was great, and I earned the right to have a practice room in the music building. And that was very important because music is really, if you ask me what is the food of my soul, it is music; and it's music to hear, but I will sit down after--like last night, I've been teaching this week, and it's been really great and rewarding, but it's been very intense. And last night when I got home about nine o'clock, I just sat and played the piano for about an hour. I do it for my own amusement, and I used to do that on campus. I would go over--I had a room, which was not mine alone, but if you were good at music, you could get a room, which you had access to. And I would go over and it would walk into that building and it would just be music--it was a brand new building--there would just be music everywhere with people practicing in their practice rooms, so you would hear it. And it was just a wonderful, relaxing sensation-- Story_ID: 169421 Speaker 1: --So I finished the first year [at North Carolina College for Negroes, later, North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and went home. And my mother said--my parents [Geneva Ellen Byrd and Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] said, "Do you want to transfer?" No, I don't want to transfer. I've got all these friends. I had pledged a sorority by then, and I wanted to go into the sorority, which didn't happen until the sophomore year. I was in AKA, and I was caught up in that network. I had done well with the newspaper, and I was scheduled to be managing editor the next year, which is the person who lays out the paper and sees that it gets done. And I had a column that I wrote in every issue of the newspaper. The newspaper was very competitive and we had gone--there was--I guess there still is a National Student Newspaper Association, but they give awards or they used to give awards to student newspapers, and we were a little college publishing once a month; and we were getting awards. We got honorable mention I think the first year I was there, but we were trying to get awards. We had [HM] Horace Dawson, who is the former ambassador to Botswana, who is the head of the Ralph Bunche Center at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He was my mentor. He was the advisor to the newspaper--to the student newspaper, and his mentor was Charlie Ray [Charles A. Ray], a real tough-nose newsman, who everybody loved, who was the head of the journalism department. And I was in that kind of network, where I was writing, and we had just gotten a new newspaper office, so people who were on the newspaper would study there, and it was kind of like I had an office. So I was a part of the network there. So I thought, you know, I'm going to go back. Let me do another year because, you know, this is fine. Well, I was doing very well academically too and fighting with some--I wasn't getting over. I mean I got a couple of Cs that I did not deserve, but I got them because the teachers who gave them to me, for whatever reason, felt that I could have done better work, so they were grading me on what they thought I could have done rather than on any curve that had to do with what the class was doing, which was not happy. I didn't like getting Cs, but, in any event, there were all these indicators that this was an environment in which I'd be prepared to be competitive at least, so I went back. Um, just second year was better than the first. And sort of halfway through my second year, I decided I wasn't transferring. I had by then had friends-- I had my roommate--was my roommate right straight through. I have another good friend who is right here in the area, whom I see, and I went home with to Martinsville, Virginia, Caroline. She was Caroline Self [ph.], she is Caroline Green [ph.] now, but she was from Martinsville, Virginia. I went and visited with her family because it was a long way. In those years, you took the train from Buffalo, New York to Raleigh, North Carolina and it was twelve hour trip, so you didn't go home at Thanksgiving and Easter; you went home with somebody else. I had all of these ties, all this bonding that had occurred; and I went back and decided that I was going to finish there. And I went on. It was certainly the most profound experience of my emerging adulthood being there in that environment, learning. Story_ID: 169422 Speaker 1: I was the first Fulbright Fellow from that school, first black Fulbright from North Carolina or from Buffalo, New York for that matter. First Fulbright from Buffalo, New York I guess. I went--I had all kinds of mentoring going on. Speaker 2: Now you went to--as a Fulbright fellow, you went--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I went to Germany, to Germany, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, and the school was just delighted that I was interested, and I took--studied German with the German professor there, and had all kinds of support going on. Dr. [Helen] Edmonds, as it turned out, had studied in Germany, a friend of my mother[Geneva Ellen Byrd]'s, so I would go talk German with her, and get advice from her on what I should do. I can't think of anything that wasn't good about my years at North Carolina [College for Negroes], it's what is North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] now. Um, there are many people who have gone--well, [HM] Julius Chambers who is head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], going back, we were school mates. We had the same advisors. Edmonds advised him and me. He was history major and I guess political science minor. I was a political science major and history minor. Speaker 1: Chambers was head of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund for a while. Speaker 2: That's right. And then he went back as chancellor of North Carolina Central University and retired from that position. It's hard even in the sports arena, Hans Herman Warlick [sic, Ernie "Big Hoss" Warlick], who played for the Buffalo Bills, was in school when I was there. Sam Jones was my classmate. Speaker 1: Who played basketball? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sam and I were good friends. Speaker 1: The one Casey Jones played ball with too--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Uh Sam Jones--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --with the Celtics? Speaker 2: --with the Celtics. Yes, Sam Jones with the Celtics. Speaker 1: He was a good shooter (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He was--but he was always good. I mean, you know, I was looking at a picture last night when I was looking for pictures for this, pictures of basketball team. There's Sam, there's [Charles] Tex Harrison, who is now coach of the Harlem Globetrotters, who left school. He was my classmate also. Graduated and went with the Harlem Globetrotters. It was a rich, rich environment. And my last year, I had finished all my courses, and I didn't want to graduate--well, two things, I was planning to law school. I had been accepted at Georgetown Law [Washington, D.C.], and I didn't want to leave my class. I was president--I had been president of the women's student government. I had run for student government generally, first woman to run. A lot of people didn't vote for me. They told me I was the best person, but they couldn't vote for a woman. I thought they were brain dead. But, at any-- Speaker 1: This is in 1950-- Speaker 2: This was in 1955, '54 [1954]-'55 [1955]. I ran in '54 [1954] as the first woman to run for president in student government, but the president, Dr. [Alfonso] Elder, felt that my skills should still be used for the school, and he created a position called, "The undergraduate public relations officer," and the undergraduate public relations officer got the same stipend as the president of the student government got. And I got to go represent the school at events that had to do with what the president was doing. I would go with the president to do things or the president would send me to things. Whereas, the student government president did student government, so they were not the same job, and it was great. I got to do a lot of stuff. I had been editor of the newspaper when I was a junior, and therefore, I became contributing editor my senior year, sort of like a senior editor. My first husband was editor my senior year. We had met there. Speaker 1: Were you married in college? Speaker 2: No. No, I didn't marry until I came back from Europe and I was in graduate school at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I had every--a rewarding college experience. Story_ID: 169423 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you graduated, you went to? Speaker 2: I went to Europe. Speaker 1: Went to Europe on a Fulbright [Scholarship]? Speaker 2: Right, on a Fulbright. And I left in August in the same year that I graduated in 1955 and went to Bonn University [sic, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany], which was where I had applied, but when I got to Bonn--we went by ship. It was an eight-day trip. We got a chance to--there were two African Americans on the ship. A young woman who went to--this was all--there were 235 or 265 students who were Fulbrights to Germany, and we all went together. We had German lessons, cultural orientation. I was invited to participate in The Experiment in International Living, sponsored by the International Education, which meant that for the first month that I was there, or six weeks--it may have been six weeks, I lived in the home of a German family, most of who spoke no English. They had a daughter, who was a little younger than I was, who spoke school-girl English, but the rest of them, the father was a doctor, was a physician. He ran a clinic, which was in the neighborhood, not far from his house. The mother was a homemaker and there was a daughter, who was my age and a brother who was--a younger brother. They didn't speak any English, so I'm living in their home, and it was unreal. You get up in the morning and somebody is jabbering to you in a language that you know, you've been studying it, but now, suddenly, somebody is talking to you about life and death matters, like did you eat breakfast yet? And I would go to bed every night with a headache, but I just--it was great because by the time I left Konigstein im Taunus, which is where I lived, outside Frankfurt [Germany], I could speak German. And I had made a promise to myself that I would not hang out with English-speaking Americans, and so I didn't. When I was on the ship, the people I was friendly with were four American citizens, who--all of whom, except one, had been born in Germany and had had to leave during Kristallnacht [November 10, 1938, Germany]--sometime during the programs; and they had grown up in the United States. First of all, they knew exactly what it was like to be a kid having to learn a brand new language, but we were just sort of kindred spirits. We were all political scientists. Vanna Danhauser [ph.], Inga Breitner Powell, Marvin Kartek [ph.], and Marian Mageed [ph.] were their names. Inga and Marvin--Inga was from California, from Pomona; Marvin was from Louisiana, where his family grew rice; Vanna and Marian were from New York. They were real New Yorkers, and we sort of bonded on the ship. And so when we got to Germany, I went on to live with the Troutwines. They went onto to do whatever they were going to do, but we all came together in Bonn because that's where the academic orientation took place. Well, we got together again, and they said, "Scruggs, you don't want to be here. You need to go to Berlin [Germany]. We're all going to Berlin." And the only reason I chose Bonn [Germany] was because I knew Bonn. I knew about Bonn. I didn't know about Berlin. If they say Berlin is good, must be good, so I transferred to the Free University of Berlin and the Institute of Political Science. And it was just a wonderful decision. We were just great friends the whole time we were there. They didn't have the need to speak English, so I learned German and they would correct me. I really learned German well. I was bilingual by the time I returned home, and I could be a student and really appreciate the environment that I was in. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this again? Speaker 2: This was '55 [1955] and '56 [1956]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I came back at the end of '56 [1956]. Story_ID: 169424 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the Brown versus the Board of Education decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had already been done? Speaker 2: That was done. That was done--well that was '54 [1954], but what happened while I was away was Autherine Lucy-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --and that was all in the front of the magazines and papers in Germany. And, of course, the thing that was so--well, first of all, because I could speak German and because I was African American, I was the darling of USIA [United States Information Agency] because they could send me around and then Berlin [Germany] was divided. I mean I could go to the eastern sector because, first of all, I would go with Inga [ph.], but, in any event, Marian was a student of Bertolt Brecht who was alive. He died while we were there, and so I would go with Marian [ph.] over to the Brecht Theater and watch Marian being educated by Bertolt Brecht and we would go to the opera for a dollar and go to the valet for a dollar. Well, the Fulbright stipend is quite generous. It pays your room--it pays you an allowance every month, it gives you enough money to buy your books, it pays your tuition, and it also gives you money in the intercession. There is a two-month or three-month vacation between semesters. The semesters run from the fall until right after until Christmas I guess, and then you go on--you come back and you go on a trip-and you're on a trip, no, you have a vacation, hence, you go on a trip and see the rest of Europe, but vacation is sort of like in the spring, so it's enough money to give you some money for vacation. My parents sent me some money, but mostly I was able to live on the stipend, and then you come back to school. So things like going to the opera, in that time, and the ballet you did it everyday; you did it as often as you could. And I was able to move back and forth because I could speak German, so the Germans who would interfere with that were--normally, didn't, a lot of Germans had never seen a black women. They had seen black men because you know women were really not in the service very much in those years, so the occupation forces were almost 100% male and there may have been some nurses around; I never saw any. So here I am this African American woman; they didn't know what I was. I could speak German, so they really were confused. So that was really funny, and the Germans are not tolerate of difference. So I'm hanging out with these Americans, who are very American just like I am, but they look like they're German because, of course, they were born in Germany, but they're Jews, so they got this special history with Germany, and none of them had been back since they had to escape. So it was just highly charged for all of us. Speaker 1: How did they feel? How did they--did they share--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(unclear), oh yeah, we were best friends. We didn't live--well, two of the guys shared an apartment, but Inga had a separate living arrangement and I did too, so we would hook up every day on campus, and then we would go and do stuff. And we would have dinners together. We would make dinners. Vanna [ph.] and Marvin [ph.] had a real apartment, so we would cook over there. And we were really close friends. Yeah, they--it was--I lived their trauma. It was very hard for them sometimes. And Inga's [ph.]father had been a member of the government in Austria. She was from Vienna, and so Inga and I were a traveling pair, and Vanna--and Marian really was in theater, so she didn't really travel with us in the same way. She did stuff with the theater people, but Inga and I in the intercession took a trip all down through--right straight across the top of Switzerland into Italy, down through Italy, and back out into Vienna, where her aunts, who were still there--and her aunts were Aryan or had survived as Aryans and they were sisters, and they had an apartment, and they moved out of their apartment and into a hotel or someplace I don't know where they went, they gave their apartment to Inga and me while we were there, and so I was able to go with Inga to places where her father had been in government and where he had been hunted down when the Nazis took over. Story_ID: 169425 Speaker 1: And you know, I--they shared with me as fully as I could appreciate. Speaker 2: How were they treated in Germany? Speaker 1: Well, that's how I started talking about this because the Germans kept--you know they would say things. No, I never met any Germans who saw the Jews being carted off any place. They were all someplace else. Speaker 2: Nobody ever saw anything?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --nobody ever knew anything. They--and sometimes--a couple--and the younger students would admit that their parents had talked about it or there was some awareness of a concentration camp, but people--there was a sense of denial that was unbelievable. And so we would challenged then. Don't tell me that you didn't know, and I was living with a German family. My living arrangement--and so was Inga's--we had a room. It was you were a roomer. And the stipend was enough so that it was a bed and breakfast; and the family treated me very nicely, the Kindermanns [ph.]. They were very warm, and they had children, and they sort of--and we could talk. And we'd talk about opera, and we talked about stuff, and we finally got to the point where we could talk about what was going on with them when the Jews were being killed; and they said that they were aware that some of their neighbors were disappearing but they didn't know where they were going. And they were in Berlin [Germany] the whole time. They had a wardrobe in their dining room that had this huge scar down the middle of it, where the Russian soldiers had come when the Russians occupied Berlin and taken an ax, looking for stuff and just chopped their--I mean they had evidence of their war experience that they shared with me, but when I was challenged--not these people, but when we would challenge others about how could they not know about the prosecution of the Jews, they would say things like, "Yes, but what about the Negroes in the south?" And this was their way--it was a defensiveness, you know, like how could you be talking to us about the Jews after all, look at what's going--and I was always very candid. I was always amazed that U.S.A. would send me anyplace because I would say, "It' horrible. It's illegal. It's barbaric. It is--It should not be. It's unconstitutional, they're retrogrades, they're Neanderthals," you know I would go into my spiel, one of my friends calls the "screed." (Laughter). Story_ID: 169426 Speaker 1: I wasn't, I wasn't intimidated by this, but when Autherine Lucy's picture appeared on the front of Der Spiegel, which is sort of the equivalent of Time magazine, people were coming up to me in the street asking me, did I know--first thing they would ask me, did I know her? No, I don't know her, but wanting to know what all of this meant, and that I would take this opportunity to talk with them about--well, you know, you remember when the Jews were here and you were cart the Jews off to concentration camp, this is sort of the parallel of that that is being rejected and fought against in the United States because we have lynchings, and we have people who are put in jail for no good reason, and while it is illegal and unconstitutional, you guys named a leader who made it legal, but it still is wrong, and it's just as wrong in the United States as it was when it happened to the Jews here in Germany. Vanna [ph.] went back. I never understood--I never understood why he went back. He went back--first of all, he looked very Jewish. He had a beard, he looked like a rabbi, and he just really looked like a Jewish rabbi, so he would get nasty comments made to him frequently. Inga [ph.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --There was a lot of anti-Semitism?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--There was a great deal of anti-Semitism especially inside the cosmopolitan areas. You did not find it so much in Berlin [Germany] because Berliners are, by nature, very cosmopolitan, and that's sort of the free-spirited part of Germany. Germany is a very rigid, just, in general terms, they are not as a people sort of warm and fuzzy. And the Berliners--the southern Germans were much more warm and fuzzy--gemutlich--friendly than the Berliners, but the Berliners, in many respects, were transplants. A lot of them were not real Berliners. They were people who had come to Berlin from other places. They were very cosmopolitan. They had been other places, but in the small towns along the Rhineland, in (speaking German), and Bad Honnef, and Bonn, and just that whole area of small towns, there was a great deal of anti-Semitism, just like in the land and in the small communities here in the United States you can find rabid racism, not mediated by anything, including thought. And that's what you found in those towns, and Vanna went back, and wrote, and said that he had been beaten up in one of the towns. He went in, you know, he was staying at (speaking German) and went to one of the bars to eat. There's a lot off--in the small towns, there's a lot of restaurants/bars kind of things, and a group had jumped him and beaten up. And, of course, I was furious because I didn't think he should have gone back, but he made the point that he was born in Germany. That was his home. Story_ID: 169427 Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Germany? It was a year? Speaker 2: About eighteen months--yeah, about eighteen months (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Eighteen months? So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I was invited to stay. So some Fulbright students were invited to extend their Fulbright. I think Vanna [ph.] did. They did not come back with me, and I think they did stay. I'm saying I'm thinking it was a long time ago. I don't remember. And they were moving back and forth, but I was invited to stay for another term, and I didn't want to do. By then I had sorted through what I wanted to do professionally. I did not want to be a lawyer any longer because--oh, I had started to tell you that in my senior year, I had finished all my courses but I didn't want to leave my class. I wanted to graduate with my class. I was getting honors and stuff. I wanted to do that, so I went to law school. I went over to law school, and I audited torts, I audited constitutional law and moot court. And I was very friendly with the dean and the faculty, so they didn't care that I was there. Speaker 1: You do that so well (laughter). Story_ID: 169428 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am can you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I'm Yvonne Scruggs-Leftwich, and it's spelled Y-V-O-N-N-E, Scruggs-Leftwich is hyphenated, S-C-R-U-G-G-S,-L-E-F-T-W-I-C-H. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Niagara Falls, New York on June 24, 1933. Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor primarily at this time; although I'm a policy advocate, and for the last decade, I've the leader of a major civil rights confederation called, "The Black Leadership Forum," so I'm sort of transitioning from full-time-in-your-face-advocacy to part-time in-your-face-advocacy. Story_ID: 169429 Speaker 1: So, you know, I'm now a university professor and an advocate and analyst, policy analyst. Speaker 2: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is November 20, 2003. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're in my home in Wheaton, Maryland. Story_ID: 169430 Speaker 1: We talked about my life in many different ways, but we were sort of trying to be more chronological and orderly, and I had finished a year as a Fulbright fellow in political science and international relations at the Frie Universitat in the Otto-Suhr-Institut fur Politikwissenschaft Berlin Germany [the Free University of Berlin] and during that year I had traveled rather extensively in Europe. And on one of the trips, I had been interviewed at the Bologna Institute of Johns Hopkins University's School for Advanced International Studies [Johns Hopkins University SAIS Europe, Bologna, Italy] and I had applied for continued graduate education at what we call "SAIS" and I had been accepted and given a scholarship, which covered my tuition and books, and I was coming back from the full bright fellowship in the fall of 1956 I guess; and I went immediately--I went home to Buffalo, New York where I had lived since I was five years old really; although I still consider myself to be from Niagara Falls [New York]. I went home to visit my family and then went--or came, since we were in the Washington area, immediately to SAIS in Washington, D.C. And I was at SAIS. for one semester. It was an interesting era because white I had lived in Europe, Autherine Lucy had been admitted to the University of Alabama in the midst of much controversy and lack of support by the local government and local leadership, and full support by the federal government, and there was this perception that things had changed because this was now two after what we now refer to as Brown [v. Board of education, 1954] and I had been an undergraduate at the time of the decision--the Supreme Court decision, which reversed Plessy versus Ferguson [1896] and had lived abroad for a year, and had been the spokesperson of color for the United States government, going around at America House gathering, and speaking about democracy and all the promise of civil rights. I got to SAIS, to Johns Hopkins here in Washington and enrolled in a program, in which I was one of two African Americans. One was a man who went on to become an ambassador, Ronald Palmer [ph.]. He had been there two years. I enrolled as a second year student; and there was discrimination up the kazoo. The woman who taught German acted as though I couldn't speak German when I had been lecturing and writing academic papers in German, and had lived with German people. I really didn't live with Americans when I was in Germany; and we spoke German all the time. I was bilingual. There were other kinds of example of bigotry, but the major one was that SAIS facilitated their students--and this was creme de la creme of the foreign service community--facilitated their students taking the foreign service exam; and they took us around to different places. We got interviewed by the State Department and by, what was USIA [United States Information Agency] then, by [Central Intelligence Agency] and I kept being offered these jobs as the secretary if at all. And the one agency that did want--I took the Foreign Service exam. I passed the foreign service exam, and the one agency that was interested in hiring me at the end of the academic year when I would have a master's [degree] in International Affairs was the United States Information Agency because I had worked for them and they were interested in using my Western European experience, but I was also, by then, engaged to be married; and the person--the man with whom I was marrying was a graduate student in psychology and had wanted to go to the Freud Institute [Sigmund Freud University Vienna], which was in Vienna [Austria]. And well this was an ideal arrangement, I would go and be assigned to a German-speaking country, and he would have go on and do what he would have done here in the United States--what he did do. I would be the worker because I had a master's by then and he would be finishing his master's. And I was informed unceremoniously by USIA that women could not be married and be in the foreign services and you most certainly could not take a dependent to an assignment, only men could do this. And I decided I needed to quit this popsicle stand, that I did not like the way I was treated at Hopkins. Furthermore, all of the discrimination, which I was experiencing, had to do both with race and gender. And I really couldn't tell which was which. I mean how many men do you know whom they would be inviting to go someplace as a secretary. Story_ID: 169431 Speaker 1: And I decided it was a waste of my parents' money because even though I was being--I had a full scholarship, and the scholarship paid for my books, my parents were paying for me to live on the Washington [D.C.] economy, which, even then, was not cheap. I had--when I finished North Carolina Central [University, formerly, North Carolina College for Negroes, Durham, North Carolina] before I had been awarded the Fulbright fellowship, I had been invited to come to the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] on a scholarship and an assistantship in what has become the Hubert Humphrey School of Public Affairs to take a master's in public administration. And I decided at the end of the first semester that I was not going to subject myself to further abuse at the expense of my parents. And I think probably also because I couldn't get real promising and productive work in the international affairs field, I decided that it would be a waste of my time and my experience and talents to try to fight that battle just to go live in some other hardship post, so I quit Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] before the second semester began. I contacted the University of Minnesota and said, "Well, I'm back to this country. You offered me an assistantship when I was leaving undergraduate school. I'm interested now in taking you up on that offer. How does that sound to you?" And they wrote back and said, "Sounds great to us. Come on out to Minneapolis." So I went to Minneapolis. I worked for a little while for the Air Force. I worked from the end of-from February until maybe August of 1957 for the United States Air Force doing entry-level work, but I was saving money and I went to the University of Minnesota; and when I got there, I had not only a scholarship, I had an assistantship, which paid me for setting up the public administration library at the University of Seoul in Korea in collaboration with twelve Korean exchange students who were all adults who were working public administration and had been supported--were being supported by their government to get a master's in public administration at the University of Minnesota. And I selected books from the American experience and selected these books and they were ordered, and sent to the University of Seoul and created a public administration library to which these twelve students then returned and became faculty to teach public administration. Story_ID: 169432 Speaker 1: And I stayed at Minnesota [University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota], got a master's for that. I stayed that year. And then I left Minnesota and came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because the man I had married, Sherman Perry [ph.], who was my husband at that time was from Philadelphia. He had been born in Philadelphia. He was living there, and I came to join him in Philadelphia. My intention was to go from Minneapolis [Minnesota] to Philadelphia, stay a short time in Philadelphia and then head on to New York because Paul Ylvisaker, who was the head of the Ford Foundation Public Affairs Program at the time was an alumnus of the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And both he and Senator Hubert Humphrey had come for a week in residence there with us. It was a small class. I don't remember exactly, but there were no more than twenty or so of us in the graduate class at the University of Minnesota and Humphrey was Minnesotan and Ylvisaker was a graduate of the University of Minnesota. And they'd come out, and when I was finishing up my master's at the end of that year, Paul Yvilsaker said, "What are you going to do?" He stayed in touch with those of us who were interested in working in the east and I said, "I wanted to work for the United Nations." And he said, "Come on to New York and we'll see what we can do." And I was headed to New York to follow up on my interest in international administration--by then international affairs and administration, and my husband became ill, and was hospitalized in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; and so instead of going to New York, I stayed in Philadelphia and got a job in public administration in the specialty of housing and urban redevelopment because my thesis for my master's had started out to be the story of the Ellicott District renewal project and how the administration of urban renewal grants had been differentially applied to black communities. And this was a desert wasteland in Buffalo [New York]. Some people say all of Buffalo is a desert wasteland, but in those years, it was not. And I had some experience--some research experience and background in redevelopment urban renewal. And I got a job at the city of Philadelphia as a specialist in a housing technician in an urban renewal evaluation project. And I stayed in Philadelphia until 1974 from '59 [1959] when I got out of Minnesota and went there until 1974 I lived in Philadelphia. My daughters--my two oldest daughters were born in Philadelphia, Katherine Perry and Rebecca Perry Glickstein [ph.]. Rebecca Perry Glickstein [ph.] still lives in Philadelphia and Katherine Perry lives in Columbia, Maryland, which is not far from here. My experience in urban renewal was just rich and very compelling. It covered the whole issue of federal funding, federal intervention, the relationship between the federal government and the cities, the problems of deteriorating inner cities, the up south aspect of those problems. Which is to say that the most deteriorated communities tended to be black communities. And, of course, now they are black and Latino but it was clear that the process of gentrification and succession that characterizes the aging of cities, in any event, was the experience--the core experience of African Americans who had migrated from the South to northern cities during the Second World War [World War Two, WWII] and had settled there in segregated communities, in balkanized communities, which had been permitted to age and deteriorate. Story_ID: 169433 Speaker 1: And that kind of charted my focus for many years. It wasn't until--my Ph.D. is in urban planning. I discovered that urban planning, not international affairs, is what I'm much more psychologically suited for--that sort of intense high energy approach to problem-solving and to policy making is much more consistent with urban activism than it is with the diplomatic core. And I probably was a misfit from the beginning. Um, thinking about being a diplomat, that's not my personality. I'm not patient. I do not suffer the dissembling easily and I'm not very good at dissembling. And I tend to be very direct, and I would like to see the product of the efforts, which, of course, does not at all characterize the diplomatic process, so it has been a good fit. I have often said that if you're lucky, you will choose profession for which you're hard wired. And I think that I've been lucky in that regard. I'm really hard wired for advocacy, for cutting through to--cutting to the chase, as we say in the vernacular with regard to change and improving conditions for people who can't speak for themselves. I remember my mother--both my parents [Geneva Ellen Byrd and Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] were activists. My father used to say he was a "race man" (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --yes, that's what they used to say (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --that meant a whole lot. Like many African American men, he was educated. He had gone to Ohio State University. I may have mentioned earlier that his father [Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs] was a physician who had written a book--had written a couple of books as a matter of fact, but he was very change-oriented, very much a feminist in the contemporary sense. And my mother used to be--she used to advocate for people all the time. She was elected official, and they would come to her, but she was naturally inclined to take up the cause for people whom she considered to being taken advantage of. And she would say when people offended her and she would be very abrupt and quite blunt about countering such offense that, given her bearing, her education, and her position, if people would offend her and insult her, she knew what was going on with people who were more reticent, less willing to stand up for themselves. And she thought it was her responsibility to take care of whatever the offensive situation was right then and there, so that the lesson could be conveyed that that's not the way that you should treat people and it could be conveyed in a very effective way. And I sort of--that's what I mean by "hard wired." I heard that all my life. And it turns out and planning and looking at conditions through the prism of economic and political analysis is an effective way of bringing about change, and it has always been a comfortable way for me. Story_ID: 169434 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just was going to say that I guess the research and the ability to cut the issues, I guess still requires some activist element--I mean somebody actually causing some trouble to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right. No, no, you have to be willing to take risks and you have to not be fearful of repercussions when you take a position based on principle and truth. It is not always comfortable, and sometimes you're there by yourself. I wish I had a dollar for every time I've been in a meeting where I have said, "Well, I don't understand this because these are the issues as I see them." And people have said to me after the meeting, "I'm very glad you said that. It was the same thing I was thinking." And that's reassuring because you know you certainly are reflecting some of the concerns of somebody other than just yourself, but you do have to be willing to take the risks and to be exposed, and I think that I was given that in my growing that there was never anything wrong with saying "I don't know." There was never anything wrong with raising concerns about things that you didn't agree with, that your point of view was as valid as anybody else's as long as you weren't shooting from the hip. And sometimes you had to shoot from the hip if you wanted to get responses that you could then use to increase your knowledge and information about the situation. I don't think that I was ever constrained by my parents from speaking out or from involving myself in activities that were designed to bring about change. And that does not mean that I was raised as a revolutionary. African American families in that era were not necessarily looking for ways of being disagreeable or getting in confrontation. They were looking for change. And part of the process of seeking change meant establishing that you knew what ought to be the condition and that was because you were a part of that value set; that this was not something foreign to you, and that you worked out of that sense of knowing what is right and knowing how things are done by other people in other places, so that you validated your position because you knew how the world ought to work and how it worked for others, so that was not really revolutionary behavior, but it was seen as revolutionary in those days by people who wanted to see it--who were benefitting from the status quo. And I was given the tools for taking up battles on behalf of other people from as long as I can remember; both from examples from my parents were leaders and helped other people a lot, as well as being told, "You've been given certain gifts. You have intellectual gifts. You've gifts of socialization, and it's your responsibility to see that people are not mistreated." Story_ID: 169435 Speaker 1: At the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota], were there any teachers there that were particularly important? Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. [George] Warp, who was the head of the program, had been the person who I had interfaced with who made sure I got the assistantship. He was the head of the public administration program. There was another person who was not at Minnesota then. He was at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at the Fels Center for Government [sic, Fels Institute of Government]. His name was Steve Sweeney, and [Stephen] Steve Sweeney's son was one of my classmates at the University of Minnesota, Jim Sweeney. So that I got sort of the benefit of that prospective on public administration, government service, the way government works from a couple of people there. And, of course, as I said, Paul Ylvisaker was out there. Hubert Humphrey was out there. And I was out there a year; and I worked very hard. It was not a luxurious graduate study. It was going to finish, and I had to make up some time because all of my courses from the University of Berlin [Free University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany] and from Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] were not transferrable to that particular graduate program, so I worked hard that year, and I worked. You know, I was living in the dormitory with all these senior women who seemed always to have some problem as a resident advisor, so I learned a lot from a lot of different sources there at the university from my colleagues, who were graduate students also, living in the dorm, oh, from Carl Rowan. Carl Rowan was living in Minneapolis then. The journalist, late journalist, and his wife, Vivian, was from a Buffalo [New York] family, and, of course, as we always did and still do when African Americans are going to another community, the family reaches out to family members whom they know and say," my daughter is coming or my son is coming and I'll give them your name and address and just look for them." Well that didn't mean anything in particular except that there was an expectation if there was ever crisis or if anybody needed to be on your side that you could go to the family members, who were friends of your family. And my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd] was very best friends with Vivian's oldest sister, who is head of the Urban League in Buffalo, Lynn Green [ph.]. Her doctor, Ben Murphy [ph.], was the sister of Vivian Murphy; and so when I got to Minneapolis--not knowing--I mean Carl Rowen was still a young journalist. He was working for the Minneapolis Tribune. He may already have written, 'South to Freedom,' but I can't remember, the sequence isn't clear to me now, but I called them up and I babysat their children on occasion when they wanted to go out. I was a graduate student, so they'd come to pick me up and I'd go over there. And I learned a lot--I mean just being around Carl Rowan who was just a brilliant journalist and I read his column every day when they appeared in the paper. I was very impressed by Carl Rowan. And I was impressed also because I had been editor of my school paper in college, and had won awards. And I was really a writer, and I've continued to write over the years. So I did--that was one of those experiences that you had because you were there in that place at that time with that person. Story_ID: 169436 Speaker 1: I was reminded that [HM] Horace Dawson--Ambassador Horace Dawson, who is a HistoryMaker also, was my mentor, and has been my mentor throughout my career. He was on the faculty at North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] and was advisor to the newspaper, which I edited; and we and his wife, Lula [Dawson], have remained friends over all these years. And that was a rich influence on me, on my way of thinking, on the written word, and the ability to use writing as a tool for change, which I did then, and have continued to do, but you had asked me about Minnesota, and it was one of the experiences--if I had not met Paul Ylvisaker, I would not have gone on to become the associate director of the Philadelphia Counsel for Community Advancement, which was the Ford Foundation gray area project in fifteen cities, in which Philadelphia was one. And I worked at the job as the associate director, and [Samuel] Sam Dash, who was the Watergate Counsel, was the director. So, Sam Dash, I knew, and I learned from Sam Dash, but also the senior vice president at the Philadelphia Counsel, and this was fairly early on. This was in the '60s [1960s] that I went to the Philadelphia Counsel was Dr. Howard Mitchell, who, if anybody influenced my life, it was Howard Mitchell, psychologist, held an endowed chair at the University of Pennsylvania. He was the reason I went to the University of Pennsylvania. I worked for him for a number of years. He was the chair of my doctoral committee, the chair of my dissertation committee, and my life-long friend. Story_ID: 271275 Speaker 1: What Ph.D. were you working on at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Same one I was working on Ph.D. in planning. Speaker 1: Planning, alright. Speaker 2: I was always sort of--once I started on planning, I've never been ambiguous about that at all. This was in the beginning of the '70s [1970]. I was the troubleshooter for the poverty program, a federal liaison officer, which meant I was supposed to be the glue box for the model cities program. I enjoyed those programs. I've never enjoyed bureaucratic work. Um, I took the job in the Model Cities Program, which was a GS position, because model cities was run by the Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD]. And I took it recognizing that when I got tired of doing it, I was going to leave; and that is precisely what I did. The Model Cities Program began and ended in a couple of years. People talk about the Great Society's program without realizing that everything that was Great Society's program ran between 1964 and 1969. By '69 [1969], it was over. Richard Nixon came in and overnight, he sent out telegrams to communities who had received community development contracts to do economic development and told them they were over unceremoniously, without due process or anything else. It clearly was going to be an era of draconian changes. And I guess that seems like a trip to the South Sea Islands now as compared to the junk that's going on in the White House now, but, in those days, on the heels of the Kennedy administration and the Johnson administration, which had brought about tremendous changes. And these changes, people don't really understand, many people don't, that the Ford Foundation had been instrumental in these changes. The poverty program was made up of a series of programs that were already being designed, many of them already having been demonstrated or piloted by grants from the Ford Foundation to individual colleges, universities, and communities under the egis of the sort of Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --New Frontier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --persona and the New Frontier. Goodwin [Richard Naradof Goodwin], [Paul] Ylvisaker, these guys--Michael Harrington, these guys were all Kennedy-ites. And they had been designing these experimental programs to address poverty and to address the quality of education in schools--the greater city schools program, and all these things were on the burners when President Kennedy was assassinated, and when President [Lyndon B. Johnson] then had to find a way to continue this legacy. He drew on work that was in the pipeline already and put it altogether in this thing called, "The Economic Opportunity Act." This was--it began in sort of in 1963--or the beginning of 1964 because Johnson became president on November 22, 1963, and so in 1964, he had the Poverty Act. It went through until 1965. The mayor has decided, "Oh, oh, this is funding revolution. We got all these black poverty workers who are now running for office, giving primaries and challenges to incumbents," and they tried to squash the poverty programs, but then the model cities program was already under way. That was passed in 1966, was implemented in 1967. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], it was clear that this era was coming into an end. In 1969, you have [President Richard] Nixon, so I quit. Story_ID: 271276 Speaker 1: I said, you know, I don't like this president [President Richard Nixon]. I don't like his policies. I don't have to work in this job. I'm young. I've got talent. I need to go on and get my Ph.D. and I called up Dr. Mitchell, Dr. Howard Mitchell, whom I had been working with at the Philadelphia Counsel for Community Advancement, who had gone back to the University of Pennsylvania. He was a tenured professor there, and he had taken a leave to work on the Ford Foundation project. And I called him up and said, "I'm looking for a job." He said, "Why don't you come work for me?" I said, "Great idea." And I went over to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was going to go to Law School. I had forgotten about that. I was going to go get an advanced degree, but the dean of the law school was an old friend, colleague, Ted [Theodore] Husted, and I went and applied, and he said, "You know, Yvonne, a lot of the people who are on the faculty here are people you've been doing battle with across the tables in the community on policy issues, on political issues, on urban issues. I'm just warning you. It's fine. You just--you need to decide. Are you going to be willing and do you think you'll be happy going through the lock-step education of law?" And I thought about my experience many years before at the law school at North Carolina Central and the answer to that was "no," I was still wasn't interested in the more traditional buttons I would have to punch in order to effectively complete a law education. I was interested in urban issues. And I looked at that again and I decided the place where I needed to work was with Dr. Mitchell, who was heading a thing called Human Resource Center which was in the department of city and regional planning at that time and later moved to the Wharton School of Finance, and that's that was where my--I still was psychologically, and emotionally, and intellectually challenged by urban planning-- Story_ID: 271277 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you something about Model Cities as Model Cities was really big and I think for the first time, neighborhood people in the poorest parts of the country had a chance to participate in the redevelopment of their neighborhoods. And they came to the table. I know in my hometown, a self-employed contractor, by the name of George Washington, you know, was the chairman of the Model Cities planning counsel. There are kind of crazy stories of what happened in Model Cities, but there was a sense of ownership. Speaker 2: Oh, very definitely. You know, that when you look at it philosophically, the Model Cities Program really was an expression of a real change in the government paradigm. Before Model Cities, the federal government was still pretty much related to state. It was said just axiomatically that 92 percent of all health, education and welfare funds went through the state. That was true, and the state distributed everything, but the models--the poverty program really was the beginning. I mean Model Cities was where it found its expression, but these warriors--these community leaders were recruited and got their on-the-job training in local politics and in decision-making, having to do with the interface between the government and the people through the Community Action Program, which was one of the titles of the Poverty Program. And they were one of the head of the Community Action Counsels. And then when the Community Action Counsels were squelched by the Green Amendment, which said you can't have all the people from the community making these decisions; the mayor has to appoint 51 percent of the members of the Community Action Counsel, these same leaders just really segue right on in to the Model Cities boards, which were the planning instrument for applying for funds to be spent on the decision of local people in local communities. And so that was a whole piece of empowerment and civic education, of civil disobedience in many instances. The area-wide counsel in Philadelphia, the counsel in Gary, Indiana, the counsel in Newark, New Jersey, these community activists took over the Model Cities Program because that's what the legislature provided for. And a lot of them sued the federal government when [President Richard] Nixon, then, tried to terminate their power in the neighborhood advisory boards. They sued because they said this was arbitrator and capricious, that they were not given due process--that the legislation provided for their decision-making roles in the determination of how federal funds were to be spent. And the states had nothing to do with any of this. These were grants that the neighborhood Advisory Counsels applied for directly to the federal government--to the Model Cities administration. And while the Model Cities administration was sort of an umbrella group, the primary actors in there were HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development], transportation, Labor and Health, Education and Welfare. It was still Health, Education and Welfare in those days. And the department of Commerce also got some small administration money. And these local decision-makers crafted a program, put all these different pieces together and then sent it to the Model Cities administration as an application. And the Model Cities administration went to all these different agencies and collected this money to fund this Model Cities grant, which was administered by local leaders. It was just a fantastic period. Head Start came out of that experience. The CETA, the Concentrated Employment and Training Administration [sic, Comprehensive Employment and Training Act]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Comprehensive employment, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --provided workers to local government. They paid the workers but local government got good work for the work that they did. There were many paradigms that were developed out of the final determination that people who are going to be served ought to be a part of the design of the program that was going to serve them. Story_ID: 271278 Speaker 1: And that was pioneered by grants that were made to local universities by the Ford Foundation in the Gray Areas Program. The Ford Foundation reasoned, under the leadership of Paul Ylvisaker and McGeorge Bundy that the local government were too corrupted, were too interested in status quo maintenance for money to be given to them to help poor people change their lives. So they went to the universities and said to the universities, "You're the citadels of research and analysis, look at these problems, look at (unclear) work facts, look at on-the-job training, look at parenting. Look at these problems that beset people in inner cities, and help the people who live in the inner cities design solutions to these problems," so University of Chicago in Chicago [Illinois], NYU [New York University] in New York [New York], (unclear) HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams] with Kenneth Clark (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Temple University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], across the country--North Carolina--University of North Carolina, in that now what is a research triangle down there, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT in Boston [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts]. These universities worked with local citizens, churches and grassroots leaders to build plans for programs which would address the problems that the local community people saw as their priority concerns. This model cut out the city, cut out the state and took the money directly to the grassroots leaders, and that was a model that informed the community action program, which then informed the Model Cities administration. And out of that, came the leaders who became mayors of these cities of--I mean from 1970 to today--In 1970, there were approximately 700 black elected officials whom--most of whom had come out of this crucible of community activism and training; and had learned that, well it's one thing to have a volunteer organization where you come from noting and you meet and discuss, It's another thing to turn this community-based force into a mobilizing arm that elects you to office, where you have a mandate and some power and you can make decisions that affect the way that government is run. It was such a remarkable and profound transition particularly for urban communities and for blacks in urban communities. It was only in cities like New York and Los Angeles [California], where there were Latinos in a large enough concentration that they also were a part of that early experience. That was essentially a black experience and some Native Americans in the south west, but that was the introduction of political power and the use of political power to grassroots organizations in urban communities. Speaker 2: Nixon started up revenue sharing and some other things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --he did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I mean it was a little bit different. The money went right to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --it was block grants (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --yeah--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: --revenue sharing and block grants (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --black grants. Speaker 1: --which sent the money back to government, now remember that's what it did. There was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, but it kind of controlled the (unclear), right? I mean you couldn't really criticize--I mean local groups really didn't have any access. Speaker 1: No, he was government. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean to the local, elected leaders got the black grants. There were very perfunctory requirements that there be some citizen involvement, and in fact, I think in the revenue sharing bills and in the community development, there have been requirements that there be citizen participation, but they didn't get to make decisions about stuff and certainly not very much differently from what had been the experience of the great society's program, where they, in fact, made the real decisions and whether or not the money could be sent there was a function of the sign-off from the community leaders that they in fact had participated and they may have negotiated, and they may have been an agreed-upon distribution, which included the city. It depended upon on how local government negotiated a position with the local grassroots leadership as to how to collaborative the plan was. And that's why the area-wide counsel sued the Model Cities administration because the city administration in Philadelphia emasculated the community--the area-wide counsel, which was the Community Action and Model Cities citizen participation arm. And the suit was that the city had collaborated with the local government to undermine the right of citizens to participate in their own destiny. Story_ID: 271279 Speaker 1: Now, while [President Richard] Nixon is at work--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 1: --you're at the University of Pennsylvania, right? Speaker 2: --yeah, doing the same thing, working in adult education, running out of the Human Resource Center, urban planning, community participation, training, using the tools of education, research to help grassroots organizations and community-based organizations, as they then were called, and local leaders to master the tools of negotiation and change, and planning, working on my Ph.D. I finished my coursework by 1972. I had done my residency, had taken all the courses I needed to take, and began working on dissertation, which was an empirical study of leaders--of leadership, and the characteristics of it, and the strengths of community-based organizations and how those strengths were maintained, and I did all the research. And I finished all my interviews and did my preliminaries, took my orals in 1974 because I had been contacted by an old friend, who is Jerome Lindsey, who was the dean of the School of Architecture and Planning at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to come to Howard University and share the graduate department of city and regional planning there; and he needed someone immediately. I needed to come to a juncture in my doctoral education, and I felt that if I left before I took my comprehensives and my orals, it would just be a whole other world my coming back to that. I was married, I had two children, and I wanted to come to Washington, to Howard, to be on the faculty there, so I did everything that December. Took three written preliminary examinations, took the orals for those preliminary examinations, and left on the 31st of December, moved to Washington, to Bethesda [Maryland] to work at Howard University. Story_ID: 271280 Speaker 1: This was in, as I said, in 1974 and I worked at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I was on the faculty there until 1981. I took two years off in between in 1977, no, in '78 [1978] and '79 [1979]. I was appointed by President [James Earl] Carter to be the head--well actually I was hired by Patricia Roberts Harris, who was another person, who was very significant in my life to be the deputy assistant secretary of HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] for what was the planning element--the community planning and development, and that same day I began work in that job, I was assigned by the secretary, with the approval of the president, to be the executive director of the Urban and Regional Policy Task Force, which President Carter had created as a fulfillment of one of his campaign promises to the urban inner city people who had voted for him, his promise was to do something to help cities and to create an urban policy and that was the job of the Urban Regional Policy Task Force. And I set a deadline for March of the next year, and I really mean that. I sat down and I said, "How am I going to do this job?" And I sat at my dining room table in Bethesda [Maryland] and worked out a planning work program that began from August and tried to anticipate when would be the best possible optimal time for the urban policy to be announced. And it came out by looking at Congressional calendars and other things that it should be announced in March of 1979. And that's what we did, and I ran that process, hired a lot of consultants but brought minorities into a process in a way that they had never been involved in a national policy-making process. I had task forces of academics, of civil rights leaders, of union leaders, of city leaders, you know, elected officials, governors, who met in the White House with the president. When the task forces met, they met in the White House, and if there were elected leaders around, you knew that President Carter was going to show up. He was really sensitive to being and welcoming people who were elected leaders to the White House and he would come to the meetings and he may or may not stay. He would always say something. He would always talk about the policy and his interest and his gratitude for them for being there and working on it, but that was an intense year. At the end of that twelve-month period, I had worked every day of the year except for two weekends right straight through. I worked ten and twelve hours or more a day. And I was at the White House on HUD on Saturdays and Sundays except for two weekends. I don't even remember what the weekends were, but worked right straight through. And we finished the Urban Policy. The president signed off on it, had a big thing to announce it. The primary task force was the secretary's. Secretary Harris headed that task force. My task force was the deputies, who were--for each of the twelve agencies that were involved in the making of urban policy, the deputy from that agency was designated by that the secretary from that agency, and this was the person who was the most concerned with urban issues. And then there were all these other task forces and work groups, that were made up of citizens, who--people from the universities from all over the country, who came and worked with me and my staff on giving their best ideas. My office, which was about the size of this room, had no, no vacant surface. People sent in drafts of all kinds about urban issues from all over the country. Story_ID: 271281 Speaker 1: And I guess the thing that I learned in that issue--in that experience was that African Americans needed to have a better sense of entitlement about their government. I got calls, in those days, of course, it does not work like that now, but if you were a federal executive, if somebody wanted to talk to you, they could call the White House switchboard and the White House would find you. And I had people calling from everywhere interested in some aspect of urban policy or other who knew how to call the White House; and I would get calls from the White House, wherever I was, saying Mr. so and so wants to speak with you about the urban policy because they would find me. Very rarely did I get calls from African Americans except those leaders who had been brought into the process and knew that's that what they should do, and they knew, I'm sure, intuitively. Speaker 2: Isn't that like--that's like one of the major gripes about neighborhood, especially that are low income and have a lot of crime that people don't take ownership of the neighborhood or responsibility for the things that they see that are out of order?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Well, maybe. I think it wasn't--it wasn't indifference (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --no because everybody cares, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --well, it was--it was the understanding--here again--I was talking about the understanding how the rest of the world gets things done, and it was in my view kind of a reticence to intrude upon an institution from which most blacks are alienated. Most whites didn't feel it was--that was their government. That was their urban policy process. And I was just the hired hand which was running it, which was quite right. And they felt perfectly free to call me up and send me stuff. I got--I had from the Urban League, I had drafts from the very first day. From what was then the Urban Coalition, I had drafts from the very first day. I had some materials from the National Counsel of Negro Women, nothing from sororities and fraternities. And I had stuff from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], period. I then--the process that my staff went through, which I honchoed regularly, was making sure that all of these other organizations that are the back bone of the African American community sent in stuff that they were entitled to call, to send in things, both the drafts and requests because it was clear to me that that was not the natural process of influencing government. --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --So they had to be--you had to agitate them to get--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --yeah, and I people who would call up people and would say, "We haven't heard from you. Are you sending things in?" And I had gotten a report that someone, a friend of mine, who was at a meeting of movers and shakers in Washington, many of whom were African Americans, said, "Have you sent stuff to Yvonne for the Urban Policy?" The response from a very knowledgeable person was, "So what, so it can be put in a safe somewhere and never see the light of day?" Well, it was the experience of not having considered and valued opinions from people who ought to have been solicit--whose opinions ought to have been solicited. And that was the way things were done. We met in the '70s [1970s] a group, people, who were finally, who were at the core of the black leadership forum, met with the editorial board of the Washington Post, [HM] Vernon Jordan, Eddie Williams, Carl Holman, a couple of other people and I. And I was heading that was from being really at Howard University more than anything else, saying, "Why is it when you're doing stories on black people, you go to Harvard?" There weren't any Harvard--any black people at Harvard, they were consulting. "Here you've got the joint center for political and economic studies. You got Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. There are people who do studies on black people over there. Why are you not asking them what they think?" Well, that was the mode then. This was in the same period. It was in the late '70s [1970] that this meeting occurred, and this was the same period when I was hoping that blacks would get a sense--would use their entitlement to force the government to invite their opinions on policies. Story_ID: 169444 Speaker 1: Yes, we're still in the [President Jimmy] Carter administration those last couple of days in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the last few--after the urban policy was done, you know I'm remembering--I'm thinking--no, I've given the wrong years because Carter was elected in '76 [1976]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and I came in the administration in 1977 and we did the urban policy and announced it in '78 [1978] because I had taken a one year leave of absence--I was a tenured faculty member at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I had to make some arrangements because chair of department, and I had taken a one-year leave of absence and the dean had appointed an acting chair. At the end of that year, all I had done was the Urban Policy, and the secretary said to me, "Well, you're also a deputy assistant secretary. You got all these programs." I ran her $100 million discretionary fund. Oh, that was the sweetest job I think I've ever had, where people trying to do things across this nation who hadn't been able to get the resources to put together a project could apply for a discretionary grant from HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development], and it came out of the secretary [Patricia Roberts Harris]'s discretionary fund, which was run by Community Planning and Development, and it was my responsibility. Speaker 1: Who got some of that money? Speaker 2: Oh, one of the--people would do all kinds of things, but the thing that I remember most clearly was that in Adobe, New Mexico, there is the oldest example of multi-family housing in the world. It goes back to the thirteenth Century and it's Adobe Indian, Native Indian Americans. And it was Quonset multi-family. It was built on levels, and it was maintained by the process--of the right-of-passage process within the community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the right of passage had the Young Braves doing certain maintenance things, replacing the gutters, re-enforcing the joists and rebuilding the stairs, all kinds of things in collaboration and under the apprenticeship of the elders and that's the way it's been maintained for centuries and it was still being lived in and still standing, but the core of engineers had been asked to come and look at a problem with it, and they found that because so many of the Braves had left the community, by then it was a reservation--had left the reservation and had become urban dwellers, that fewer and fewer Braves were available to participate in this rite-of-passage; and the work was hard work. It was climbing on these things, and a lot of the work had gone undone for many, many seasons. And the core of engineers reported to me that if another season passed, there was a rainy season, that certain parts of these structures would wash away, and that this multi-family housing would be destroyed. And I went there and I looked and met with people in the community. We had people from the Regional office at HUD, who had worked with the leaders in the community; and we made a grant to the Adobe community. And I wish I could remember how much, but it was in collaboration with the core of engineers and it paid for their completing renovating this example--this multi-family community, so that it could then be maintain and would not be destroyed. I mean when you just think about the ability to do something like and to use public monies to help preserve a cultural artifact that could never be replaced, it just gives me goose bumps. And there were many examples of this kind of work, factory-built housing for rural communities, community centers, (unclear)--some of them adult educational facilities for communities that had 40 percent and 50 percent unemployment, so that people could learn the skills that they would need to get jobs, all kinds of things, and it was discretionary money. It meant that the secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development was the one who decided how to spend that particular dollar item. Other agencies had discretionary funds too. I don't know how much they were, and I don't know how they worked, but I know how the one at HUD worked. It was just--we had the Urban, UDAG, Urban Development Action Grant, which was a matching relationship between local government, a developer and HUD, and sometimes the discretionary money would be used to add community services and other kinds of enhancement, empowerment activities to this Urban Development Action Grant, which was almost always the construction of affordable housing and creation of economic development opportunities. Story_ID: 169445 Speaker 1: It was fantastic. So the point was that I wanted to do that for another year. At the end of that second year, I just had been fully exposed to the way the bureaucracy works. I was very aware that a lot of the changes that we were making in that administration would be reversed as soon as that administration was gone. I had an obligation to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I was a tenured faculty member and to have a tenured faculty member gone for two years was expensive in many ways, and so I decided that it was not--I just didn't want to continue working for HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development]. Secretary [Patricia Roberts] Harris left HUD and went to create Health and Human Services and to facilitate the create Office of Education, the department of Education. She invited me to go with her. I did not want to go to Health and Human Services. I did planning. I did housing and community development, and I didn't really want to do anything else. And I needed to go back to the school of planning because having written--having been responsible for the creation of the National Urban Policy, first in the history of the country, I scrapped everything I had been doing for dissertation. I had all the archival materials for the writing of the National Urban Policy and I decided I was going to do my dissertation and it was named--a book, which is coming out this January I think, 'Consensus and Compromise: The Making of National Urban Policy.' Story_ID: 169446 Speaker 1: And I decided that I wanted to go back into the academic community. I really had had enough of the pace and the dynamics. Speaker 2: Before you leave that, do you have an assessment of Patricia Roberts Harris and an assessment of [President] Jimmy Carter? Speaker 1: I thought Patricia Roberts Harris was just one of the most brilliant people I had ever met. She was extremely gifted. She almost had--she had steel-trapped mind. She was very able in administration. She was my kind of woman in that there were all kinds of--Joe Califano tried to take her whole department from her, and talk about a fight. He had no idea what he had unleashed when he decided that--the position he took was that public housing really ought to be under the egis of Health and Human Services because housing was one of the welfare benefits of government and welfare benefits ought to be handled by Health and Human Services. He didn't have a clue what he had started. And, of course, he lost that fight. She was just marvelous to watch. I enjoyed her tremendously. She was tough, uncompromising about things that she really believed in, knew who she was, knew that her experiences had been unique, did not take umbrage at the intention of most men to act as though she didn't know what she was doing. I enjoyed her. I thought she was marvelous. Story_ID: 169447 Speaker 1: [President] Jimmy Carter was also incredibly bright. I think one of the brightest people until [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton--I don't think he is as bright as Bill Clinton. I don't think anybody is as bright as Bill Clinton, but Jimmy Carter is certainly smart. He just had a way of focusing on the things he wanted to focus on and he really thought that he could do everything himself. And it meant that--in my view, it meant he didn't use the expertise which was available to him as effectively as he might have, and he lost the presidency not because of the hostage crisis. It was because he didn't let his people pay his dues to the constituents who had supported him. I traveled around the country a lot marketing the Urban Policy until I went really back to being deputy at HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development], and the Urban Policy moved for implementation in the White House. I am student of government. I know that the White House doesn't have any staff; and if you agree to go to work there, then you do it as a special assistant. I had staff. I had aid agencies, 600 people reporting to me, I had a budget. As I said I ran the secretary discretionary fund. I did not want to work at the White House, particularly at that point in my career. So I went and stayed with HUD, but during that period when I was with HUD, I was traveling all over the country talking about Urban Policy because I pretty much knew as much, if not more, than anybody. People were very angry with Jimmy Carter for not having made appointments to places where they were vacancies. They were Nixon people still in appointed positions when Jimmy Carter left the White House. There were vacancies on local boards and commissions that nobody cares about really except the local people. And people who had been active in the campaign had wanted those appointments. They should have had those appointments. There is no reason an administration should end with Nixon appointees, whose terms had expired by the way. They were in positions that they should have been out of; and what it took was to appoint somebody else. And there was a lot of anger about that across the country and that Jimmy Carter just didn't pay attention. Speaker 2: Do you think that's what it was, that he just didn't pay attention to it or tried to do too much and didn't get around to it, or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --no, no I think you assign (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --or was it politically (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --people to do that kind and don't ever get invested in a single thing that has to be done. Some of those things do need to get delegated. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). That's certainly that a good Chicago politician would do right away. Speaker 1: That's right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: -- (unclear) from people. Speaker 1: That's right. Jimmy carter came out of a different milieu. He was from Georgia. He was a Georgia politician. You do think that the pace is different in the south than it is here up here; and I think that there was a lot of--what do I want to call it?--that process that has the principle so central to it that Jimmy would govern the way that Jimmy Carter. And then when you look at him now--I mean we like what he's doing because he goes over to countries, but he does ask anybody anything. He just goes. And he did a lot of that in the presidency. Speaker 2: Isn't that how he basically does it now, he shows up at these places, at (unclear) elections?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I mean he talks to the people, but he doesn't--I mean Jimmy Carter makes the decisions. He is an ex-president, he has his own center, but Jimmy Carter--I think that is his own personality to decide--as I said, he's very smart. It's not that he doesn't understand stuff. It is his personality to do things based on his own sense of initiative. And I saw him a lot. I didn't get to know him very well, which is not unusual. Most people don't get to know the president, but I did see him a lot, so I was able to watch him work. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 169448 Speaker 1: Alright so after the [President Jimmy] Carter administration? Speaker 2: I went back to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I started--I decided I did not want to any longer chair that department. I really wanted to work. My pattern throughout my life had been to do some high profile things that, you know, are at here in the real world and then to retreat for a while to absorb things, to integrate my experiences to look at whether or not what I'd experienced was consistent with the theory is about it, the concept, to try to learn and to try to make information that I'd learn available by writing. And I was tired of being in that kind of position in government, where anybody can reverse you and there's always this end game. There's always this rear action that you have to pay attention to. It was axiomatic at HUD [Department of Housing and Urban Development] that if you went to vacation for two weeks, when you came back, they would have moved your desk. It was almost true. I hadn't lived my life that way. I had been pretty responsible, pretty based in substance, and two years of that was enough, so I went back to Howard. And I wanted to write, so I didn't really want to chair the department. The man who had been dean and who I had worked for was no longer dean. He had retired, and I just felt that the new dean ought to hire somebody who was his personal--was his choice. And I went back to Howard. I started writing. I did a lot of research and writing. I had taught classes--I teach the studio mostly, which is the theory--the application of the theory of planning to real planning experiences, and I taught that. Story_ID: 169449 Speaker 1: And then in 1981, my mother [Geneva Ellen Byrd]--my father [Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr.] died in 1969 after a long illness. My mother had been active, and was very much involved in the life of the city of Buffalo [New York], but she was a heart patient. She had high blood pressure and diabetes, and she was a very thin person. You would never think that she had either of these things, but she did. And she had a heart attack in September of 1980 and she died in January of 1981. And I really sort of had to reassess--I was very close to my mother and I spoke with her every single day and sometimes a couple of times; and we share a lot of concerns and issues, and she visited me a lot and my children would go and be with her, and she would come and take care of them. And I then reassessed where I was. I was finishing my dissertation. I was not a native of Washington. I was here instrumentally, in my view--I was here in Washington because there were things in Washington for me to do. There were no longer things for me to do in Washington. I didn't really want to stay at Howard. It just felt like it was time to move on. I wanted to finish my dissertation, and my mother had been very active, and there were a lot of things going on in Buffalo, which she had started, and I thought about it, and decided that I really wanted to be in a place where I could be more valuable than--there are more professionals and experiences people per square foot in Washington than there are anywhere else in the country. And I just felt I could use myself and my skills better. And I looked at Gary [Indiana]. I was invited to go to Detroit [Michigan]. I looked at several communities and then it dawned on me, there was hardly a community more in need of someone to come and help with its urban problems than Buffalo that was home. I could pick up some of the work that my mother had started, and I could carry that on. I had sister who lived there and other relatives and friends. And I decided to--Arthur Eve who was the Deputy Speaker, New York Assembly, had been sort of my mother's adopted son. She had been his political mentor, and I called Arthur and said, "What's going on there in Buffalo?" He said, "I'm glad you called, we're looking for a director for the regional office of the State Housing Agency, are you interested?" Sure I'm interested. So I packed up in 1981, in August of 1981 and moved back to Buffalo. Story_ID: 169450 Speaker 1: Here again, following what I thought was an opportunity to make a difference. I knew Buffalo [New York]--I mean I had been looking at the Urban Renewal Project and things weren't a whole lot better by 1981 than they had been in 1957 or '58 [1958], so I went to Buffalo to become the regional director of the division of Housing Community Renewal of the State of New York. I did that. I became president of the board of directors of the Geneva B. Scruggs Health Center, named after my mother, which she had been helping organize when she died. We got that up and running. We built a fifty-nine bed intermediate care facility right next door to it with the help of [D.] Bruce Johnstone, who later became the chancellor of the SUNY [State University of New York] system, who was, at that time, president of the SUNY college of Buffalo. And I met my current husband, who was the regional director of the other part of the state. He was the regional director of the division of Housing Community Renewal in Albany [New York]. His name is Edward Leftwich--Edward V. Leftwich and we married in 1982. I had divorced my former husband in 19--we separated in 1974 when I moved to Washington and we divorced in the interim and then in 1982, I married. And he was working as the director of the Division of Housing and was working very closely with Arthur Eve and with others of political head, and working closely with a lot of other elected officials, and he became very engrossed in the campaign of Mario Cuomo. Arthur Eve was a big supporter of Mario Cuomo. He took the task of organizing the black and Hispanic communities in the western part of the state. He was the senior legislator from the western part of the state. And my husband, as sort of a colleague of his, became involved in that campaign and quit as regional director, and began to work for Arthur Eve as director of his Buffalo office, his district office. At the end of the campaign, the coalition, which had elected Mario Cuomo, which are Hispanics and blacks and their leaders, which were Arthur Eve, Angelo Del Toro, Al [Albert] Vann and Danny Farrell [Herman D. Farrell], had said that they wanted to identify people from their constituency to be in the governor's cabinet. It was no secret that while New York State has sort of led the way in having blacks in top governor offices, it certainly had not been in any large number. And they wanted to identify--they identified people whom they wanted to recommend to the governor for his appointees to the cabinet, and I was the first one who supported by the all three--all four of the minority coalition, the black and Hispanic caucus. I was the first one appointed to Cuomo's cabinet. I was appointed as commissioner of Housing and Community Renewal. This was in 1982 and I continued in that position until I resigned in 1985. Story_ID: 169451 Speaker 1: That was just a fascinating job. I think really even though I enjoyed writing the urban policy, I really think of all the public jobs I've had as deputy assistant secretary, later as deputy mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and in [Mario] Cuomo's cabinet, I think as a job, a public service job, I enjoyed the commissioner's job the most. I worked directly with the legislators, the members of the assembly and the senate. I had a very good relationship with them, and as a consequence, doubled--tripled the budget for the division while I was as a commissioner. The budget was not really big in today's dollars, but it started at $22 to $23 million and when I left it was, $68 million. When I left, much to my objection, the state took over the management of rent regulation for the city of New York. For the city of New York, there were hardly any other rent-regulated properties outside of the city of New York, and I thought that was a mistake. I thought that should stay with the city of New York, but the state took it over, and put in my agency to administer. My original view was proven daily. It was a disaster because the state doesn't know really about how you administer rent-regulated housing, and they've given it back to the city in the interim, I might add. Somebody asked Mario Cuomo a few years ago, in the '90s [1990] what would he say was his greatest regret in his governor tenure, and he said, "The takeover of rent regulation," that it had not been--it had been ill-advised, and it certainly was, and it was very difficult to do, but, in any event, that was put in my agency. I had 500 contracts. They went to nonprofit corporations all over the state, created a program called, "Urban Initiatives," which was like an Urban Development Action Grant except at the state level, we helped local governments, private entrepreneurs, and local citizens do things that they couldn't do by themselves, but collaboratively they could do, and we funded sort of the citizen part of that operation, so that there could be community involvement and collaboration throughout. Had 500 neighborhood preservation and urban initiative grants, every year went to contract, took over some public housing and middle income housing projects, took them into receivership because they were being run poorly and the residents weren't benefitting and the loaners were getting all the money, and weren't doing maintenance and repairs, just sort of enjoyed the process of helping communities develop in positive directions. We did the first housing code, you know, the standards by which you--for the state of New York. Speaker 2: There is no housing code, now? Speaker 1: There is now. There wasn't before. We did a housing policy for the state of New York, headed co-chair the governor's task force on homelessness. I was the interlocking member of the Housing Finance Agency, the State of New York Mortgage Agency, the Financial--I've forgotten, but the agency was in charge of bonds and financing for the state of New York, and, of course, for the DHCR, Division of Housing and Community Renewal, and as this interlocked member, I was able to do projects because my influence was on all three--all four of these entities. And I could get people to work together so that we were able to fund renovation of the Apollo Theatre and return it online, and created a housing factory, which built modular housing for, you know, affordable modular housing, all kinds of stuff that was really, really fun. Speaker 2: Were you around when they--there is an organization called, Fight, in Rochester [New York] that built some housing, so were you around (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Yes, right, that was one of the--almost every community-based organization that existed in the '80s [1980s] that still exists, got funding from DHCR [Division of Housing and Community Renewal] either for a neighborhood preservation project or for an urban initiative project. Story_ID: 169452 Speaker 1: I left the commissioner's post [at New York State Housing and Community Renewal, later, New York State Homes and Community Renewal] to become the deputy mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but that's deceptive in a way. I left the commissioner's post because I was being attacked constantly by people's from within the governor's administration who simply couldn't get over the fact that you had a black woman running the second largest agency in government who really knew what she was doing. You know, the jobs that are given to people who go in cabinets are in two categories. They're people who appointed because they're prominent, because they have contributed to the candidate's campaign and they may or may not know the area but they know generally how to administer, and they have the right to participate--or they participate in the appointment of experts who help them do the job. There is no one who would argue with the possible exception of the Department of Health that every cabinet member who has cabinet agency is an expert in that area. Then there are the people who come into these top level cabinet positions who really do know what they're doing, whose field is that particular functional area, and who have as much experience as you may find to do that job. Usually what happens is that women mostly are in that latter category. They do not tend to get appointed to do stuff in cabinets because they were prominent or contributed to the candidate's campaign, they usually are experts to some extent in the field, and that frequently is the case also with blacks. Black women then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --doubly--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --are doubly encumbered by the requirement that they be both of these things, and it is counter intuitive to have bigots and people who are biased that there would be a black woman who could in fact do both of these things, and so what happens is if a black woman comes into a position, it is assumed, as a priority, that she is there for the political part. If, in fact, the detractors are forced to recognize that she is also an expert in the area, there is a disconnect there that makes them hysterical and they then get almost automatic reaction to try to undermine this person because this person counters--contradicts their comfortable assumptions about the limitations of African Americans on the one hand and women who are African Americans on the other. I had not been in that position two months before in some very careful and unexpected doing of my job, I unearthed or some of my principle appointees, people who worked for me, found copies of correspondence that people in the governor's office had been writing to undermine me and writing them, and sending each other copies of privileged correspondence and putting people in my agency to whom they sent this kind of information in an effort to make me fail. Fortunately, I discovered this, and I took it to the governor's secretary and I said, "You know, this would be very interesting reading for the media," because what would the governor's correspondence be doing in the desk of a woman who worked in a junior position in my agency? So that went on the whole time I was there. The thing that never seemed to get understood was that I had been doing housing since I had come from the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and had been hired in a housing job. I had worked in the federal government. I had written or helped write and advised a lot of the existing housing legislature. I knew housing. And what I had to do was simply to learn the mechanisms of state government, which I was helped to do because I had four political godfathers, and so the combination of these two things meant that I was dealing with morons half the time who were put in my agency just to spy on me. And the thing that was so funny was that these were not people who knew housing, so they wouldn't know what they were looking at to help undermine me if they got a chance because they were political hatchet people. And I just got tired of it. Story_ID: 169453 Speaker 1: I was saying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you were saying that you just got tired of the hatchet people staying after you (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --I got tired of the hatchet people. Oh, and what also happened was that there was an effort that was succeeding--the governor [Mario Cuomo] was under attack--for not having in his immediate cabinet people speaking to him every day, any African Americans. And he then decided a way to respond to that was creating what called The Advisory Committee to the Governor on African American Affairs [sic, Governor's Advisory Committee of African American Affairs]. And it had two leadership elements, one was the chair person, the chairman of a committee of African American leaders from across the state; and the other position was as the executive director, who was the staff director. And the governor decided to offer me those two jobs, both of them instead of my job as commissioner. The commissioner's job was very successful. I had a lot of support. It was getting a lot of publicity. It was being done well. It was always visible because people care about their housing. And housing was something I knew, and I had very good people working for me, helping me with this housing. We had a really dynamite agency, and then, of course, then what happens--"Well, we need to give this to somebody else because it's too good a plum for this black woman to be running," and offered me this job, and well my response, which was almost a knee-jerk response, and it's not entirely true, it was "I don't do black affairs. I do housing, I do public administration, I do urban revitalization, and I do equity and justice, but I'm not the specialist in black affairs. There are people who are much experienced in doing black affairs than I am and the governor has a right to have whomever he wants in his cabinet. No one should have to tell him that, but I also know what it is I will and will not do." Black affairs is not what I'm going to do. Black affairs had no staff, black affairs had no budget, black affairs had no charter, and I'm going leave a staff of 1060 people, a budget of $67 million and contracts all over the state to do really great stuff to go do something in an agency--it's like being in the White House, it's being a special assistant. And I decided that at that stage in my career, it was perfectly fine for the governor to want somebody else to do housing, but it wasn't me. And I was invited to be the deputy mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. This was after the move of the destruction of the houses by the dropping of C4 on them in this black neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yeah, MOVE. Speaker 1: MOVE by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --by Wilson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Wilson Goode (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Wilson Goode administration. Speaker 1: Right, I had mentored Wilson Goode through his career. I had hired him out of the insurance industry when he was an Allstate agent when I was leaving the Ford Foundation to do the job that I had done at the Ford Foundation because I was going to do poverty program in model cities and he went on to become commissioner--head of the public service commission and managing director and then to become mayor. And I had mentored him through all of this period. I would come into town in the evening and have dinner with him, talk through things with him, and he and I--he had asked me to be his housing director when he had been elected mayor and I had to refuse. I had just become commissioner for the state of New York. I didn't really want to leave that job, and it would have been irresponsible for me to do that, but by then, I was ready to leave and he needed someone to put his mayor's office in order. There were thirteen operating agencies, which had over time been located in the office of the mayor. They had thirteen heads of agencies reporting to the mayor. That made no sense. This was over 600 employees in the major agencies, and there were 200, 200-and-something anti-graffiti employees. There were all these agencies in the mayor's office and he asked me if I would come and help organize or rationalize the mayor's office, and this was in 1985; and I resigned as commissioner, was sworn in as deputy mayor of Philadelphia with the commitment to stay a year and to get rid of some of those agencies, put them in other places where they could be more effective and to help him in any way that I could with regard to the MOVE event. Story_ID: 169454 Speaker 1: I stayed as it was a year and a half [as deputy mayor of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And that was the hardest job I've ever had. Local government is a very demanding job, especially at the top, where you could be eating dinner with your husband and somebody comes over to tell you that their basement is flooded and the department of sanitation has refused--I mean you're on all the time. I would hear fire engines going down the street in the middle of the night and I would know there was a possibility my phone would ring because they needed a top official for something. It was 24-7 in the most absolute sense of the word. And by then, I was sort of in public service burnout. I had been regional director of housing, I had gone on to be commissioner of housing, high profile, rewarding but very, very intense, then I went on to become deputy mayor; and I really just was just tired of public service, but, at the same time, my husband had created a model for a non-depository banks in collaboration with the New York Telephone Co. and with DayTech instabank and his model, which he designed, he made it, you know, and convinced DayTech that this was a good plan and they, in turn, convinced the telephone company that they should pilot it in Buffalo [New York]. It was so successful that they wanted to replicate it down the state. And -- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What is DayTech? Speaker 1: DayTech is an electronic transfer corporation, which you will find on the stock exchange now that does electronic trading. And this was at the very beginning, this was in '85 [1985]--well, this was in '84 [1984] when he was working at this. This was at the very beginning of how you used the web and electronic transmission to do business on a daily basis, and they had designed these little computers--or they were computers. They didn't look like the computers we use, but you could punch in data and transmit it immediately to a mainframe, so to speak, which would record--sort the data and record the data so people could pay their bills at a site and the person who received the payment, who was bonded, which was the corporation, which turns out--that was what we were piloting as the corporation would transmit this payment and it would be recorded with the utility that had the receptor technology to do this and New York Tel [New York Telephone] was paying a high price per transaction for a person to walk in to a store to pay a bill because they had to pay staff, they had pay benefits. They had to pay retirement and all this overhead, which raised the per capita cost of their own collecting their own bills. And this was true for other companies too. And our corporation took contract--we made these corporations, and we took the contracts to accept the payments, transmit them, deposit the money, and make deposits, transfer the money to the corporations, and the corporations would pay us. The customer never had to pay anything. Part of it--my husband's philosophy was that people should not have to pay to have to spend their money to pay, that we ought have people working in institutions that come from the community, that this was an economic development tool because it could generate traffic in an area where other retail activities could then come. Many, many people, particularly immigrants, do not mail their bills. They do not trust banks. The banking systems in the countries they come from are not reliable, and in many ways, they can't access them; and many people don't use checks. This was a booming business. We grossed $7 million dollars a week. We had three corporations. And we had one located at 125 Street in Harlem [New York, New York], one in Bridge and Willoughby in Brooklyn [New York, New York], downtown Brooklyn, and the Flagship one was in Main Place Mall in Buffalo, New York. It's where he pioneered the system and worked out the kinks. We employed--at any time, we had seventy people on our payroll. They were all people from our communities in which the facilities were located. And this was a business that required hands-on management. It was very difficult to handle that amount of money and hire people who you don't know, so it means that there needs to be an anchor manager in each facility who can make sure that these transactions occur. That everybody--it's like a bank. It's a non depository bank. My husband had created them. We had the three of them. I then was the operating officer. Story_ID: 169455 Speaker 1: And I did the--we had a relative operating one in Buffalo [New York]. And my husband and I operated the two in New York City [New York, New York]. And things just emerged. In '87 [1987], we had open Brooklyn [New York, New York] and we needed to move to open Harlem [New York, New York], that opportunity was there. And so I just I resigned as deputy mayor and began running those banks. Those banks ran very successfully until the commercial bank we were using was taken over by the FDIC in 1990. That was a period when the FDIC was going around and descended on a bank and shut it down. These were mostly savings and loan companies. We have never been clear why they descended on that bank. That was a Hispanic-owned bank. It had five branches. The owners were not in financial difficulties. They were not in violation of any of the requirements of FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation], but FDIC came into that bank one afternoon at 3 p.m. and by 3:15 p.m., we had lost more than a million dollars. FDIC insures only 100,000 dollars in any deposit account that is backed up by a corporation, a corporate resolution. Everything else you lose is gone. And we limped along. This was on the 7th of July. We limped along until October 9th, but you can't lose that amount of money if you're a small business, a corporation or three corporations in an environment that is not easy to raise capital. And we limped along. We never declared bankruptcy. But we clearly--we had to fight to hold the contracts. We sued once and won one of the suits, but it was clear that for this business the--we really just needed to close up, and we did. Story_ID: 169456 Speaker 1: I then--we moved to Woodstock [New York], from New York--from New York from Manhattan [New York, New York], where we were living and I took the time to do some writing to work on my dissertation again because I hadn't finished it. I had almost finished it. When my mother died, I just lost interest in it. I wrote some more on it and then did some consultation for SUNY in New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz] but it's an interesting thing the Mitchells in Baltimore [Maryland], Parren [HM Parenn J. Mitchell, III] and that whole family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --yeah, have done a lot of work. Clarence [HM Clarence M. Mitchell, III] of course, was a patriarch and Clarence Mitchell was our go-to person in the Carter administration in the Carter White House, and he was very, very effective. Well, Parren and Clarence III have looked at the kind of attacks that minority public officials experience, and they have a whole institute, which has chronicled the efforts made with no good reason to undermine the effectiveness of public officials. And, to some extent, when I was commissioner of housing, that's exactly what happened, but, you know, when you're a public official, people write bad stuff about you, and it may not be true. I can remember when I was mayor, the Philadelphia Enquirer, I did a front page story saying, "The new deputy mayor needs to learn that you catch more flies with honey than you do with vinegar," to which I responded, "That's good if you find somebody who's trying to catch flies, you should tell them that. I, on the other hand, am not trying to catch flies. I'm trying to reorganize the mayor's office. Well, you know, those are ad-hominem attacks and you roll with those punches, but what happened after I had gone back, moved to Woodstock, was a private person and was doing some consultation for SUNY New Paltz, the political enemies came out of wherever they had been hiding, a rock, and planted a story that had to do with a reason why our banks failed that was completely untrue, but took me back into that political bag of defending myself, as a black woman, who had reached positions that there were people who felt I wasn't entitled to. And that said to me that I really needed to move myself out of New York because I had no interest--I had never been interested in running for office. I was no longer a public official. I had no interest in becoming one, but being under that kind of political attack was simply unattractiveness and not necessary. I was invited by the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies to come to Washington [D.C.] to head their Urban Policy Institute, which is a brand new institute that I took to Chicago [Illinois], and we had an active, two to three years in Chicago, in Los Angeles [California], in New Orleans [Louisiana], in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And I decided that really I really did want to remain in sort of the research environment, where I could do both research and could apply what I had learned in the years that I had been doing public service and that's exactly what the Urban Policy Institute was. Joint Center's venerable twenty-year-old, now it's older than that I guess--think tank was for many years the only Think Tank devoted exclusively to research through the unique prism of the African American experience, and I went there from 1991 to late '95 [1995] ran the Urban Policy Institute--'96 [1996] because I coordinated the '92 [1992] and '96 [1996] National Policy Institute, which the Joint Center had every presidential election year. I was the director of that. I would also serve as the director of something called, the Executive Leadership Council, which was made up of the appointees. Well, it was in the Clinton administration mostly because from '92 [1992] until 2000, it was the Clinton administration, but we did all kinds of programs, bringing these appointees into research environment, and making research analysis information, not the tools--they didn't need to do the research, but the sharing of the outcomes of the research in ways that they could use in their appointed positions was what we did with the executive leadership program. Story_ID: 169457 Speaker 1: And this sort of gave me the opportunity to consolidate the experience from the public sector as deputy assistant secretary, the director of the Urban Policy Institute, a member of the governor's cabinet, the state level, the deputy mayor at the local level, and the private sector work that I had done with my husband in bringing urban--into the urban core an economic development tool that would build wealth and that gave people access to a whole new experience in the marketplace because our employees went onto to jobs in commercial banks and into the commercial banking industry. In fact, we found out that a couple of banks would pay $50 dollars to anyone of our employees who would come and interview, and would give $50 dollars to any employee who could get one of our employees to come work for them. Our employees were very well trained. We collaborated with (unclear) WAC, which was a Hispanic-owned training concern. They would train people, get them job ready, make sure they had those skills and then they would share in the supervision of these new employees. When they came to work for us, we would train them in banking, balancing, and make sure you don't short people and the whole financial part; and they were extremely skilled. And, of course, we had an ethic that had to do with the customer is the reason we are in business. Do not offend the customer, which, of course, is a real important issue when you're doing business in a minority community and when a lot of your staff is a minority staff. I mean we have a very bad habit of not--of being rude to the customers because we feel they're disrespecting us. And we did a lot of work with our employees that having to do with, this is a business, they don't know you from Adam, and they're not doing anything to you to disrespect you, but think about it, if you have to work all week, and then you have to take half of your pay check to pay for your telephone bill and your gas bill, and you need to take borrow money just to pay some other bills, you're not going to be a happy camper. So you have understand it's no different from your relatives. You gotta give the respect that you expect to get. So to consolidate all those experiences in a black-owned, a black-oriented research institution, and to look at national policies that have an impact on all of these things that are going on in the cities and urban communities, that was an interesting opportunity and I was right for that, and I went and did that until the beginning of 1996 when the Black Leadership forum, which was created in 1978 by eleven black leaders when the Black Leadership Forum decided they needed to move to the next plateau. It needed to incorporate. It needed to become nonprofit and it needed to hire an executive director, so it incorporated and it hired an executive director and then it became a nonprofit. And I was the executive director; and I did that until the beginning of this year, which is 2003. Story_ID: 169458 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today as if you haven't given us some already (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh, I did, but that's a good question because I've been really thinking a lot about that. You see I'm at the point where I'm primarily back in the academic community, and I'm trying to help the Black Leadership Forum as it now goes into transition. There are a lot of forces that are--many of them new, which with the--with which black leadership must deal with. And one of my hopes is for there to be some way of younger black leaders benefitting from the experience that those who have gone before them and others who went before me have had without feeling that that's old stuff and that the environment has changed sufficiently that they can afford to ignore--to ignore these experiences and these perceptions and perspectives because I don't think that people--that mainstream Americans have changed enough in their attitudes towards African Americans, now I'm not talking about people of color, I'm talking about African Americans can afford to be sanguine and say, "Oh, well, it's really not about me being African American and I can leave that heritage because it's really about economics and that they can--that they can afford to lull themselves into a state of complacency and amnesia about where they came from, what they bring to this country, what they've contributed to the existence of this country, and pretend that they are just like everybody who came over on some immigrant boat, and they don't have to maintain vigilance about being African Americans. I value the fact that young people are going to the schools they're going to. I see there is a bigger schism between African Americans and those who live in the inner city and those who are someplace else than there ever was. There are fewer opportunities for value transmission and for experience exchange than there ever were; and I worry that this separation and this reaching of mines of communications will cause the African Americans who are still the "have-nots" to become something even worse than "have-nots" and to become so alienated and isolated that they in fact stand outside mainstream America permanently. It's almost like seeing a group of people who had the potential of becoming what the Aborigines were in Australia, native people without land and without no stake. And I think that whether or not that happens is going to depend very much on how young, well-educated, well-placed African Americans perceive this problem, so that's one of the things--and I'm hoping they will perceive a responsibility that goes beyond how much money they make, and what cars they own and where they live too. The very quality of life of people who don't' have, of people who are disenfranchised in many ways, not just in terms--I've had young people inside the corporate world who have said to me--I've been working on things like the digital divide and developing ways in which we can help inner city people bridge the digital divide, and I've had them say to me, "I don't understand why you're wasting your time on that," all they have to do is pick up the mouse and point, and that just reflects such a total lack of understanding of what the divide is that you don't even know where to begin to discuss this. And these are people who should at least have an interest in whether or not--if that's all you had to do, then why is there this digital divide? That troubles me. And I've said, maybe the way that it works is that all of us who carry this institutional history, this cultural history, from our experiences have to die off and that history dies off with us. And then the young people who have none of this history can negotiate a different place for themselves in this society because as long as there is this institutional memory of what it's been like and where we've come from, there are going to be people like me who are agitating that things be resolved in some active way, and that runs counter a lot to a lot of what I see with young people. They do think we ought to get over it. Story_ID: 169459 Speaker 1: If you had something to do differently, what would it be or was there anything that you would do differently than what you've done? Speaker 2: I really don't think so. I've been working on a memoir and it came to me not longer--I think I said this in the last session--that I would call it is "blessed" that I've had such advantages and have had such opportunities, doors that I could open, and such encouragement to go through those doors, not to be afraid to do any of the things that I have done. I think I've had options all along the way. I think that I'm painfully candid with myself, you know, when I'm talking to myself. My father used to say, "Me, myself and I are having a conversation." And I think most of the choices that I have made have been quite intentional, and I know that had I made other choices, the outcome would have been different, but I have no regrets. I like the outcomes as they have evolved, and I can't think of--I can't think of anything that I should have done differently. Story_ID: 169460 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That people--that it is entirely possible for a person who has come from a rich background to understand what it is to be of the people and to be successful in carrying out that role. I could have easily gone on and be in the Ivory Tower somewhere and not have any interface in any direct way with people's quality of life, and I think that taking that--my determination to be a whole person, not to be constrained by my gender, and to resent being constrained by my race has given me the opportunity and to be a voice for a lot of people who are voiceless; and when I look at what I've written and where it's been, I--people come up to me, and it really warms my heart in a way that I can't describe--people come up to me whom I have no idea who they are and say, "I know who you are and you're really saying what I want to hear, what's meaningful to me, and you keep right on saying it." And it happens regularly. Last week, two people different approached me in the store and in the elevator of a hotel--I was coming from a meeting and said similar things. One said, "I used to watch--one of the talk programs on television, and I had a friend I would call up on the telephone and say 'She's on again. She's talking about our stuff." That's really, you know, that's worthwhile. It means there are things that need to be said that people aren't having a venue in which to say them. And I think that I have used the venues that have been made available to me to speak for people whose voices might have not otherwise be heard. Story_ID: 169461 Speaker 1: One last question, similar to legacy, but it's how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: My husband [Reverend Edward Leftwich] describes me as a person who doesn't leave any wounded in the jungle, and doesn't take any prisoners. I would say I'd like to be remembered as that person on behalf of African Americans, just really simply as a person who isn't afraid to take a position on behalf of--that's kind of, yeah as you said related to the legacy. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 169462 Speaker 1: This is a picture of President Bill Clinton and now Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, my husband, Reverend Edward Leftwich and me at one of the many White House occasions that we attended during the Clinton presidency. This particular one was a Christmas party. Speaker 2: Do you happen to remember which year this happened to be? Speaker 1: Well, we went every year, so I don't remember which one that was. That probably is the second term. It probably is '96 [1996], I mean--yeah, that's right. It's probably '97 [1997] or '98 [1998]. It's upside down. Oh, that's how you do it. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. That's a picture of my husband, me with two of our three grandchildren. That is Avery Davis and Avery Paul and James Edward. The picture was taken at our daughter's house in Philadelphia. She is not the mother of either one of those children. I'll show you later. This was in 2001. This is a picture of me with our four children. We have four children, three girls and a boy with Catherine Perry, Edward V. Leftwich III, Tean Desiree Leftwich [ph.], Davis and Rebecca--Geneva Rebecca Perry Glicktstein [ph.]. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Oh, this was in the '90s [1990] '92 [1992] or '93 [1993], '92 [1992] probably. That's a picture of me with my mother at my house, my mother, Geneva B. Scruggs in Bethesda, Maryland. This was in '79 [1979] or '80 [1980], 1979 or 1980. It's in my living room. Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture of me with the, then, secretary, Patricia Roberts Harris, the late Patricia Roberts Harris, and it was taken when I was sworn by her as the deputy secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. That means it was in 1977. Speaker 2: This is a magazine cover. The Empire State Report had never done a cover on a public official--sitting public official who wasn't elected, and they did this cover on me on 1983 in the fall after I was named commissioner. I was named commissioner in 1982; and they did a marvelous multi-page story on me as commissioner of housing. Speaker 1: This is a cover of Success, right, magazine of me. This cover was in 1991 and it was a result of the success of the business I had spoken about in the business that my husband had created, this was a YEO corporation and the point was that we had located these businesses in non-depository banks in the inner city. This was for both Harlem [New York, New York] and Brooklyn [New York, New York]. That was what that story was. Speaker 2: That's when I was deputy mayor city of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I had negotiated the visit by the Honorable Reverend Desmond--Bishop Tutu (ph) to the city of Philadelphia to accept the Ben Franklin Award which is made once a year to an outstanding world figure. I had met him when I was in South Africa in the '70s [1970] as the mayor. That's Mayor Wilson Good standing in the background, and it was at the reception that we held for the Bishop and we were talking about the fact that he had agreed to come. Speaker 1: My grandparents, my mother's parents, my mother's mother and her father and this is at harvest season, some year I don't know when. I never knew my grandfather and I knew my grandmother just when I was very young. She was a teacher of teachers and he was a Baptist minister. He taught at the Baptist seminary and also was a father--I mean was a farmer and that's when he was harvesting whatever they grew. I don't know what they grew on his big farm in Virginia. Speaker 2: In Virgina? Speaker 1: Yeah, in Virginia. That's my uncle, Richard. Byrd is his last name. They were Byrds. My grandfather was Byrd and uncle Richard was a Byrd. And he was a minister in Syracuse, New York. We used to visit him every--two or three times a year. That's my grandfather, my father's father. That's Dr. Lawson Andrew Scruggs. This picture had to be made--this is probably 1893 or 1894. He was the associate dean of the Leonard School of Medicine at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] and the founder of tuberculosis sanitarium in Southern Pines, North Carolina. Speaker 2: This is another picture of my mother's father, my other grandfather, that's in his ministerial garb. He was an itinerant minister. He had a circuit that he rode. He preached at four churches each month and this is his morning cloak for preaching. His name was Byrd, okay, Reverend. Speaker 1: Reverend Byrd? Speaker 2: Reverend Byrd. I don't remember his name. That's my mother, Geneva Byrd Scruggs, Geneva Ellen Byrd Scruggs. This picture was taken when she was the manager of the first black-owned department store in the United States, the manager of the Buffalo [New York] branch, the JJ Allen Department Store, originated in Chicago and that picture was taken at the same time that the ribbon was cut on the Buffalo JJ, she was also treasurer of the corporation in '47 [1947] '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: My father, my brother and my two sisters, taken on the back porch of 212 Adams Street which was the home where I grew up, which we owned until about 10 years ago when we sold it. Speaker 2: About what year was this? Speaker 1: That year would have been '47 [1947], '48 [1948], '49 [1949] somewhere around there, 1947. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me when I would receive the Outstanding Research Award, Faculty Research Award at Howard University when I was the chairmen of the Department of City and Regional Planning in the School of Architecture and Planning at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. That was the night of the awards and the rose is a rose that one of my graduate students gave me and the award is in my hand. Speaker 1: Oh, that's me with my aunt Dr. Anna Burton Wheaton. It was taken two years ago. I was the key note speaker in Kissimmee, Florida for their annual county Martin Luther King celebration. This is a picture of me with Mayor Wilson Goode and Gail [ph.]--sorry I can't remember Gail's last name, who is one of his aides and one of his aids in the field of intergovernmental affairs. This was at a fund raising event that was sponsored for Mayor Wilson Good. Speaker 2: Do you know the date? Speaker 1: It had to be '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with deputy speaker of the New York State Assembly with the mayor of city of Buffalo and the president of the city counsel. I don't know who the man is pointing, but the president of city counsel is sitting next to me and the Mayor Jimmy [James G. Griffin]--what's Jimmy's, but that's Arthur Eve--Deputy Speaker, Arthur Eve standing on the side of the front end loader. That was when I was commissioner of housing and we were breaking ground for which I signed the contract. This is the four of us, by my brother and my two sisters. It was taken at my nephew's wedding in October of 2003. Speaker 2: I don't know anybody on there but David Rockefeller. This is a picture of me with the queen--I was a runner up to Ms. North Carolina College and that is a picture of Arnee Dupree [ph.], obviously, who was Ms. North Carolina College and the two of us on either side of her, Audre Flamer [ph.] and me--that's me were the runner up and the rest were her court. I don't remember--maybe they were also candidates. I think they were mostly they were underclassmen. The three of us were seniors. It's me with a little girl with my legs crossed. Oh maybe I left it in there, as a baby. That's a picture of me, my mother and my father. We were at the train station in Buffalo, N.Y. This was in 1955, in August of 1955, and I was embarking on the first leg of the trip from Buffalo to Berlin, Germany as a full bright fellow. All right, this is a picture of me. This was Christmas in 1934 and my mother had that picture made into a Christmas card, Happy New Year card, and this particular card was sent--it was from me to my father. And you can't see, it's an inscription to my daddy from me in 1934. Oh, come on. He's a musician and he was under contract to Columbia records for 13 years, and this picture was taken in Buffalo, New York. in 1982 or '83 [1983] and he was singing at a fundraiser that we sponsored for the re-election of Arthur Eve. And he is there on the mic and I'm dancing with somebody. I don't know who it is who I'm dancing with. At the top, the four of us, this was in 1982, shortly after my mother passed and we were in Buffalo, all four of us to make decisions about her estate, and that's my sister, Rosalind, my sister, Harriet and my brother, Leonard, and the same this picture was taken--my husband's and my home in Washington, D.C. in 19--maybe '94 [1994] or 1995 and here again of the four of us together. Picture of me with my oldest daughter, Catherine Diane Perry was taken in Philadelphia at our home in Marchwood Avenue, Philadelphia in University city there. This had to be--oh this was maybe 1970 or '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Is that right? Or maybe earlier than that-yeah it's earlier than that because this one is the same day--it's 1964 or '65 [1965]--well, no, 1963 or '66 [1966], this is 1966 or '67 [1967] the same home in Philadelphia with our second daughter, Geneva Rebecca Perry Glickstein [ph.] This is a picture of my parents, Leonard Andrew Scruggs, Sr. and Geneva Ellen Byrd Scruggs at our family home in Buffalo. They were very active in social organizations, the Elks, the Odd Fellows, the Masons, the Shriners, and this is one of those--and these organizations always have events, you know, like dinners and this is one such event. Speaker 2: This would have been--Oh, well my father died in 1968, so this was 1969, so this would have been in the--this would have been in the 1950s or the latest 1961--(unclear). Speaker 1: This is Hunter Perry Glickstein [ph.] This is my grandson whose mother is Rebecca and this is a picture that was taken when Hunter and I were sitting at a table at his granny godmother's. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: This was taken in 1999 or 2000--maybe 2000. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: This one is a picture of me--this was taken in Florida with our daughter Tean [ph.] and her oldest son, Avery. It was taken in St. Petersburg, Florida, where my husband had a business for a couple of years and they were visiting. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: This would have been--this is 2001. Speaker 2: Okay...