 Story_ID: 667637 Speaker 1: So, I'll begin by slating. I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole. I will be the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], which is at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. Today is October 7, 2016. Would you please introduce yourself? Tell us your name and spell it for us, and tell us your birthdate, sir. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Gus Solomons jr. That's capital G-U-S, capital S-O-L-O-M-O-N-S, space, small J, small R, no period, no comma. I was born in, August 27th of 1938. Speaker 1: Excellent. And, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in Boston [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 667638 Speaker 1: So, I'll start with some easy what we call People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. It's a tossup between orange and purple. Speaker 1: And, your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't even know if I have a favorite. The only--I can't eat dairy, so, and I try to stay away from sugar. But, otherwise, I'm good. Speaker 1: How about season of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. And--yeah, spring. Speaker 1: Vacation destination? Speaker 2: Wherever I have work. Speaker 1: Good. And, do you have a favorite quote or saying? Speaker 2: Well, Dudley Williams my former associate used to say, "Dance like no one's watching." I don't think he said that, but he used it all the time. And, that's as good as any, dance like no one's watching. Story_ID: 667639 Speaker 1: I'd like for you to tell me about your family now. We'll talk about both sides of your family. Let's start with your mother. You can tell me her name, when and where she was born, and tell me about her. Speaker 2: Um-hm. My mother was Olivia Mae Solomons. No, Olivia Mae Stead [Olivia Stead Solomons]. And-- Speaker 1: S-T-E-A-D? Speaker 2: S-T-E-A-D. And, she was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, I guess at home. And, on Windsor Street, I believe. And-- Speaker 1: Do you know her birthdate? Speaker 2: I don't. I'm not good with those kinds of figures. Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And then she moved to Inman Street. Her mother was Nana, that was Lillie, Lillian Mae Stead [Lillian Stead], who was married to her husband [Willis Stead] (laughter), whom I only knew until I was about four. I don't remember him well. And, my grandmother, I guess was a homemaker. My mother had been a teacher because that was one of the things she could do back then. And, she went to, I wanna say Salem Normal School [Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts], college. And, she taught in elementary school until she got married [to Gustave Solomons, Sr.]. And, when she got married she could no longer teach. Think about it (laughter). Only single women could teach in those days. Speaker 1: And, what days are these? Like around? Speaker 2: These were the days, I guess, the '30s [1930s], and maybe late '20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: So, she had to become a homemaker? Speaker 2: Yes, when she-- Speaker 1: When she married. Speaker 2: When she married. Speaker 1: Do you know of any generations prior to your grandparents? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: So, you don't know how they got to Cambridge? Speaker 2: No. I don't. My grandmother, I think was, South Carolina, originally. But, I don't know the, the tree. Speaker 1: And, your grandfather, do you know what his work was? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Do you know, you mentioned where your mother lived, were these houses? Speaker 2: Yes. We had house, separated houses, 89 Inman Street, with a backyard and a garage, and an apple tree. And, it was two story house and I, and they, guess they rented the upstairs, lived in the downstairs. Speaker 1: And, this was the house that she grew up in? Speaker 2: Yes. But, well, after she moved from Windsor Street and I'm not sure when that was. Speaker 1: Did she have any siblings? Speaker 2: She--I had an uncle that died, either at birth or shortly thereafter. I remember hearing about that. Story_ID: 667640 Speaker 1: And what about your dad? Speaker 2: My father was, I believe, born in Brooklyn [New York], on a farm, I wanna say. At least rural Brooklyn. Speaker 1: And, he's Gus Solomons, Sr. [Gustave Solomons, Sr.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gus Solomons, Sr., Gus Martinez, Gustave Martinez Solomons. Speaker 1: Gustave? So-- Speaker 2: G-U-S-T-A-V-E, because it's Dutch. His family is from Aruba. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I met my aunts from there, and my grandmother [Mary Solomons], who's very light skinned West Indian. That was grannie. And, her husband [William Solomons], I don't think I ever met, my father--my father's father. Speaker 1: Did your grandmother live in Aruba or in the U.S.? Speaker 2: In the U.S. Don't know when they came [to Cambridge, Massachusetts], but they moved into 85 Inman [Street], which was next door to my grandmother [Lillian Stead]. And, my mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] and father met over the back fence, literally (laughter), and married. My father had a sister. Aunt Alice [Alice Solomons Romney] who took care of her mother, my grandmother, until she passed away. And, then, quite late, in her forties at least, she, when my grandmother died, she married. And-- Speaker 1: Alice? Speaker 2: Alice married, I wanna say Lionel Romney and moved to Elmhurst. And, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York? New York-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Queens [New York]. Story_ID: 667641 Speaker 1: So, my father [Gustave Solomons, Sr.] and mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] married and lived upstairs in his mother's [Mary Solomons] house in 85 Inman [Street]. And, then when she passed, my grandmother passed away and my aunt [Alice Solomons Romney] got married [to Lionel Romney], we took over the whole house. And, so, when I was born we were upstairs. And, I can't remember--my, when my, my brother was born when I was six, and we were still upstairs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's your brother's name? Speaker 1: Noel, Noel Willis [Noel Solomons]. Speaker 2: N-O-E-L? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And, he was born on the 31st of December, that was why he was named Noel. Speaker 2: And, so, you grew up in the same house where your mother grew up [in Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: Exactly. Wow. And, we had a backyard, and a peach tree and two pear trees, and a grape arbor, and a victory garden. Speaker 2: What's a victory garden? Speaker 1: That was during the war, during World War II [WWII], the civilians were encouraged to grow their own vegetables because everything was in short supply. My father did, was not in the [U.S. military] service because he was building battleships. He was an electrical engineer. So, he was, I guess, not drafted because he was doing defense work. And, I remember blackouts, we had blackouts, where all the lights had to be turned out. And, the statehouse dome [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts] was painted black, instead of gold (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when was this? Speaker 1: This was forty- before '45 [1945], from '41 [1941] to '45 [1945], I guess, when the war was on. Speaker 2: So during the war? Speaker 1: During World War II, yeah. Speaker 2: And, tell me more about the blackouts. What--? Speaker 1: Well, they would just be, just practice. We would get a warning, you know, like an alert. And, we would turn out the lights and have to keep them out so that the, whoever it was the Germans, or the Japanese, flying over couldn't see us, and know that they could drop a bomb (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How were they organized? Speaker 1: What, the blackouts? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I think it was with the radio. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We got an announcement of it, like the NORAD [North American Aerospace Defense Command] warnings. Story_ID: 667642 Speaker 1: This was a detached house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, who were the neighbors? Speaker 2: On our left, 89 [Inman Street] was here, 85 was here, and on our left, on our right were the Murphys [ph.], I wanna say. Most of the neighborhood [in Cambridge, Massachusetts] was either Irish Catholics or Italian Portuguese Catholics. St. Mary's school [St. Mary of the Annunciation School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a block up. So, all my friends tend to be, were white kids. And, that was, I think, that was my parents' [Olivia Stead Solomons and Gustave Solomons, Sr.] goal to be assimilated. They were strivers, I guess the term is now. Speaker 1: They were? Speaker 2: Strivers. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My father had gone to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] actually. He graduated in 1928 from MIT, which was kind of a phenomenon. And, when he went to school, he could not play team sports. And, he could not do ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] because those were not integrated. He could run sport--run track; individual sports. And, that's the way it was. And, there was no anger involved with that. No resentment, that was just, those were the rules, you followed the rules and you did your best (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though you were in the North? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Abso- Boston [Massachusetts]? Yes (laughter), and that was 1928. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But, to be in an integrated neighborhood at that time, so, therefore in the North the laws about where you could buy property that, that people had to follow in the South weren't there? Speaker 2: No. No, evidently not, 'cause both my father and my, I mean, my grandparents on both sides had bought into that street (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, how did, how did these family get along across race? Speaker 2: Well, we were neighbors. I mean, my best friend was Arthur Wilson [ph.] who lived a few doors down and I was always in and out of his house. And, he was always in and out of my house. His parents were, I remember his mother had to go away a few times. So, I guess it was some kinds of mental breakdown she would have. But, they, and they were less well off than most of the other neighbors. Their house was in the back of another, of a front house. So, it was kind of, not a shack by any means, but a small house. Speaker 1: And, what was their ethnicity? Speaker 2: They were white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Wilsons were white (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they also Irish Catholic? Speaker 2: Yes. And, the Desmonds [ph.], and the Johnsons [ph.] across the street, and all the family surrounding us were white. Two doors down on the other side were the Protruliouses [ph.], so they were Greek. And, Athena Protrulious [ph.] was one of my best friends. Now, that family was amazing to me because they had, I wanna say, eleven children. That was completely phenomenal to me 'cause we had two, you know, my brother and I; that was it. Speaker 1: And, so, other than your parents' families, were there any other blacks in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: A ways up was another black family, the Clements [ph.] maybe. And, he was the minister of our A.M.E. church [Rush Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, then, the Marches [ph.] came and moved upstairs in that house. And, I think he was--ran the community center. And, he may had had a son. No, no, they had two--now, I'm getting it all mixed up. Because my mother's best friend was Thelma something [ph.], who lived up there. And, she had adopted two little girls from Africa when they were in Liberia. So, Ingrid [ph.] and Margaret [ph.], and my brother Noel [Noel Solomons] and I were, I formed a, a little repertory company in our basement because I was in to show business from the beginning. I liked to perform. So, I wrote these little plays. And, I built the costumes, and I built the set, and I you know, and we performed. So, that was Ingrid and Margaret, and Thelma was my mother's best friend. Now, the Marches I guess, I don't know when they came, if they came later. But, I remember doing things, like going to the beach with the Marches. And, that was a light skinned black man, who was very handsome. I remember thinking how handsome he was. And, maybe he had a child, a son it would've been. But, I think we didn't, we didn't play together. We weren't best friends like Arthur and I. And, then I had some other Irish friends that stayed down St. Marys Road [sic. St. Mary Road]. And, we did a lot of playing out in the, in the streets, and in the playground, the swings, and tag, and dodge ball, and jump rope and all that. It was kid's games. So, that kept us very busy when I wasn't doing my theater stuff. Story_ID: 667643 Speaker 1: Your father [Gustave Solomons, Sr.] was college educated-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, he was an engineer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You said that many of the whites in your neighborhood were poor. Speaker 2: No, not many, but some. Speaker 1: Okay, some. Speaker 2: It was mixed. And, my best friend Arthur Wilson [ph.], his family was quite poor. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what were the kinds of jobs that the parents had? Speaker 2: You know, I don't really know. I don't really know. The Olsons [ph.] up the street, George Olson [ph.] and his parents had a nice big house with a yard that we played football in. But, I don't know what the parents did specifically. Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of what your family's status was, say economically in comparison? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, in those days, you were called upper middle class. But, the neighborhood was very mixed economically, as well as--well, it's not very mixed racially, but it was mixed racially at least. Or, I guess, maybe you'd say integrated. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because they were there. And, I went to Longfellow School [Kennedy-Longfellow School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and there were a few Negro children in Longfellow School. And, I went to Cambridge High and Latin [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And, actually studied Latin. So, I know how to spell. And, there were a few more black kids and they hung out kind of, they hung out together. And, I hung out with the theater kids 'cause I was in drama shop and all that. So, my, my comfort level among black kids was not so high. Speaker 1: 'Cause you hadn't, you didn't grow up around them-- Speaker 2: Didn't grow up around (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you didn't go to school with them? Speaker 2: The black children that I knew were the children of my family, my mother [Olivia Stead Solomons], my parents' friends and we would get together for birthdays at one of their places. And, so, those were kids I knew. But, I didn't play with them 'cause they lived in other cities. Speaker 1: Did you go to church? Speaker 2: Yes, we went to Rush A.M.E. Zion [Rush Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: So, there were black kids there, right? Speaker 2: Yes, a few. And, they lived, most of them lived in south Cambridge [Massachusetts] down Western Avenue way. That was the black part of town. And, I went to the community center there and learned pottery and leather crafts and so forth. But, I was a little intimidated going down there when there were a lot black kids because they were tough, some of them. For a little while when I was about, I wanna say twelve maybe, it may have been earlier, I, I was aching to dance. So, I, my parents allowed me to study tap, acrobatic, and ballet with Ethel Covan over on Mass Avenue [Massachusetts Avenue] in the South End, not South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] but the South End. And, I did that for a while, maybe a year. But, the kids in the neighborhood would harass me. I don't know if because they thought I was stranger or because I was taking dancing or whatever. So, that was not comfortable. So, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, these were the black kids in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause the South End of Boston [Massachusetts] was primarily black. Story_ID: 667644 Speaker 1: I wanna take you back further for a moment. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: As you think about your growing up, what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I remember four years old jumping over the cat's box and spraining my knee. And, it was, it set my walking back a little bit. And, I remember being in my, in the stroller, and I was four years old, so that was a little--I don't know if it felt special or if it felt a little embarrassing, but I remember that. I remember when my brother [Noel Solomons] was born. I remember loving to scare him. And, so, one day I ran into the room when he was having his bath and growled at him and actually, I accidently bit his finger. And, he just cried and screamed, and cried and screamed and my mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] didn't know I had bit his finger and I wasn't gonna tell. And, she couldn't imagine why he would keep crying (laughter) for so long. That was, that was when I was six (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's six years your junior? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she ever find out? Speaker 2: I don't know. (Looks up) Did you find out? And, like that--oh, I remember when I was, I guess must've been four when my [maternal] grandfather [Willis Stead] died. Next door at my, you know, my grandma's [Lillian Stead] house. He was on the sun porch sick. He didn't wanna be in a hospital 'cause black people didn't wanna die in the hospital, so they brought him home. And, he had maybe what was cancer but I didn't, we didn't know that then, he had, I think somebody said a tumor. And, I remember kind of trying to crawl to sneak out onto the, on the sun porch to see him, and being chided, told to get back. Speaker 1: Because they knew he was dying? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, they didn't want me around it. I remember touching my grandmother [Mary Solomons]--we had a wake at home when my father's mother died. I was much older then, eight maybe ten. I remember going to the casket and touching her knuckle, and it was cold. And I, "Ooh." Story_ID: 667645 Speaker 1: Did you ever visit Aruba? Speaker 2: No. No, I've never been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there any family that was still there? Speaker 2: Yes. My father's sisters or cousins, I can't remember, the Arandaels [ph.]; cousins, would come up and visit periodically. Anne Arandael [ph.] was one of them. She was very pretty I remember, light skinned black woman. And, she was career woman. And, they would come up to visit my [paternal] grandmother [Mary Solomons] occasionally. Speaker 1: Did you, was there ever any talk of when whites were part of your family history? Speaker 2: No. No, there was not a lot of talk-- Speaker 1: You mentioned several very light skinned people, so I'm wondering (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Well, that's, I guess, the Dutch side from Aruba. That's where my name comes from, both names, Solomons, with an S. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, at some point there were probably some A's in there. Speaker 1: But, you can't trace it to the Dutch? Speaker 2: But, I can't trace--I haven't, no. No, except Aruba was Dutch, is Dutch, was Dutch, is Dutch (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was that? Speaker 2: Aruba. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes, colonies. So, that mixture. Story_ID: 667646 Speaker 1: Thinking back again to those very early days: what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember in your home and your neighborhood [in Cambridge, Massachusetts] growing up? Speaker 2: The radio was very important. We had a big console. My father [Gustave Solomons, Sr.] always bought the best. We had a DuMont television set when television sets came along. We had Lincoln cars, a Lincoln Zephyr was the first one. And, then he would always buy Lincolns. I can't remember the--Magnavox, we had a Magnavox stereo. It wasn't even stereo then but, you know, it played records, and a radio, and it was big. It was a piece of furniture in the living room. And, I remember listening to classical records lying on the living room floor. This is when we were still upstairs. And, imagining the orchestra was inside the record playing and thinking, they must be very small. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, there was that (air quotes) cultural aspect. My mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] I think--she liked to sin- she was in the choir, she sang and performed. I remember going to see a performance in the basement of the church [Rush Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in which she acted, and jigged around maybe. So, she was the show business side of the family (laughter), I guess. I guess that's where I got that. 'Cause she was always encouraging of my doing what I wanted to do, which was everything handmade and performance. And my father tolerated it as long as I got a good education, got my degree, so I can get a good job when I came to my senses kind of. Okay. Speaker 1: Did your mother want to work after she was married? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, she wanted to. And, then when the law changed, she went back and taught, we were older, she went back and taught remedial reading in the North End of Boston [Massachusetts]. So, when it was all right for a married woman to teach again, yeah. Speaker 1: And, did she speak about wanting to be a performer? Speaker 2: No. She didn't talk about that. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: She was very active in Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], her sorority sisters, and in the community, she did a lot of stuff. She kept busy. Story_ID: 667647 Speaker 1: Were you all in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. I was in Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. And, I belonged to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I think that's where I learned to swim, in the Charles River, oh my goodness; dog paddle. Speaker 1: How old were you when you learned to swim? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Huh. Well, six something, maybe seven, one summer; seven or eight. Speaker 1: How old were you when you knew that you wanted to perform? Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: What happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Sunday school [at Rush Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts] there was a lively hymn being played and I just got up and danced in the aisle, which was not appropriate. So, I was taken out and spanked because that was not appropriate. Speaker 1: Spanked by? Speaker 2: My mother [Olivia Stead Solomons]. Speaker 1: Oh, your, your mother was present? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yes. Speaker 1: So, your mother went to Sunday school with you? Speaker 2: Kind of, or at least she was there, you know, kind of hovering getting ready for the service. And, no, that was not, that was not what we did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, that spanking didn't deter you? Speaker 2: Unh-uh (laughter), not at all. 'Cause that's what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: Was she encouraging a performance? I mean, obviously not in church, but? Speaker 2: She, she wasn't--yes, I guess. I mean, I would have to say yes. She wasn't discouraging, and she let me do what I wanted to do because I was very headstrong. For instance, I joined children's theatre [Boston Children's Theatre] when I was twelve, I think. And it was taught by or run, directed by a woman named Adele Thane who was just remarkable. And, we did, the children who were at the theater, did these plays in the John Hancock Hall in Boston [Massachusetts], or Liberty Mutual Hall [ph.], one of them in Boston, kind of maybe once a month. And, we did, at one point we were doing TV shows every week, live TV shows with Big Brother Bob [Bob Emery], little, a little ten minute segment on his show ['Small Fry Club']. Speaker 1: And, now, what, where is this airing? On TV? Speaker 2: On-- Speaker 1: Like the local--? Speaker 2: On the local TV, WBZ-TV in Boston. Speaker 1: And, what were you doing? Speaker 2: Acting. I was playing Wolf, I was playing Giant. I was playing, I can't remember all the roles I played on the TV show. But, I, in, on, in the productions, I was a magician in 'The Emperor's Nightingale.' I was, was I the wolf? I was Mr. Caterpillar in 'Alice in Wonderland' [Lewis Carroll]. I can't remember specially what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At what ages are we talking about? Speaker 2: This is twelve-ish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twelve and up. And, then when we graduated from children's theater, a few of us who had become friendly there started our own little summer theater company in the church basement over on Arlington Street. We did '(Unclear) Candle' [ph.]. We did 'He Who Gets Slapped' ['He Who Gets Slapped: A Play in Four Acts,' Leonid Andreyev] I remember. Speaker 1: And, how old are you? Speaker 2: Then I was maybe twel- fourteen, in that range. And, of course, we colorblind casted 'cause there I was. And, didn't think anything of it because, 'cause the theater kids were all, they, they respected your talent. They didn't care what you look liked or, you know, what color you were. So, those were the people I gravitated to. And, also in high school [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], in the drama shop, it wasn't drama shop, that was in college [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But, whatever the high school thing was, Mr. Guest, Bob Guest [ph.] was the drama teacher, and Lynn Hardigan [ph.], and Bob Guest would put on these shows. And, I was always in them. So, I sang and I danced around and I, I guess it was mostly that; singing and dancing 'cause it wasn't, they was, they were revue type shows. Story_ID: 667648 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your education, your early education and, and you as a student. So, how did you see yourself as a student back when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: I was an A student. I loved school. I loved learning. I wanted to be the best because I think that was instilled in me by my parents [Olivia Stead Solomons and Gustave Solomons, Sr.]. I learned my alphabet before--well, first of all, the minimum age for entering kindergarten was supposed to be four and a half, and I was August 27th. So, September, the beginning of September I wasn't yet four and a half. My mother convinced them that I should start then, so I was always a year ahead in age from my classmates. I had learned my alphabet when I went to school [Longfellow School; Kennedy-Longfellow School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I had to-- Speaker 1: Your mother taught you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, I had lots of books and you know and all things. And, then I had to unlearn it because then they were teaching phonetic alphabet. So, I had to, you know, I knew all my letter names and I had to (makes sounds), all that. Speaker 1: Did that prepare you for Latin? Speaker 2: I don't know if that specifically prepared me for Latin. But, I en- I mean I was going to Cambridge High and Latin School [Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when I went to high school, so I thought, well, you know, Latin is there, why not? And, Mr. Dairy [ph.] was wonderful reading in his Boston [Massachusetts] accent (laughter) reading, 'All Roads Lead to Rome' [Louis Grudin]. Story_ID: 667649 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever experience any racial strife when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Not so--no. I didn't experience, I didn't notice it. This was when I was in college, I guess, theatre. And, we would go out to eat after rehearsals in Boston [Massachusetts] and what have you. And, I-- Speaker 1: You were at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I was at MIT, yeah. And, a friend of mine told me recently when we reconnected after 100 years, that the--she read a waitress for being rude to me. I did not recollect. I did not have any sense of that. I wasn't on the defensive. I wasn't looking for being put down. And, she was more sensitive to it than I was. Speaker 1: And, were you aware of what was happening in the American South as you were growing up? Speaker 2: Vaguely. That was not something we dwelt on because we were striving to be as good as everybody else by being a little bit better. And, also, unfortunately that--and I guess by the nature of my parents, emotion wasn't talked about a lot. I learned to please people and my evaluation of myself was how well I was able to please other people. So, I didn't acknowledge my own wants and needs or what have you until much later, which is too bad. Speaker 1: And, when you say your own wants or needs, what are you talking about? Speaker 2: Well, if I felt an emotion that needed to be expressed, I knew--a negative emotion especially, I knew that wasn't allowable because someone might not like me if I expressed that. So, I just swallowed it, buried it; was nice. So, everyone liked me. That was my gauge of how, "They liked me? Okay, I'm good," you know. And, I, I was being liked on their terms, not on my own. Speaker 1: And, that's something you feel you learned from your parents? Speaker 2: I think so. I think so because I was, I was encouraged to be outwardly nice. I was not encouraged to feel or express my feelings or to acknowledge them in that way. Now, part of that was my father's [Gustave Solomons, Sr.] nature because he was a tech man and they didn't have humanities then (laughter). And, my mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] was a pleaser, and very cordial and very well liked by everyone, so that was the model. I think my brother [Noel Solomons], being six year younger than I, was much more in touch with the racial situation, political situation in America. He went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and studied medicine. And, he always felt a little conflicted by--about not knowing whether he was an affirmative action recipient and that conflicted him. He was a brilliant student too. But-- Speaker 1: Was he? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--no, no was he an affirmation action recipient? Speaker 2: (Shrugs shoulders). Speaker 1: Who knows. Speaker 2: Who knows-- Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) could've been at that time in Harvard. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 667650 Speaker 1: I was in fact a legacy student at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which I didn't know. But-- Speaker 2: Because your father (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, because my father had been. And-- Speaker 2: So, you went to MIT to study architecture? Speaker 1: Correct. Which was the thing that looked like the least reading, the least math, the least scientific. It involved buildings, and I liked buildings. And, I liked making buildings, and liked drawing buildings. So, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT in the catalogs those--that was the course that appealed to me, if I had to go to one of those places, which I did. Speaker 2: You knew that you wanted to perform-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --then. Did you ask your parents [Olivia Stead Solomons and Gustave Solomons, Sr.] if you could go to a performance school? Speaker 1: No. No, that was out of the question. No. But, I performed wherever I was. I performed at MIT. I performed at--in high school [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I was always performing. And, I performed outside of school as well. So, my life always involved performing with, I think a latent desire to do it. But, also, the, the immediate necessity was to get the degree. So, that was my pursuit (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, architecture while maybe not as much science or math, or whatever as some of those other areas, it's still pretty intense. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was intense, and I was ready for intense, but it was intense that I was enjoying. Not, you know, engineering that I had to do because--I could memorize formulas, you know, I can do that to build my, my little stick figures in my buildings, and I loved the models, and I loved drawing and all that. So, I--the artistic side of it appealed to me and the other was a necessary evil. And, then I, it was a five year course of architecture because then you could go for another two years maybe to get a master of city planning. And, I didn't wanna do that. But, so, it was a five year course. And, I flunked--oh, the shame of it, I flunked heating and ventilating, which was a required course. So, I had to spend an extra year-- Speaker 2: Year? Speaker 1: --at MIT to do that course. And, so, that year I was, I was in school two hours a week. And, the rest of the time I was dancing. At one point, I was in, performing or rehearsing nine shows at once. I remember that, I thought, 'cause that must be some kind of a record. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know. It was plays and musicals and dance shows and what not. Speaker 2: Professional? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Story_ID: 667651 Speaker 1: When did you perform in your first professional show? Speaker 2: (Makes sound) I guess, I would say the Dancemakers. That was a company that I joined in 1958 maybe. It was Boston's first professional modern dance company. And, it was started by Martha Baird who lived out in Newton [Massachusetts] or somewhere. And, there was no modern dance company so that was, that was what I would call my first professional performing. Speaker 1: And, when you were taking dance classes leading up to that, did you take traditional ballet and all of the--? Speaker 2: Yes, when I went to the Boston Conservatory [Boston Conservatory of Music; Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts]. See, in my first year at Tech [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I went out to audition for the show, the original musical. And, they said, "Wow, you can dance. Can you choreograph?" And, I said, "Oh, you mean make up dances? Yeah, I can do that." So, I was the lead in the show and choreographed it. Speaker 1: What show is this now? Speaker 2: It was called MI- the 'Tech Show.' It was an original--and the first one was called "Djinn and Bitters" [Harold Lawler]. And, I played the genie. But, when I--they said, "Can you choreograph?" I thought, well, maybe I should go and see what that's about. So, I went across the river [Charles River] to the Boston Conservatory and enrolled in a modern dance class, which was taught by Jan Veen, who was a German Viennese who had studied with Laban [Rudolf von Laban] and he taught us the Laban scales. Now, in the, in his system of teaching, making dance and technique and improvisation were all one. There were no categories, no sharp divisions. So, that was a wonderful way to learn to dance. And, then, they kept offering me more and more classes because men were scarce in dance in Boston [Massachusetts] at that time. And, then I started taking ballet classes with Rue Santon [ph.], and--Cecchetti technique, and jazz with Bob Gilman [Robert C. Gilman]. That was kind of Broadway jazz. Speaker 1: And, this was all at the conservatory? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So, you were taking, the entire time that you were in college you were also taking dance classes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --across the water? Speaker 2: Yeah, (makes sound). Yes. Yes. As a matter of fact at one point in my senior year, or my, yeah, either the fourth or fifth year, I went up for jury with our projects. That week, the last week before the project, I had slept six hours in total that week, because I would sleep two hours before each performance. I was performing in an opera in Boston, 'Traviata' ['La Traviata,' Giuseppe Verdi] I think. And, when I got up to present my work one of my professors said, "Gus [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], would you tell us how you managed to do a full time architecture course at MIT and still have time to be dancing professionally in the opera?" I thought, oops, busted (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: But, yeah, I mean, 'cause when you're that age you don't need sleep. You just need more pasta and coffee. But, that-- Speaker 1: So, you knew, that you were gonna be a dancer? Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some- in one way or another. Speaker 2: I knew I wanted to do some kind of performing. And, I remember actually going to one of my professors, Richard Phillapolski [ph.], and saying, "You know, I really, I'm not sure I wanna finish that extra sixth year because I really wanna be a dancer." And, he said, "Oh, no, you will be a credit to your race if you become an architect." He--those were his words (laughter). And, I thought, okay, whatever. And, then when I graduated, I graduated in May--oh, and they gave me an award at MIT, a (unclear) or something, in recognition of my service as a performer in the 'Tech' shows, because I did 'Tech Show' every year when I was there. Story_ID: 667652 Speaker 1: You were telling me about this credit to your race. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Well, that when I grad- but my graduating [from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I didn't have a job in architecture so, and I got called from [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle to come and audition for a Broadway show he was doing ['Kicks and Company']. Speaker 1: And, tell me who Donald McKayle is. Speaker 2: Donald McKayle was a choreographer who had danced with Martha Graham-- Speaker 1: African American? Speaker 2: African American, one of the handful of serious black choreographers in New York [New York] at the time. It was Ailey [Alvin Ailey], and there was Donnie, and there was Walter Nicks, and it was Talley Beatty, like that. And, he-- Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell among those? Speaker 2: Not yet. He was still a performer. Speaker 1: And, what year are we talking about? Speaker 2: This was in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I went to New York and did the audition and I got the job. And, I thought, wow, okay. If I'm good enough to be hired professionally, I guess I'll do that. So, I did that. And, the show didn't run, it closed in Chicago [Illinois] in previews. But, there I was in New York, a dancer, and I went to a lot of auditions. Now, this is when I started to, when I got to New York I stated to understand that being black was different from being not black. And, I would go to these auditions and get kept 'til the very end, and then be told, "Your dancing is great, but we're not integrating this show." Or, "We don't have a partner for you." Or, "The producers don't wanna mix the couples," or, like that. And, all I took away from that was my dancing was good. So, and I was at the Graham School [Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York]. I got a scholarship at the Graham School. And, I, I'm sure I was studying with Merce Cunningham at the time. And, of course, because I knew I needed it, I went to the Joffrey school [Joffrey Ballet School, New York, New York] to study ballet. And, I was rehearing, rehearsing, rehearsing, because, you know, someone would ask you to be in their dance. And, you would say, "Fine." And, the pay was maybe twenty-five dollars when you did the concert. So, you weren't getting paid for the rehearsals but those, I was doing all these little--'cause I told you I was in nine shows at once at one point. So, I didn't have any trouble just rehearsing from dawn 'til dusk. And, putting those twenty-five dollars together. And, you like on very little in New York. Now, my first rent was something like twenty-eight dollars and some change. Speaker 1: Were you living by yourself? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Where (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Over on the East Side [New York, New York], York Avenue and 74th Street, that was a sublet from a friend of mine. Speaker 1: And, this is in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961] that I had met, well, of someone that I had met at the audition and he was going to, he didn't get the show, he was going to Hawaii to visit his family. So, he said, "Why don't you stay in my apartment," and I did, fifth floor walkup. And, then when I came back from the would be tour in Chicago, I found a place on West 72nd Street; it was a sublet. It was a floor through apartment for a hundred dollars a month, like a dumbbell apartment. And, so, each of us, and I had a roommate then, Merle K. Lemmon [ph.] who was a tenor. And, we each had fifty dollars to come up with for every month. And, the, the torture was it was, it was in a building over Bloom's Bakery [ph.]. So, those bakery smells would be wafting up in the window, and I couldn't afford to-- Story_ID: 667653 Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, you've graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with a degree in architecture. Speaker 2: Right, bachelor of archi-- Speaker 1: You come to New York [New York] for this audition [for 'Kicks and Company'], you stay, and start taking dance classes and all this. What do your parents [Olivia Stead Solomons and Gustave Solomons, Sr.] have to say about you exploring dance after you've gotten your architecture degree? Speaker 2: As long as I got the degree, and I was making a living, they were fine. I mean, they said they were fine. I don't know how my father felt about it. Actually, this is very funny. My father kind of acknowledged that I was okay when I got inducted into the, what is it called, the, what's that book, Who's Who? Who's Who, I think it was 'Who's Who in Dance' [ph.]. And, I got the book and I sent it to him and said, "I'm in this." And, he said, "Oh, okay" (laughter). So, "Now he has the degree and the Who's Who. That's my son." So, he's fine. But-- Speaker 1: And, when, in those early days when you were living in New York scraping together your twenty-five dollars here and there, they were not helping you financially (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were. They were, you know. And, I would come up to Boston [Massachusetts]. I would take the bus up to Boston often, get a square meal (laughter), some extra clothes and a little change. And, then it worked out that way until 1963 maybe. And, then I was not being able to make ends meet. So, I went and looked for a job designing. And, I found a job in an architecture--design, interior design firm, Barbara Dorn and Associates [Barbara Dorn Associates, Inc.] on 5th Avenue. And, it was a full time job, so I did that. And, then I still had the scholarship at, at Martha Graham [Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York]. So, I had to be in 4:30 class a bunch a times a week, whatever. I don't know if it was every day or three times a weeks or something. So, I went to Barbara Dorn and I said, "I wonder if I could make this, if this could be a part time job?" And, she said, "Well, no. It's a full time job." And, I said, "Well, I'm studying," and just studying, and she said, "Oh, what are you studying?" I thought well, that's the end of the job, "I'm studying dance." "I love dance. Where are you studying," da, da, da, da. So, what she did was gave me the key to the office and I would come in at seven o'clock in the morning and finish at three o'clock so I have time to go, I got in my eight hours and I had time to go to my class at Martha Graham's. Well, that lasted for six months. And, I was indispensable in the office because my favorite thing to do was to draw renderings, three dimensional renderings of what the plan was. And, Barbara Dorn was a very high society lady and very politically connected but she couldn't read a plan. (Laughter) So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the architect? Speaker 2: She, well, she was an interior designer-- Speaker 1: Oh, excuse me, interior design (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) different. She'd done Revlon [Revlon, Inc.], she work--Revson [Charles Revson] was one of her big clients, so she had--very high end. So, my job mostly was to make renderings for her to see what the room would look like, which was, you know, that was heaven. The thing I love most to do; drawing pictures. Speaker 1: So, you would do these drawings and then when they came in, you were done, or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --it's just what you did during the day? Speaker 2: I would show them to her. She would see what the room look like and then she would show them to the client, so. And, I did do a couple of designs. One was a pavilion for an exhibit, for an exhibition show, and exhibition. And, one was a lobby for an apartment building that was not yet built up on York Avenue. And, then years later I walked into this room on York Avenue, some friends of mine had moved to New York, and I walk into this room, I thought, wait, this is my lobby, and they had built it in the intervening years. But, so anyway, after six months, the stock market took a tumble and I got laid off. Story_ID: 667654 Speaker 1: And in the same mail that I got the layoff notice [from Barbara Dorn Associates, Inc.], I got an offer to come to Boston [Massachusetts] and teach at the Dance Circle where I had learned--had met all these New York [New York] people. So, I went up the Boston-- Speaker 2: And, had you finished Martha Graham scholarship [at the Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York] by then? Was that complete? Speaker 1: No, that was ongoing, I think, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was ongoing. Okay. Speaker 1: But, this was-- Speaker 2: What year is this now? Speaker 1: This was '63 [1963]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --going into '64 [1964]. And, the, well, the Dance Circle job involved going up--flying up on the Northeast Shuttle, eleven dollars each way, which I think they paid. Speaker 2: Divine. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And, teaching two classes on a Wednesday night, flying back home, made fifty dollars. Fifty dollars was plenty. Speaker 2: Especially if they were paying your way to travel (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The rent was fifty a month. I had 150 left over to buy groceries (laughter). So, that was fine. And, then after that I got more teaching jobs. And, and performing with various people. Speaker 2: So, in between that you're also performing, you performed in one of the [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle's, the 'Kicks and'-- Speaker 1: 'Kicks and Company' was the musical that was not successful. Uhura, [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols was the star, and Burgess Meredith was Mr. Kicks, who was the devil. And, Vi Velasco was the second female lead, and the cast was very much integrated. It was great. It was dancing show. Trouble was, it had that book. Speaker 2: What does that mean? Speaker 1: The, the script was not solid, not strong. And, the music was by [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr., and he had written the book as well, I think. So, what we did in Chicago [Illinois] when we realized--first of all, it was an intimate musical. They opened at McCormick Place in Chicago, which is a three thousand seat theatre [Arie Crown Theater]. You could barely see the back of the theatre from the stage. So, that was a bad fit. And, they wanted to do it in Chicago because that was Oscar Brown's hometown, instead of doing it in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or in Boston where things are usually tried out before Broadway. Anyway, so, what they did, what happened was, they realized the book was bad, and this happens so often on Broadway. So, they fired the director. And--instead of writing a new book, they fired the director, Vi Velasco--no, Vinnette Carroll, and hired Lorraine Hansberry, the writer, and, also, by the way, the wife of one of the producers [Robert Nemiroff], to direct. She didn't know how to direct. And, it was so interesting to watch, Burgess Meredith being a professional, taking what she said (laughter), doing--'cause he was, you know, a very competent director as well himself. He was a professional. He just did what he was told. Anyway, so, it was ill, it was ill starred, let put it that way, from the beginning. But, anyway, that was that. But, I was dancing when I came back to New York. I was dancing with Peal Lang. I was dancing with Donnie. I was dancing in Donnie's concept company. I was dancing with various other independent choreographers including Deborah Jowitt who's now the illustrious dance critic, and various other people, Joyce Trisler. Speaker 2: So, were you consistently dancing? Speaker 1: Yes. And, after I got the job at the Dance Circle, after that I got more teaching jobs. So, my whole living was made dancing, which was a blessing. Speaker 2: Either teaching or-- Speaker 1: Teaching or performing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) performing? Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 667655 Speaker 1: What would you say was the, a big break? You know, where--you were dancing a lot, what became the big moment in your early dance career? Speaker 2: Well, I guess, being asked by Martha Graham to do a lectured demonstration they were doing at Philharmonic hall [David Geffen Hall, New York, New York]. Which was essentially a class, did the floor work, then we did the standing work, then we did cross the floor with that. And, that was the beginning of my, of her noticing me as a dancer. Speaker 1: And, when, about when was that? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then the--at the end of that season, she asked me to join the company [Martha Graham Dance Company]. That was '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Now, can you show, you're dancing, you're going to school at Martha Graham's school [Martha Graham School of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York] and she invites you to join the company. Are there any other black people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --around at that time? Speaker 2: At the Graham School there were a lot. She was one of the pioneers in colorblind casting. Mary Hinkson, Matt Turney, Yuriko. So, she, she looked for good dancers, Clive Thompson. So, she had black, and white, and Asian in her company. And, that was where, that was my comfort zone anyway, concert dance. And, also in New York [New York], in the concert dance field especially, men were in short supply, and men who could dance. So, I got lots of opportunities. Speaker 1: So, what's the difference between concert dance and other types of dance? Speaker 2: Well, there's--I say concert dance, and commercial dance. Commercial dance is Broadway shows. Concert dance is choreographic artists who make their own work and present it. Not usually in long run, but in little short stints, and tour, and so forth. So, people like Paul Taylor and Merce Cunningham, and Jose Limon, and Martha Graham. And, Martha didn't do a lot of touring because her stuff was so theatrically elaborate. She would tend to do a Broadway season each year, in a Broadway theatre. And, you know, she had lots of backing. She had Bessie Rothschild, and people like that to fund that. But, she didn't do a lot of touring either. So, I did the 1965 season, and in 1965, Merce Cunningham had done a big world tour in 1964, six month long tour, killed everybody. When he came back, almost all the company left. They just had had it. So, he had to form a new company and I was there. I was always there, taking every class he tau- he gave. And, he asked me into the company [Merce Cunningham Dance Company]. Now, I had not aspired to dance in Merce Cunningham's company because no one in there looked like me. I was taller than Merce. I was black. And, he said, "I would like you to dance with us." I thought, oh my god. That, that was big aha moment, you know, like, I floated home, like the movie. Story_ID: 667656 Speaker 1: You were invited to join Merce. You were the only--? Speaker 2: First and only (air quotes) ethnic member of his company [Merce Cunningham Dance Company]. 'Cause he had one other man in the early days when I first saw him, he had Remy Charlip, was the other man, was a little guy, and a bunch of tall willowy gorgeous women. Then, when they went on the world tour there were, I think, ten dancers, including a few men, Steve Paxton, Bill Davis [William Davis], and Merce, and a bunch of women. And, then when they came back the men all left. So, he had to hire new men. I was one. Albert Reid who was the partner of one of the men who left the company, Bill Davis. Albert Reid and I and Peter Saul, I think came into the company at that point, and a bunch of new women as well. So, he was in need of new dancers. And, that was why the opportunity arose. And, then we went on tour to Chicago [Illinois], ironically, right away. Speaker 1: Now, can you place Merce Cunningham and Martha Graham for that matter in, what did they mean in the world of dance at this time when you were joining Merce's company? Speaker 2: Well, Martha Graham was the, well, she was a giant of modern dance. She had come from the Ruth St. Denis, Ted Shawn, her legacy, which they did kind of, they toured the world and collected dances from other countries. And, then, did imitations of them for the, their audience who couldn't travel. So, they would do kind of fake Indian dances, and fake Arabian dances, and what have you. And, they came just after Ruth St. Denis--I mean, after, what's her name, Isadora Duncan. Then, and Martha Graham had been a member of that company [Isadora Duncan Dance Company]. But, Martha had her own vision. And, it was a vision of her as the central figure and this theatrical world of legends and biblical stories and mythical heroines around herself. And, so, she started--and she had done Broadway. She'd done variety shows. She had danced in nightclubs. She danced at Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] with her solo pieces 'cause she was kind of a phenomenon as a solo dancer; very strong, very striking looking. She started her company [Martha Graham Dance Company] and--first her company was all women and they did very political dances, wonderful stuff. And, then, she decided to get more narrative and she hired men. Merce Cunningham and Erick Hawkins were her first two men. And, then, built this world of theatrical dancing around herself, with sets, and costumes, Noguchi [Isamu Noguchi] did a lot of her sets. She was a costume designer. She knew how to make fabric work. And, then the men were just naked, you know, little briefs. She knew what she wanted and she knew what the audience liked. So-- Speaker 1: And, was that the first time that men were so bare on stage? Speaker 2: I would say, yes. They took off their shirts in Ted Shawn's company [Ted Shawn and His Men]. And, you know, they were all World War I [WWI] veterans and they did a lot of dances with bare chests. And, maybe they, they did some Indian dances too with loincloths. So, they were--Martha wasn't the first one. But, she was the first (laughter), the first, probably the credit with to show their cheeks, you know, the--okay. And, the women were draped in lovely fabric gowns of her designing. And, she did, you know, 'Clytemnestra,' 'Judith,' biblical heroine, mythical heroines, mostly tragic. And, did these kind of deconstructed three dimensional mind plays about their psychological goings on and their desires and so forth. There's a lot of symbolism. And, not very many people, perhaps including Martha, knew exactly what was going on but your eye was feasted the whole time. And, that was her big thing. Story_ID: 667657 Speaker 1: Okay, Merce [Merce Cunningham] left Martha [Martha Graham Dance Company], and Erick [Erick Hawkins] left Martha, and they both started their own companies. And, Merce's work was initially kind of, well, not very initially, but became a kind of rebellion against the hyper theatricality of Martha's [Martha Graham] works. So, he dealt with movement as the medium. And, that was in the time when Marshall McLuhan was talking about the medium is the message, da, da, da, da. And, Merce got hooked up with John Cage who, John just adored Merce 'cause he was an amazing dancer and preacher. And Merce--and John was a composer who had a similar philosophy about sound being the material of music the way Merce thought of movement, any human movement as the material for dance. And, you put it together according to structural ideas rather than dramatic ideas or narrative ideas. So, the two of them were a match made in heaven. And, John had a lot of musical connections 'cause he made a ton of music, and had, was into every nook and cranny of the musical world. And, attracted, 'cause the musical world attracted lots of money, rich people. Like visual arts; dance, no money for dance. But, John managed to get some financial backing for some of Merce's work. So, Merce then began touring. When I joined the company [Merce Cunningham Dance Company], we toured a lot in this country and in Europe, in London [England], and France in Paris, Germany, Sweden, when I was there. Speaker 2: How long were you with this company? Speaker 1: I was there three years. Seems like much longer but we were dancing all the time. And, fifty-five--'65 [1965] to '68 [1968]. And, in '68 [1968], my back started to give me some problems. So, and, I couldn't jump anymore, and that's something what attracted Merce to my dancing was I loved to jump and I was a big jumper. So, I had to leave the company, kind of in an emergency, and people had to shuffle around and learn my parts and what not. That was in '68 [1968]. And, they didn't know, there were no MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] then, so they didn't know what was going on. But, they could see in an X ray that two of my vertebrae were closer together than the others. So, there was some pressure in there. It was a herniated disk, whatever they knew. And, they could go in and find out with surgery. And, I said, "No. That's okay." So, I stopped dancing for about six weeks, which is about how long it takes for injuries to heal when you're thirty. And, then I started feeling all right. And, I thought, oh. I guess I can keep dancing. And, that's when I formally started my own company [Solomons Company Dance]. And, I didn't go back to Merce because I didn't--I had been replaced. So, I didn't realize that there was an opportunity to go back to Merce. Which I found out about five years ago, there was (laughter). Carolyn [Carolyn Brown] said, "Why didn't you come back to us?" Speaker 2: Even though you had been replaced, there was a place for you? Speaker 1: Well, there would've been if, if, or there possibly could've been if I had expressed a desire to come back. Then Merce would've just expanded the company by one, you know, which is what he kind of tended to do (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so-- Story_ID: 667658 Speaker 1: You're recovering from an injury but your decision to start a company [Solomons Company Dance] that's still, that's a big decision. Speaker 2: Yes. Except it wasn't that big because I'd always been making dances anyway. Speaker 1: Since you were a kid. Speaker 2: Since I was a kid and while I was dancing in New York [New York], I was also making my own dances occasionally and showing them at Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York] and places, the 92nd Street Y [New York, New York], and Hunter College [New York, New York], places where, concert dance work (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where these dances featuring just you or other dancers as well? Speaker 2: Me and other dancers, friends of mine. Some friends from Boston [Massachusetts] actually who'd come to New York around the same time I did. And, we're dancing with people like Helen Tamiris who was another great theatrical kind of dancer. So, yes, I was making work. Starting about, well, all along I would say. But, when I left Merce [Merce Cunningham Dance Company] in 1969, I gathered some people together including [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre, and started doing my work. And, then in 1972 we got incorporated, became a 501(c)(3). So, that's the official birth of the company. Even though it really started earlier. Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe the style of dance that you were developing and that your company became known for? Speaker 2: It was abstract in, in the style of Merce Cunningham. It was based on my preferences for structure; architecture, line, space, rhythm. And, I, I loved the progressions. I loved geometrical shapes. So, I incorporated that into my work. And, there was a little bit of, I guess, satire maybe, mild satire. I would make commentaries on other styles of dancing occasionally or other periods of time or what have you. But, basically it was abstract work. Speaker 1: And, did you name it melted architecture? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. That's what I--because people always say architecture is frozen music. And, I thought, okay. Well, dance is melted architecture because all the elements of architecture are similar to the elements of dance. Except time is ongoing, and in architecture time is fixed. Once it's built, there it is. Speaker 1: So, you have a degree in architecture [from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this clearly has influenced your style of dance. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was it a conscious decision? Speaker 2: I don't know. It was in there. And, it also has to do with my nature of liking order and categories--categorizing things and putting things in little boxes. So, that's part of my, my own nature. I would be called a minimalist or geometricist or geometric abstractionist, not an action painter (laughter). You know, I had to have some order (gesture) about my work. Story_ID: 667659 Speaker 1: Can you describe the process of choreographing a piece? Speaker 2: Um-hm. For me it always started with movement. I would play around, or I would conceive of a movement idea, which built into a phrase, into a series of phrases. And, then I would figure out how to put them together using musical structure sometimes canon, counterpoint. At some point, and I was very lucky that I most always worked in collaboration with a composer. So, I didn't have to find music to set it to, the composer and I would work together. Or, I would show him the dance and say, "Could you find some oral complement for this?" Speaker 1: But, even that, the picking a composer to complement a new style of dance, how are you going about finding someone who is creating a sound that uniquely matched your work, and was different from others? Speaker 2: Right. I guess, I lucked out in that sense. Mio Morales was the first composer that I worked with. And I'm not sure exactly how I met him but he was around our circle. There was a bunch of us that rented a studio on East 9th Street [New York, New York]. We each paid ten dollars a month for rent, and we all rehearsed there. And so, he was kind of in our circle. And, he was interested in making dance for music, I mean, music for dance. So, we hooked up and he started making sound. Speaker 1: And you liked him (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. And, he--because his, he didn't write melodies, songs, he wrote sound. Very often rhythmic, but it was sound that complemented and did not suggest a narrative to what I was doing. And, also, then I found a composer name Ken Schafer [Ken Schafer, Jr.] who was working with stochastic rhythm, generators, and electronic means of producing. Speaker 1: Sarcastic? Speaker 2: Stochastic. Speaker 1: What's that? Speaker 2: It means random. A machine that would generate random sounds. Sometimes based on what it was seeing, namely movement, and similar to some things that John Cage had done with Merce [Merce Cunningham]. So that the music was created by the movement. Then, I found another longtime collaborator named Toby Twining who was doing vocal music. And, I thought, I like this, because everything that you're hearing and seeing is coming out of bodies without hardware, no instruments. And, Toby and I did some work where we played each other's bodies. We would make sounds and manipulate ourselves mutually to warp the sounds and change the sounds. So, it was all, we were called the Gut Boys, which is an anagram of Toby and Gus [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr]. And, we did a couple of pieces where his singers would move at various sections of the piece, and my dancers would make sounds at various sections of the piece ['Red Squalls,' Gus Solomons jr]. And, that was in collaboration with an architect named Scott De Vere whom I met because he was looking for dancers to animate an installation he was doing for this graduate thesis at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. Someone suggested me. So, we got together and we did a bunch of collaborations together. Because he sees architecture as fluid rather than fixed. So, that was perfectly in line with what I was doing. And, some of his collab- his installations moved along with us. Story_ID: 667660 Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) You were studying dance. Was there, were there classes in choreography, or did, like-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --this was just something that you--? Speaker 2: Everybody was just finding their own way in the--I mean, there were, Louis Horst who had been Martha Graham's mentor and colleague, had codified some rules about composition. Doris Humphrey who had a company of her own [Humphrey-Weidman Company] and devised a wonderful tech- excuse me, technique based on the dynamic place between vertical stasis and horizontal stasis, it's ongoing, falling. And, she had some really big ideas about how to make a dance. She wrote a book called 'The Art of Making Dances' [Doris Humphrey]. But, her work was all based on musical structure. And, the trouble with using composed music for dance is that you usually run out of dance idea before the music runs out because you see quicker than you hear. So, while Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] and Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] are doing their ostinato thing, the (makes sounds), you've seen it. And, then, the poor choreographer has to find a way to finish the music so the work becomes redundant almost always. And, she was the worst offender. Her (laughter), her most famous dances were all a little bit too long, you know. Says me (laughter). Story_ID: 667661 Speaker 1: As you're building your company [Solomons Company Dance], you know, and--I learned a bit about dance companies being built, one of the big struggles is often how do you finance it. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes. And, I was lucky in that sense that I would do, I was invited to various colleges and universities to do residencies. And, I learned how to live on nothing. So, I could save all that money that paid me to pay for my company. And, then, this was also at the beginning of the '70s [1970s] when the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] came into being and founded the national touring program [Dance Touring Program], which would subsidize mostly universities to bring modern dance companies and--to their campuses. And, pay something like a third of the, of the bill. So, we were on that for several years. So, in the early '70s [1970s] we were working a lot in between those two sources. And, also had been applying to New York State Council [New York State Council on the Arts] and the National Endowment. And, we got some small grants so it could happen. And, that managed to keep us together. And, we were not performing a lot a lot, not the way were with Merce [Merce Cunningham]. But, through the beginning of the '70s [1970s] with the national touring program, we were working enough. Then, that-- Speaker 1: Well, what does enough mean, about? Speaker 2: We would do ten or twelve gigs a year maybe. In a week, would be, a gig would be a week. So, you'd go to a university and do some classes and like demonstration maybe and then a performance or maybe two performances if you're lucky. And, that was a week of work (gesture). Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And, so. Story_ID: 667662 Speaker 1: How did you select your dancers? Speaker 2: I--they were dancers that appealed to me for one thing or another. I had an idea in my head at one point that I liked tall dancers, tall and lean. And, a lot of my dancers have been tall and lean. Speaker 1: And, you, in fact, were at what height? Speaker 2: 6'3". Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, lean. Speaker 2: And, lean. Yes. What are trying to say (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I made my dancers in my own image. But, but, I had had so many wonderful dancers who were tiny. And, so, I, I think what appeals to me in a dancer, what appealed to me in a dancer, in those days when I was looking for them, was someone who was quick; who could learn fast; who was adaptable to whatever style they were confronted with; who didn't impose their preferences on the work. Didn't superimpose. And, who danced well, basically. Speaker 1: How large was your company [Solomons Company Dance]? Speaker 2: I think the largest was eight. No, that's not true. The largest was ten. That was for one piece. And, that, in that piece the heights ranged from 6'6"--oops, from 6'6" all the way down to about 5'3". That was quite a, a bunch. I can't think of the name of that piece right at the moment. But, we did it at St. Mark's Church [St. Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery, New York, New York]. But, that was just basically for that piece. That piece didn't tour. But, when I toured it was with six to eight dancers and mostly in the later stages, six. Story_ID: 667663 Speaker 1: Where did you rehearse? Speaker 2: This is another stroke of luck. In 1972 I found, I had moved into a loft on West 50--on West 19th Street over--Paul Sanasardo was one of the choreographers I worked with. And, he had a building where he had three floors of the building, I believe. And, his partner, Donya Feuer, lived on the third floor. And, just after the first concert that I did with him, she had a residency, a two week residency in Sweden, so she left for that residency and never came back. She started working with, with, what's the wonderful Swedish director's name, Ingmar Bergman. She became his movement person, never came home. So, that loft where Paul use to teach his classes and she lived in the back, became available. So, I, when I was living down on Broome Street at that time, and said, "Ooh." So, I moved in there. And, I lived in the back and we rehearsed in the front. And, then props and things started to take up more and more spaces (laughter) and then I thought, around 1971, I started looking for another space. And, I found a space on East 19th Street and Broadway, which is where I am still today. And, that was a space, it was eighteen hundred square feet. Big enough for me to have twelve hundred square foot studio and a six hundred square foot studio apartment. So, that made my life possible. I could teach there, make income from teaching. I could rehearse there so I didn't have to lay out money for rental studios and I could live there. So, that made my life possible. Story_ID: 667664 Speaker 1: You mentioned that National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] helped, helped to--when, when that began, it made a huge difference in helping to fund your work. As you're touring for these ten to twelve tours in a year, now you're putting on your businessman's hat. Speaker 2: If only I had one. Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: How did you, but seriously, because there's the artistic side and then there's the business side in organizing a tour, all the logistics, do you have someone else handling all of that for you? Speaker 2: I, if I didn't do it myself, which I did in the early days, I had a series of managers who were interested in working with modern dance. This kind of brand new thing, didn't have any money. And, several of them had several companies so they could put together a living. And, they would do the logistics of ordering the plane tickets and, you know, writing checks, and handing out the per diems and what not, yeah. Speaker 1: And, typically, where would you travel? Speaker 2: Well, we went all over the U.S. We went south, we did a couple of week tour of South Carolina. There was a big initiative in South Carolina to bring arts into the schools. And, there were two companies. Dan Wagoner's company [Dan Wagoner and Dancers] went to the universities in South Carolina and our company [Solomons Company Dance] went to the secondary and elementary schools. Two shows a day, two weeks, driving in a too small car, ooh. Two, I think, two too small cars. Speaker 1: Where were you staying when you were travelling? Speaker 2: In hotels, motels. And, we toured a lot of little colleges in Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York State. We went as far as California. Not a lot in the South just, you know, South Carolina that was about south we went. Canada, and once we went to London [England] for a festival. Story_ID: 667665 Speaker 1: I know you have choreographed 165 plus (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: --performances. I won't ask you to tell me all of them. Speaker 2: No, please. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, can you share some of the, described some that you feel were highlights? Speaker 2: Yeah. Let's see. Well, the first highlight choreographically was in 1968. This was just after I was coming back to dance. And, for some reason because I was, I guess, because I was a Bostonian, I was asked by NET, National Educational Television, to make a video dance at WGBH [WGBH-TV] in Boston [Massachusetts]. And, I thought what a great challenge that would be because video lacks the thing that makes dance, that articulates dance; space. So, I thought, okay. What if you had to scan somehow to watch this piece? Well, let's do it on two tracks, broadcast it with two stations simultaneously. So, the audience has to move their eyes from side to side to get a sense of the space. The volume, the television is very good for details. And, dance is seen at a distance, needs to be seen at a distance. So, that was an issue. How do I divide the difference between close up and far away? So, all those elements went into creating this piece which was called 'City Motion Space Game' [Gus Solomons jr] and it was pretty big. So, that was a big highlight for me at the beginning (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, when, what was your-- Story_ID: 667666 Speaker 1: So, for that piece ['City Motion Space Game,' Gus Solomons jr], what was your solution? What was the visual solution? Speaker 2: Well, for that one it was, it was doing the two, two screens. And, I coordinated, I designed both of the tracks so that there were a correspondence or contrast between what was happening on the screens. Speaker 1: So, on the television screen, you would see two screens? Speaker 2: No. You had to have two television sets. And, they did research and they found that about 35 percent of the television homes in the Boston [Massachusetts] area by 1968 had two sets in the house. Usually, they had the first old black and white, and then some of them had the new color. So, they were asked to haul the two sets (laughter) into the same room (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, place them one on top of the other, or side by side. And, coordinating because they were broadcast from two difference television stations. So, coordinating the start point was a big issue. I mean, it was huge. Everything about it was huge. And, I had no idea because my producer, Rick Hauser, made it all just happen. He just said, "What do you wanna do? Do it." Speaker 1: And, then the public, how did the public react to this? Speaker 2: They liked it a lot. Speaker 1: And they did it. They hauled their TVs in and--? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah, and then there was a test audience I think in the studio. Speaker 1: So you got to a have a sense of what it would look like. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, also having the black and white, and color next to each other would make it, that adds a dimension. Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely. And, then on the edits, the quick edits, you know, where now they can do digitally, they had to do physically. So, I had, usually, they were used to they said, used to having three edits in a half hour show. Mine had seventy-five. Which, of course, cost a lot of money. Rick just did it. I have no idea how much over budget they went. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But you know they did. Speaker 2: They did it. Story_ID: 667667 Speaker 1: Moving forward in time, what's another highlight? Speaker 2: Another highlight, let's see. There were, I think the collaborations stand out for me with Toby Twining doing the music and Scott De Vere doing the installation in that company, especially--and, that was starting in '88 [1988] 'til '93 [1993] and culminating in a big site specific piece ['Red Squalls,' Gus Solomons jr] at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] in '93 [1993] on the North Plaza where the pool is. And, we took up that whole space with six dancers and twelve (pause) dancers, prop movers, chorus. An installation was a 150 foot long fabric wall that had, you know, posts each twelve feet. And, that could isolate the dancers or it could have its own dancers, become a solid if you zigzagged it from a cube. Or, it could become a streamer or it could be, if you twisted the opposite, via every other post it became a, like a bowtie arrangement. And, then the dancers would move around the plaza in relationship to this wall. That was the first time. The second time, we did it again in 1997 ['Red Squalls II,' Gus Solomons jr]. And, that time I collaborated with Walter Thompson whom I begun working with who did instrumental music. But, with a kind of a language that he had devised of directing improvisation by musicians. And, the musicians then were part of the spectacle because they marched around and they moved and they were in separate locations and so forth and he could conduct them all. And, this time also, there was a fabric designer [Stephanie Siepmann] who made the costumes. And, the costumes were three dimensional fabrics that she had invented essentially. So, the dancers were in these wonderful constructions in addition to moving. Speaker 1: So, when you did these pieces on the plaza, did you also film them? Speaker 2: Yes. Not, very comprehensively. But, there are bits and pieces of film that exist in the New York Public Library performing arts collection [New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 667668 Speaker 1: As you are building your company [Solomons Company Dance] and choreographing these different dances, you also begin writing dance criticism. Speaker 2: Yes. Fancy that. I was, I was asked to-- Speaker 1: This starts in about '80 [1980], right? Speaker 2: Yes. That sounds right. 'Cause I was asked by the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts]. They used to have what they call site visitors who were dance people that they would send just to inspect where their money was going. You know, so I would go to concerts and they would send me around the country and various places to just take a peak. See if the work was being done professionally, if, you know. Not to judge the work itself. But, the professionality of it. Was this representing government money, you know, in a respectable way? I did the same thing for the New York State Council [New York State Council on the Arts] as well, for a while. And, one of the panelist on the NEA dance panel, who would take the site visits and get an idea of work that they hadn't seen in order to evaluate it. One of them said, "Gus [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], your reports are so clear, we can really see what you saw. You should be writing." I said, "Okay." So, this woman recommended me to Ballet News, which was a, a little periodical, I guess monthly. That--and I started writing for them reviewing concerts. And, then the Village Voice, and Burt Supree was the dance editor then. Speaker 1: Is this still '80 [1980]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: So, the Village Voice in the '80s [1980s] is huge? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean free newspaper, but the newspaper especially for the arts (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not even free then. Speaker 1: Was it not free then? Speaker 2: No, it was a quarter. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Now it's free. And, we thought, oh that will be the end of the Voice. But, they're still going. Speaker 1: But, it was very, very popular. Speaker 2: It was huge. It was the downtown paper. The--there was the Voice and the SoHo News [SoHo Weekly News]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, Deborah Jowitt wrote for the Voice. She was the chief critic for the Voice. And, Marcia Siegel [Marcia B. Siegel] was chief critic for Daily News [sic.]. So, there was a conversation. And, then there was The Times [The New York Times] and the Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune] that also reviewed dance. So, then you could be points of view. It was all The Times, you know. Speaker 1: And, so, you were invited to add your point of view? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And, I wrote for the Voice over the years. And, then Burt Supree passed away and Deborah--no, Elizabeth Zimmer became the editor. And, Deborah Jowitt was still chief critic. But, and, I also wrote for something called Other Stages, which was another throw in magazine at some point, and I made crossword puzzles for them, for that one. 'Cause that was another, you know, my little categorizing things, and I love puzzles. So, yeah, and then I wrote for Bay City News for a while and Dance Magazine, when they had reviews in the, in the magazine. Now they're all online if there are any. And then I started solomons-says.com which is my own blog. Speaker 1: And, when did you start that? Speaker 2: Good question. It could've been 2009. Speaker 1: Because this is ongoing, correct? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes. And, the advantages is that I can write when I have time to write when I'm not doing other projects. And, I can write about what I wanna write about and not have to write about what I don't wanna write about, and like that, just gives me independence. Story_ID: 667669 Speaker 1: When you began writing these reviews for the papers in, in the early '80s [1980s], how many performances were you covering in a week or--? Speaker 2: Oh, well, probably one week to write about, like that. And, not necessarily every week, you know. So, it wasn't a, it wasn't an avocation as per se, it was just kind of a hobby. Speaker 1: You did it to--it fit into your schedule? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, and it was never a lot of money involved, as usual with dance. But, I saw a lot, lot, lot of work. And, then came along the Bessie committee [Bessie Awards Selection Committee] in '85 [1985], I guess, maybe they started (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what's that? Speaker 2: That, the Bessie Awards are the downtown performance and dance awards. They are comparable to the Obies [Off-Broadway Theater Awards], the Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], the Oscars [Academy Awards] for downtown--well, for dance and performance. There's no longer downtown dance performance anymore. But, so, I was on that committee which meant that we had to go and see as much work as possible, in as broad a range of stuff as possible. So, we saw, Indian dance. We saw African dance. We saw ballet. We saw modern dance. We saw cabaret. We saw tap dance, da, da, da, da, da, da. And, we didn't have specifically to write about it but we had to embrace it, take it in. Speaker 1: How did seeing all those different art forms in dance affect your choreography? Speaker 2: Good question. I wasn't--in a way there were a, a--what's the word, a measure of what was going on in the field. They didn't influence me personally because I had, I knew what I liked and what I wanted to make. So, they, I can keep them separate. But, it was very good to, to know what other people were doing and where their heads were at the moment. And, then kind of compare where my head was. Story_ID: 667670 Speaker 1: Did current events, political events, race events affect your work? Speaker 2: No. No. Quite conscientiously not. Because--and this is something I've been exploring recently. The fact is, I was in depression from the early '70s [1970s] until the mid-'80s [1980s]. During the time when my company was most busy. So-- Speaker 1: Were you aware of that? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, 1975 I think I was diagnosed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so, making work was kind of what kept me alive, kept me functioning. And, I could go through that door into my studio, work with my company, make work, which was absolutely emotionless so that I didn't have to go in there, into it. The dancers did what I said. The dance was there. It was a structure. It existed. And, I could go back into my house, close the door, and curl up in a ball, and be depressed. So, being--the fact of the company kept me from imploding. And that I'm--I regret in a way because I was, it limited the amount of investment I had in the personalness of my work. Then, in '94 [1994], I closed the Solomons Company Dance, when I, I had already gotten my job at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. And, in '96 [1996], so, in the mid, in the mid-'80s [1980s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, let's stay, let stay in this period. Speaker 2: Back there, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, just for a moment. Speaker 2: I don't wanna go there. Speaker 1: Just for moment. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, it's important. Speaker 2: 'Cause in the mid-'80s [1980s], I started to come out of depression. And, my dancers became more actively involved the process of making. Not that they made up the dance, or made up the movement, but I would give them tasks, and have them explore various ways of doing. I did a thing called paraphrase this. I would do a phrase of movement, and I'd say, "Do what you just saw me do." And, they would do what they remembered of what I--and that would generate some material. And, I loved that way of working. Speaker 1: Do you know why you were depressed? Speaker 2: I had depression, that chemical thing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, you know, and one doesn't know. Well, I have an inkling that it started. Like, in 1970 I got mugged in Boston [Massachusetts], in the North End where my mother [Olivia Stead Solomons] had taught remedial reading. And, we used to go over there, when we were in the drafting room late at night, we would go to the North End to get pizza, you know. So, the North End was friendly to me. Nineteen seventy [1970] however, it had become a war zone and you didn't go there at night by yourself if you weren't Italian. Speaker 1: And, you didn't know. Speaker 2: And, I had no clue. So, I went over to get, you know, something to reward myself for having just finished a dance. Another one of the dance in the series for WGBH [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, I was coming out of the shop and some guys came out of the back of the shop and they started following me down the street. And, I remember feeling bump, and that's all I remember until I woke up in the hospital. And, they had evidently stolen, not my wallet, but they had taken some CDs [compact disc], or some records that I had, or tapes, I guess they were tapes in those days. So, it was just, it was just a malicious racial thing. Broke my jaw. And, when I was recovering from that I, it was recommended that I go and see a psychologist. And, I did, and he was very helpful. And, then I went back to New York [New York] and began--continued with my life. And, then I thought, I need, I shoul- I'd like to see him again. So, I went back to Boston and he had been killed in a boating accident (makes sound). So, that was fine. My link to sanity. Anyway, I went back to New York and then it was in '75 [1975] I got diagnosed with depression 'cause I didn't have any energy. I went to the hospital and got all these tests. Did I have sickle cell [sickle cell disease]? Did I have this? Did I have that? Did I have some nutritional deficiency, what have you? And, I was a clean slate. So, then, in '75 [1975], I got diagnosed with depression. I got medication, Elavil for a while, until--and it started to lift. Plus, I guess, I was just outgrowing it. And, then in '94 [1994], when I got full time at NYU, I went for my physical and the doctor said, "Your liver protein are high. What are you taking?" And, I said, "I take little quarter of a thing of Elavil every day." He said, "Can you stop that?" And, I had, I'd been taking it kind of as a placebo by then. And, I said, "Okay." So, I stopped. And, I started taking St. John's wort instead. But, and, my liver proteins kind of balanced out. And, that was how I stopped taking medication. Story_ID: 667671 Speaker 1: I wanna be clearer on the time from, you clo- when did you close the company? Speaker 2: The company had closed in '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: And, why did you close it at that time? Speaker 2: Because I realized it was, it was becoming logistically harder and harder to fund, to afford, to, you know. And, at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] I had found a new family. Speaker 1: You had already starting teaching there? Speaker 2: Yeah. I started in '92 [1992] as an adjunct. And-- Speaker 1: And, what were you teaching? Speaker 2: Modern dance technique, technique first, and then later came improv [improvisation], and then later came composition. And, I had these wonderful, wonderful student to work with, and I had colleagues. So, at, I was vaguely aware at the time, more so now, that this became my new surrogate family. And, I didn't need the company anymore to fulfill that part of me. And, then in '96 [1996], I made a trio for [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade, Dudley Williams, and me, for a concert. And, we had such a good time working together on weekends in my studio that we said, "Let's do some more of this." And, I didn't wanna be the daddy anymore. So, I started to commission young choreographers, especially young choreographers to make work on older dances to see how they would modulate their styles to suit dancers who couldn't do tricks. Who couldn't jump and spin and fall down and get up. So, that became a wonderful experiment. Speaker 1: And, that started when? Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996], and went until 2011. Speaker 1: So, this was not under your--? Speaker 2: Yes. It was under my umbrella, under my 501(c)(3). It was Paradigm. A project of the Solomons Company Dance. Yeah, and the founding members were Carmen De Lavallade, and Dudley Williams, and me. And, then we expanded to include Michael Blake, Valda Setterfield, Hope Clarke, Keith Sabado, and finally Robbie La Fosse [Robert La Fosse]. And, we chor- we commissioned many illustrious choreographers. Including, first it was actually, the first choreographer was [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, Carmen's husband. He was not a young choreographer but he made a piece for us. And, then people like Kate Weare and Wally Cardona and Larry Keigwin. Dwight Rhoden did a piece, a beautiful duet ['It All'] for Carmen and me. Donald Byrd, who had danced in my company in the '70s [1970s], and then I danced in his 'Harlem Nutcracker' ['The Harlem Nutcracker']. And, then he choreographed a duet for Paradigm, on Michael Blake and me. Who else, (gesture) that. Speaker 1: So, you-- Speaker 2: Oh, and [HistoryMaker] Robert Battle who is now the artistic director of A- of Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. He made a piece for us. Story_ID: 667672 Speaker 1: So, you mentioned that the members of your company [Paradigm] had become your family. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me, you're in New York [New York] now and traveling and doing all the things you're doing, what is your relationship with your family? Speaker 2: Well, there is no more family. My parents [Olivia Stead Solomons and Gustave Solomons, Sr.] are dead. My brother is in Guatemala. I have not seen him since 1994. I've not communicated with him for probably three or four years now. We used to exchange a card and maybe a gift at Christmas. And, he, his letter to me would consist of where he'd been all year. And, reminding me exactly how old I was, and how old he was. And, I would send him note saying, you know, here's what's been going on. And, then I, I had been badgering him for his email address for years and he wouldn't give it to me. So, I thought, okay. And, then, I wrote him an ultimatum letter. I said, "If you're not gonna, if we can't communicate by email, it is 2000 whatever, then I'm just not gonna bother." Thinking I would get a response. Nothing. So, finally, I found his, the email address of his clinic. He runs a clinic in Guatemala. He's, oh, he's in Guatemala. He's been in Guatemala since 1975. So, and in 19-- Speaker 1: And he's a doctor? Speaker 2: He's a doctor. In 1994 when I saw him, I went to Guatemala on a little ill fated tour because it was going to Guatemala. A bunch of independent choreographers got together with this woman who was--turns out to be a fraud, and took us to, to Guatemala. And, I thought, well, you know, even if we don't get any money, it's worth twenty-one hundred dollars, I think it's what we had to pay to go and see Noel [Noel Solomons]. So, we had a--we, he came to the concert and he left early. The next (laughter) day we drove down to Antigua and had breakfast, and that was lovely. And, then, I haven't seen him since then. Speaker 1: Is he still there? Speaker 2: Um-hm, as far as I know. Speaker 1: And do you email each other? Speaker 2: Nope. No. He will not give me his email, you know. I'm thinking I'm gonna write him another letter this, this year end, say, "What's up?" But, I, no, I gave up the idea of having a relationship with him by now because it just was too hard, and it didn't seem to be mutual. So, I regret that. But, that's the family. So, there is no family, Solomons family. My mother's side of the family had a million cousins and I occasionally hear from one of them. But, there's no relationship. I don't who they, I can't keep their names straight. I don't, you know, all that. My mother did. She knew who everybody was. Speaker 1: And, did you ever make family personally for you? Speaker 2: No. No. I've been single forever. Yeah. Sometimes regrettably. And--but, the thing is when I would've been doing that, I was depressed. So, I had no interest or energy for that. And, then, after that, I had a couple short, long term relationships. But, not, not a family rela- and now I think I'm so set in my ways that I'm not sure I could share a space with another person. Which is okay. I mean, 'cause I have good friends and, you know, my what's called chosen family. Story_ID: 667673 Speaker 1: There's a piece that you created that I wanted you to talk about because as I read about it, it reminds me of the one ['City Motion Space Game,' Gus Solomons jr] that you described with the two TVs-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --'CON/Text' [Gus Solomons jr]. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. That was a big, yeah, that was another highlight one. Speaker 1: That's '86 [1986] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause that was in where--'86 [1986]. And, the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] had devised a new initiative which was--because multimedia was starting to be a thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, I proposed a project in which all the parts were interdependent. This was working with Ken Schafer [Ken Schafer, Jr.] the stochastic rhythm generator composer. And, also with Michael Schwartz and Mark Robison who were video artist, dancers who had become video artists. So, I devised this piece, which was done in two separate spaces. In each space was an audience, bunch of dances, and a life size projection screen, and a cameraman. And, so, the piece, each space was seeing a different show essentially, which was all happening at the same. And, the dancers would change spaces. The sound was all created by our movement. The video that was being filmed in studio A was being projected in studio B. So, those dancers were dancing with their images, the images of the other people, and vice versa. It was exhausting for us (laughter) 'cause we were dancing all the time. The piece turned out to be about thirty-five minutes long. And, I thought, well, that's too short for a concert. No concert was ever too short. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, so, I thought, well, wait a minute. And, I thought, well, we'll just reverse it. We'll change the audience from different (unclear) and do it again. And, I thought that's gonna kill us. So, why don't we just, after it's over, then we'll meet and talk about what we, what each audience saw and have a, you know, a Q and A [question and answer]. That before Q and A's were derogatory. I mean de rigueur. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, that's what happened, and it was wonderful. So, they all had, they each had their own experience of it, and then we all got together and it was perfor- produced in a, in an art gallery, essentially. She had big, big spaces, and then the space where we could meet. Story_ID: 667674 Speaker 1: What are other ways that you have incorporated the changing landscape of technology in your work? Speaker 2: I haven't been very proactive about multimedia creation because I've seen so many problems with it. So many choreographers who have no sense of scale and you project this background and that's what everybody looks at. And, oh yeah, there's dancing going on but I'm more interested in the background, that. I have worked a little bit with a marvelous artist called Jason Somma [Jason Akira Somma] who was a student of mine at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] for a little time. Who has invented a machine that does holo- holograms, I guess it's called. And, he had an exhibit downtown in which I was one of the holograms. We have worked together a little bit, but I can never keep track of him. We did a piece in which, up at (unclear), in which I was the dancer dancing with a feedback image of myself. And, we had a musician, an amazing cellist, electronic cellist providing the sound. That was a bunch of years ago by now. And-- Speaker 1: Like, like what decade? Speaker 2: The aughts [2000s], I guess. Yeah. Yeah, I can't remember the--I'm pretty bad with years. But, I remember when all my surgeries were (laughter), I remember those years but otherwise, it's kind of general (simultaneous). Story_ID: 667675 Speaker 1: So, I wanna go back for a moment to the period, (cough) pardon me, when you said you were depressed. But, you were still prolific during that time. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: As you have looked back at that work, what do you see? Speaker 2: I see very clearly now that it, the work was a defense for me from having to confront emotional issue that I was not prepared to deal with. It's structure is, is very rigid and very formal which was, which allowed me not to have to invest any emotion in it. And, it was respected I think because of my, my background. Because I danced with Martha Graham. I danced with Merce Cunningham (makes sounds). And, I was a good dancer. So, I had a little, a little bit of, what is the word they use for politicians, a little grace period. So, in other words, people were disposed to look at my work as integris. And, what they found in it was usually the intellectual rigor of it. Not the soul. Not the heart. And, Deborah Jowitt was, was one of my amazing mentors in life, once wrote in a review something which stuck with me very strongly, she said, "Son--Gus Solomons' [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr] works are very intellectual. They're very tightly organized and well structured. But, they're difficult to love." And, I thought, I guess that's true. And, in fact, that may have been the beginning of my change towards involving the dancers more. My, my beginning of being less afraid. Not about--yes, less afraid to do that, to have that interaction. And, it came out of a desire not to be seen as cold and simply--and cerebral. That's a connection when--I think I just made. I don't know, 'cause I don't remember dates but, but, there was, I mean, that, that quote stuck with me and really affected me and I thought about it a lot back when it came, when it happened. I don't remember when it happened. But-- Speaker 1: But, your period of depression was over what space? Speaker 2: I guess, it began probably in '70 [1970], and it lasted until at least the mid-'80s [1980s]. I say, fifteen, about fifteen years. Story_ID: 667676 Speaker 1: And, so, now, I wanna move forward to something else you described, to go into more detail. You mentioned when you were working with [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade and this was the Paradigm. Speaker 2: Paradigm. Speaker 1: So, you formed a new company? Speaker 2: Exactly, a new kind of branch of the Solomons Company Dance, which no longer was functioning. But, and I thought paradigm, I think we can live up to that. Speaker 1: And, this is '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996]. Speaker 1: And, so, an important dance came out of that. Speaker 2: The first dance we made together. Or, the first dance I made for us, was called 'A Thin Frost.' And, we start sitting in three chairs, 'cause that's what you do when you're old, you sit down. And, I made it the same way I make all my dances with--I started with movement phrase. It was gestural, and accentuated with (makes sound) sounds, vocal sounds and no music, just our own noises. Well, for Dudley [Dudley Williams] this was enormous because he had never danced without music before being an Ailey veteran [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. And, he had never used his voice on the stage before. Of course, Carmen had an enormous range of experience and being an actor as well as a dancer. So, it was less-- Speaker 1: And, she also defies gravity and-- Speaker 2: Doesn't she? Speaker 1: I mean, even though you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh. Speaker 1: --said this was made for older people. She even now doesn't seem older. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely, she's just magical. But, what I noticed was when they learned the movement, which was hard for them because they, well, because older people don't learn movement so well, and if there's nothing to hang it on, like the notes, it becomes diffi- so, they--I would give them images, wipe the table, throw 'em on the floor, those kinds of things. And, then they would make a story as they learned it. So, I didn't, so, so what came out was no longer abstract even though what was going in was pure abstraction, pure movement. And, I thought, hm, there's something about this. Working with dancers with experience, with wisdom, generates a different feeling, a different entity. Because when you, you know, a young dancer, you tell 'em what to do and they said, "What, what do you want me to do?" And, they do it. And, they do it perfectly physically. But, there's nothing behind it except what they're doing. And, then as you get older, you gain more. Immediately, it's automatic that what you do than has this back story. And, so that was, that was kind of the genesis of what became Paradigm because then I started, you know, commissioning other choreographers to make work for us. Speaker 1: And, how long did Paradigm last? Speaker 2: Two thousand eleven [2011] was our big swan song. It was a huge performance at St. Mark's Church [St. Mark's Church-in-the-Bowery, New York, New York], sold out three nights in a row, it was great. It was great. People were turned away. I love it. Speaker 1: And were there other actors or still--? Speaker 2: In the company? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That company consisted of Carmen, Dudley, Michael Blake, Hope Clarke, Valda Setterfield, Sarita Allen, and Robbie La Fosse [Robert La Fosse]. Speaker 1: And, so, in the beginning you were performing with the group, correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When did you stop? Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: No, I was performing in the, at the end as well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And yourself? Okay, good. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, and I'm still performing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Performed last weekend and the week before that, and two weeks before that. And, I'm going to Europe to perform some more in November. Story_ID: 667677 Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that because physically, you, your body has changed a lot. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: How do you dance through the physical changes that have occurred? Speaker 2: Well, as Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] says, "Everybody has a story to tell." And, that's my, I guess, that's my search; is to find the movement that is appropriate and possible for this instrument in the state it's now in. At whatever state that is. And, I've had a knee replacement and I've had a spinal fusion from which I'm still rehabbing after four years because the nerves take a long time to regenerate. But, there're still signals and they're there and so they can start to reattach themselves to the muscles, and the muscles get stronger and da, da, da, da. So, I'm all always trying to find the thing that I can do that is appropriate and eloquent. When I started dancing, Jan Veen was an old man when I started to study with him, he must've been in his fifties. So, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, that's when you were going across the water [Charles River]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Across the bridge to Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: When you were in college [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: So, I didn't see dance as a young person's profession, ever. I thought of it as a commitment that you make and then you maintain that commitment for as long as it's possible to do. Nowadays, you know, these little children they teach, they'll go dance for fifteen years or until they can't jump anymore and then they'll do something else. Well, I can't jump anymore but I didn't do something else. I just kept doing what it was I do and finding new and different ways to do it. So, it's that kind of commitment. And, that's not always possible. But, I was fortunate to be able to make a living doing it. So, and, I didn't have a family to support and all that. So, I was, I was able to continue. But, I think that the search for what is still appropriate is ongoing and still interests me. And, I have a wonderful voice. One of the women who was with my company forever, well no, not forever, but for a long time and I've known her forever, I, depend on her eye to tell me when I'm struggling. And, she does, you know. So, that's also helpful. She also wrote a score for a piece, for Paradigm. She's an amazing artist. A woman whose life is a work of art, an ongoing work of art. Speaker 1: What's her name (Simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's had horrible problems. Her name is Judith Ren-Lay, R-E-N, hyphen, L-A-Y. And, she started her disability with a heart valve replacement. And, then, she had, well a lot of different problems. But, then in 2009 she got hit by a cab; shattered her one shin and broke an ankle. And, in repairing the ankle they cut off blood circulation to the heel bone. So, it died and she was trying to rehab walking around with no heel bone, on metal and scar tissue. And, they said, "Well, we'll make an appliance, we'll make you an artificial ankle," which there wasn't any. And, they worked for three years, four years, and she kept mobilizing her foot and trying to keep herself in shape. Then, when they finally got the appliance made she went to, for consult and showed them what she could do, how she had mobilized her ankle and the doctor said, "Well, I don't think you're gonna get that much more ability with our appliance." So, there goes four years of being in the house, and now she's walking around. She has support from her boot and she's getting her muscles strong and she's ambulatory again. Her way of dealing with the world was to walk through it, and then that was taken away from her, and now she's getting it back. Anyway, she's my--we're soul mates I guess. Story_ID: 667678 Speaker 1: In 2012, you participated in the It Gets Better anti-bullying campaign [It Gets Better Project]. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Hm. Speaker 1: And, since bullying was an issue for you, you know, early on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --this is now many, many years later. Can you tell me about this and your involvement in it? Speaker 2: My involvement is kind of tangential through Dance/NYC of which I'm, I'm advisory board member. And, I think it's a great cause. Because the, the issue of bullying has escalated so incredibly until poor little gay, mostly men, boys, have been killing themselves because they can't, they don't know how to deal with their own feelings in a world that is not sympathetic to them or has not been sympathetic to them. So, I thought, this, this is something I need to, you know, to be part of if I can in some way. I mean, the fact that I was depressed in my prime sexual years probably saved my life. You know, because my libido was gone, and that's when friends of mine started to have these little ailments and disease and, "What is it, what is it, what is it?" And then it was AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], you know. So, again I was lucky. I dodged a bullet. Speaker 1: But, that period was, especially in the artistic community that--you lost so many people so quickly. Speaker 2: Devastating, yes. And, I was, as I say, in my, in the other show I'm doing, I said because I was depressed, I didn't have to face losing people that were lost to me, you know. I could, I was at a distance from it. Speaker 1: Now, today, well, so that campaign was a few years ago but--it started (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's ongoing. Speaker 1: It started a few years ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, it started a few years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: There've been a lot of strides that have been made in respect-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --with respect to the LGBTQ community [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer]. However, a lot of push back, too. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: It's still a dangerous time. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: In--what does the landscape look like in the arts today? Speaker 2: The arts have always been more tolerant. And, especially the arts in New York [New York] or in centers, in urban centers where people are accepted more for what they do and what they can bring to the platter. Still in isolated places, people are still struggling. Although, I'm, I'm pleased to say that the amount of progress that has been made in the past few years has been enormous. So, that even those kids who would've been thrown away five years ago, just kicked out by their families, their families now see it everywhere. See it on television in their favorite shows and whatnot, that they can't just dismiss it anymore. They have to say, "Well, you're still my, my blood. We'll deal with it," you know. And, that's, that's huge. That's really moves me a lot. Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did your family know? Speaker 2: I doubt it. Or, well, you know, I think families know, even if you don't tell them. Because we never talked about it, again, that business. In Boston [Massachusetts], again, also was a big closet all together. You know, I remember I went to, I would got a steam bath sometimes, and I would (laughter), I would meet (laughter) the husbands of the women that were choreographing for my little company that I was in, the DanceMaker [DanceMakers]. I think oh, that's interesting, okay, you know. Yeah, but it was, it was a time. Story_ID: 667679 Speaker 1: What are you working on now? Speaker 2: I am a performer now, trying to broaden my perspective into doing acting. I'm working on a play, Mamet shorts ['The Duck Variations,' David Mamet] that we're doing in, sometime early in November. I did the commercial on Wednesday in which I had to walk for three and half hours. Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: Without my cane. You know, another take, another take, another take, another take. I got involved in this project in the beginning of 2015 with a European choreographer [Eszter Salamon] who was interested in working with older dancers. I said (raises hand). And, she chose me and Valda Setterfield, who had been a member of Paradigm. Who, and she had seen us both performing together with Boris Charmatz in Europe. That was 2005 maybe. No, 2010, '9 [2009], '10 [sic. 2015]. And, she made this piece called 'Monument 0.1' ['Monument 0.1: Valda and Gus,' Eszter Salamon] for, colon , Valda, and Gus [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], for the two of us. And, they interviewed, she and her dramaturge, eventually scholar, interviewed us for months. And, then took the interviews and, this is European, had them transcribed, and then went to Palermo [Italy] to read them, you know, all of this is funded. And (laughter), and from that they chose the events and the parts of our lives that interested them to put into this piece. So, I got to--originally, I was gonna tap dance with my hands, because I can't with my feet anymore, and I get to do puppets. The tap dancing got cut, but I do the puppets. So, I had to teach myself how to make puppets again. And, I made a Merce Cunningham and a Martha Graham, and a John Cage, and a little Gus puppet. And, there's a puppet show in the piece, which is the most fun. Speaker 1: And, where will you be performing? Speaker 2: Well, we, we haven't gotten in the U.S. states yet. We performed, we premier in Germany, in Essen, Germany and in Paris [France]. Then we went back and did it in June, the beginning of July in Marseille [France], and then Berlin [Germany], and then Hamburg [Germany]. And, we're going back Thanksgiving week to do it in Porto, Portugal, Vienna [Austria], and Brussels [Belgium]. And, that's all for now. Speaker 1: Is, does the word retirement, is that part of your vocabulary (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yes, I retired from NYU [New York University, New York, New York] (laughter) in 2014. And, now I have time for my projects, yeah. Speaker 1: Very good. Speaker 2: No, no, no. I, I mean, well, I, you know, I never worked. I never had to do work. I did what I would've done anyway, and that's been my life. How lucky is that! And, so, why would I stop, you know? Speaker 1: As you look at your career-- Speaker 2: Maybe I could become a short order cook. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 667680 Speaker 1: As you look at your career, what do you intend for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I think I would like people to remember that I was very supportive of the dance world. That I made dances until I didn't need to make dances anymore. And, that I am a, an inveterate performer, doesn't matter what, I'm performing. I just have to be performing. Story_ID: 667681 Speaker 1: The young dancers watching right now, young African American dancers, what advice do you have for them? Speaker 2: Need to do it. If you need to do it, do it. If you just wanna do it, then you often have an idea about dancing. And, then when you compare that to the work it actually takes, if there's a conflict there, do something else that will make you some money so you can be comfortable. Because when you become a dancer, you commit to a life of--there's pain, discomfort, stress always, physical maintenance. It just is a lot of work, you know. I mean, if you play an instrument you know how much work it is to maintain the instrument. Well, your instrument is what you're walking around in, takes a lot of work. And, also, if you have a voice, don't listen to what people tell you about whether or not you're supposed to dance, whether or not you have the body for a dancer. I don't. I mean, I'm long and lean, but that's not what qualifies you to be a dancer. And, that's why I think I've had so many injuries. And, if I had any sense I would've stop dancing a long time ago. Story_ID: 667682 Speaker 1: But, you know, and then there's Misty Copeland who, when they said, "No. You have the wrong body for dance." She said, "Unh-uh." Speaker 2: And, she started at thirteen. Speaker 1: Yes. Ridiculous. And, now she is Misty Copeland. Speaker 2: I mean, possibly the best known dancer in the world at this moment (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely the best known dancer in the world at this point. Speaker 2: And, do you know that when she did the Under Armour ad [Under Armour, Inc.], not only was that news for wherever it might be, but the stock went up so high it was Bloomberg news [Businessweek]? It was, it was business news. Which is putting dance in a different place. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Absolutely. And, Kevin [Kevin McKenzie] the directory of ABT [American Ballet Theatre] who's sort of a friend of mine. Well look, because Martine van Hamel also danced in the company, with the company. So, we see each other often. And, I so admire what he's doing with that company. He's putting dance on the map without compromising its artistic integrity at all. But, just increasing its visibility in a way that makes it a commodity. And, he's trying to make the company look like America for a change. The two women that he promoted to, to principal along with Misty was also Stella Abrera, a Filipino, who has been with the company for years, and Hee Seo, the Asian woman, the Chinese woman. But, I mean, the Asians have been dancing up there forever because they don't require different color customs and (laughter), they can do anything. But, for Misty, with her un-ballerina body to become a principal with ABT is enormous. It makes me well up when I think about it, how huge it is. Speaker 2: Well and, as you look at the future of dance, 'cause you mentioned in the beginning dance is that art form that doesn't typically get the kind of funding support that some other art forms do. Certainly, Misty is helping to change that. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: But, do you, I mean, one person, not necessarily--Kevin with the company is attempting to change this. But, you know, what do you, what do you see for, especially for black dancers and choreographers trying to create their way, do you see a trajectory that means that it's possible to make more money? It's possible for it to more profitable? Speaker 1: It's hard to monetize it, concert work. However, there are more and more opportunities now in commercial work; videos, big. 'So You Think You Can Dance,' has helped also put dance on the map, that kind of dance, for the general public. Because, well, they're like, what Americans need, emotional appeal. Those duets are just, I mean I sit and cry sometimes watching a Mia Michaels duet or a, oh what's his name, the wonderful Wall [Travis Wall], I really can't say his name now. Their choreography is, is deeply moving. I mean, it's ninety seconds long, but still, it affects you, and people are starting to understand there's something there, you know. People spend way too much money for Broadway, and that's where a lot of it goes now. And, Broadway is becoming less, more colorblind in their casting. And, Broadway now is on the road. So, there are lots and lots more opportunities for black dancers for sure, for sure. Speaker 2: And, do you think that--yes, Broadway is becoming more colorblind. Today do you think that at these auditions, like where you used to go, and you get to the end and (makes sound). You know like, how common do you think it is for a casting director to not care that he or she is putting a black male with a white female, or? Speaker 1: Yeah, it becoming--it depends on a lot of things. For instance, it depends on where it's touring. But, the stakes are lower, is that what I wanna say? In other words, it's, it's not a big deal to put a mixed couple on Broadway. Because what Broadway is about is talent of a certain kind. And, so, it's less important that that talent be uniformed in ethnicity for instance. Well, shows like, 'Aladdin,' 'The Lion King' [Irene Mecchi and Roger Allers], and all the kind of Disney shows where people are creatures anyway, doesn't matter. That's good. So, yeah, the opportunities are increasing. Story_ID: 667683 Speaker 1: In looking at your career and life, do you have any regrets? Speaker 2: Yes. I regret that I didn't get better training, that the sta- well, no, I can't regret exactly that. I, I regret that the state of the art of physical conditioning was not further advanced than it was. Because when--although, now you see if I say that, I might've just been discouraged from dancing at all, at an early age. But, what I'm so impressed with now is how much dancers, young dancers know about how to take care of themselves, and how much they're taught about how to take care of themselves to prolong their careers. That, we just did it, and we did it harder until we could do it, or we broke, you know. And, then some of us broke and kept going, and that's too bad. Speaker 1: Well I remember [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder until he was in his wheelchair. Speaker 2: Yes, well, that was other things. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he didn't, he didn't break himself dancing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. He broke his hip, that's what he did actually. And, then he never, and then he, he had bad knees from dancing. Because, you know, we did knee slides back then before knee pads and before you knew that you didn't do that to your joints. So, yeah. But then, he, and he was afraid to get knee replacements, so he just stayed in the wheelchair. And, this was good for him because he was getting served. And, he could keep making his art, and he did. Oh, my lord. He had some wonderful collages that he made out of garbage in the ho- in the hotel, in the hospital where he was. He would take plastic cups, and you know, bits of foil and napkins and make pictures; incredible. And, now, poor Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] has to deal with all of it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The volume, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, sorting it out. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that I have not asked you? Speaker 2: I never know 'cause it's, you know, it's a whole number bunch of hours of stuff I could (laughter) talk about. But, I never think of anything that I needed to say and you've been very comprehensive in taking me into places that I didn't know I knew to go. So, good, for you (laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you very much for sharing your story with us. Speaker 2: Thank you for asking...