 Story_ID: 32892 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Walter Sanderson, III. Now, sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: It's Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, initial B, Sanderson, S-A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, and may I ask, what's your middle name? Speaker 2: Benjamin. Speaker 1: Okay, sir, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born March 20, 1921 in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Alright. And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 9, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, well that will work. Story_ID: 32893 Speaker 1: Now, before I go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask everybody, and it's kind of a warm-up, and they only take a brief period of time to answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Uh, yes, blue. Speaker 1: Alright. Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. "Macht Nichts", German for "It makes no difference." Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright. Story_ID: 32894 Speaker 1: So, well, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first, and then when we finish that side, we'll ask about your father. And then we'll put them, together, okay? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Uh, her full name was Mrs. Yale Scott Manning Sanderson. Speaker 1: So the first name is Y-- Speaker 2: Yale, and when the occasion arises, I'd like to mention why she has that name. Speaker 1: Well, this is the appropriate time. Speaker 2: I happen to be the grandson of a black child born in 1857 before the American Civil War, which began, as you know, in 1860, '61' [1861]. When the Union Navy located the coast of Wilmington, North Carolina, his parents, both enslaved, had been hired out as coulters around the docks of Wilmington, seeking freedom for their child, just four years old. They bored holes in a steamer drum, put in him in the drum, put clothes over him, told him to be quiet, and by interceding with some of the Union sailors who were then on a ship blockading the port of Wilmington, let him go. The home port of that ship was New Haven, Connecticut and he attended school there. And to show what kind of person he was, he was admitted to Yale University. He graduated from Yale University in the class of 1881. On a later reunion of that class, they resolved to name the first child born to a member of the class, gender irrespective, Yale. My mother was that person, the first born child of a member of the class of Yale, 1881. Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a story. Speaker 2: And he was therefore, she was therefore named Yale. Speaker 1: Alright, that's a great story, that's a great story. Story_ID: 32895 Speaker 1: May I mention, too, what happened to that young man after he graduated? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: He was fully aware of the judgment of the newly defeated Confederates. But that does not discourage him. He went back to the South and spent the rest of his natural life teaching and traveling in the vicinity of Knoxville, Tennessee, and received awards from school and also from Knoxville for his long and dedicated and successful service. His life--and he died the year before I was born in 1920, has been my inspiration, and has been a motivating factor for me for my entire life. Speaker 2: Now, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 1: His name was John Wesley, W-E-S-L-E-Y, Manning... Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: ...M-A-N-N-I-N-G. Speaker 2: Okay. John Wesley Manning, okay. So, um, so he lived from 18-- Speaker 1: 1857-- Speaker 2: 1857-- Speaker 1: --to 1920. Speaker 2: 1920, okay. Alright, now that's a great story. Uh, so your mother's name was Yale. And uh, now, she has quite a few other names here, too. There's Scott, Manning and Sanderson. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: So is there a story behind-- Speaker 1: Her maiden name was Manning. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yale Scott Manning. And, of course, when she married my father, she acquired the Sanderson name. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, what about the Manning part? Speaker 1: Oh, that, uh, John Wesley Manning, uh, was her father. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, I see, oh I see. Speaker 1: Yes, right, yeah, that was her father. Speaker 2: Manning, okay, alright. Speaker 1: His wife survived him for quite a few years, and I did meet her. She was a resident of Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 2: Okay, alright. Now, I've got it. Alright, so, uh, so this quite a story. So, uh, was your mother then born in Knoxville? Speaker 1: Yes, my mother was born in Knoxville in 1894. Speaker 2: In 1894. Now, is there an institution, or educational institution, or a school that your father was associated with in Knoxville? Speaker 1: Uh, my grandfather? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, your grandfather. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Oh, my grandfather. Knoxville College in Knoxville, Tennessee was his principal abode and uh, place of professional location. He also traveled in the area around Knoxville sometimes, uh, pulled in a cart, pulled by goats or otherwise, because after all, this is the pre-automotive age. Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: He was a small man, not one who would intimidate anyone physically, and that probably may be one of the reasons why he was not physically assaulted by the embittered confederates who were roaming the streets and anxious to do some harm, having just lost the war. That sentiment, of course, still prevails. Story_ID: 32896 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories in your family about that kind of retaliation during the era of Reconstruction? Speaker 2: The stories that have been passed on are mostly positive. One story which I can relate, which is not of that nature, is that my father, who was born in 1892 in Wilcox County [Alabama]-- Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, let me--can we just, let me wait until we get to your father's side and tell that story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I'm talking about the stories on your mother's side right now. Speaker 2: Yeah. She-- Speaker 1: Even the good stories are fine to tell. I don't have a problem hearing a good story, either. Speaker 2: Uh, she [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson] was very proficient in many fields. She was a school teacher. She was also very versatile and talented in music, both as a pianist and also with stringed instruments. She was constantly experimenting with the newer instruments. The violin was her favorite, and she was teaching herself the ukulele when she passed on. She also in later life was quite proficient as a bridge player, and she was still playing competitively, contract bridge, when she was past 90 years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She is responsible for me being out of my age bracket all the way through school, because when I was about seven years old, I was diagnosed with diphtheria. And as a result, the house where I lived had--was placed off limits to all visitors, and I had to withdraw from elementary school. She taught me for a whole semester at home, and when I was re-admitted to elementary school, I was so far ahead of everyone else in my age group, that I was advanced to the next grade with people, with children, who were older. And as a result, at that step of my education, I was associated with people who were at least a year, sometimes two years older. Okay. Now, did your mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson], I take it your mother went to college, did she? Speaker 1: Uh, she did. She attended Knoxville College. I don't think she graduated because she--marriage to my father. Speaker 2: Okay. Now did she, do you know if she wanted to be a school teacher or a musician when she graduated, or when she started-- Speaker 1: In her generation, there were, was very little opportunity for females, especially black females in the South to do anything other than teach, and she did teach for a while, while she was living in Knoxville. Story_ID: 32897 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, I'm going to go to your father's side. Is that alright? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: I'm going to go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it? In fact, it's the same as yours, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, except for the suffix. Speaker 1: So this is William-- Speaker 2: Walter. Speaker 1: Oh, Walter, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Walter-- Speaker 1: Walter, alright. Speaker 2: --Benjamin Sanderson, Senior. Speaker 1: Senior. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in 1892 near Gees Bend in Wilcox County, Alabama, which is a-- Speaker 1: Now, Gees--okay. Speaker 2: I understand that that is spelled G-E-E-S. It refers to a bend in the Alabama River. And Wilcox County is just outside Selma, Alabama. Speaker 1: Near Selma. Now, that area now is famous for its quilters, did you know that? There's a group of women in Gees Bend, they're famous for their beautiful quilts, in Gees Bend, Alabama. Speaker 2: I'm glad to hear that, because my wife was very proficient in all forms of sewing, needlework, knitting and so forth. I never bought another sweater after I married her. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Uh, so, Gees Bend near Selma, and you'd have to think that the G has something to do with the way a mule, you know, gee and haw, right? Speaker 2: That's correct, right. Speaker 1: The direction you would pull a mule. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The G would be to the left, right, I think? Speaker 2: I really can't speak with any expertise on that subject (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've not ridden a mule lately. Speaker 1: I know one is right and one is left, gee and haw for a mule. Anyway, alright. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 32898 Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace his side? Speaker 2: Uh, my son [Walter Sanderson, III] and my daughter-in-law are in the process now of examining census records, and have been able to come up with some clues as to his ancestry. I am not familiar now and can't recite anything other than what I can remember about my father, but what I do remember I think deserves repeating at this time. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: He met my mother while attending Knoxville College. He graduated from what was called the normal course at Knoxville. He was drafted in the military in World War I. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: He showed some aptitude for mechanical trades and was sent to school in North Carolina, specifically to become proficient as an automobile mechanic. He was promoted to the rank of sergeant, and upon his return to Wilcox County [Alabama], was assaulted and beaten up, left by the side of the road by some white hoodlums who resented his appearance as a sergeant. Speaker 1: Now, was he assaulted in his uniform? Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: And did he survive? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. I of course, I'm evidence of that. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. But this was, uh, did he serve overseas during the war? Speaker 2: No, the war ended before he was shipped overseas. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So was there any justice for him after the assault? Speaker 2: No. It was something that was so routine that nothing was made of it. Story_ID: 32899 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did he do after the war? Speaker 2: Uh, after marriage my mother, uh, they moved to the north, to this area, in Lucinda, Washington [D.C.], where he was able to find employment as a chauffeur and general maintenance man for the wife of a congressman who lived on Wyoming Avenue here in Washington. Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us who that congressman was? Speaker 2: His last name was Smoot, S-M-O-O-T. Speaker 1: And do you remember what state he represented? Speaker 2: Uh, it was somewhere in the Middle West. I was born in Freedman's Hospital, and spent the first few months of my life in the servants' quarters over the garage at the Smoot residence. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me go back a little bit and ask you if there's a story about how your parents met. Speaker 2: I do not recall. I know that they were associated with Knoxville College, and met there. And I can assume that that was the locale in which they became acquainted. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, uh, now did both your parents live in the congressman's servants' quarters? Speaker 2: Yes. And something which I think is relevant to this point is that my mother, who was a descendant of Cherokee Indians, who had been driven away from the Atlantic seaboard on the Trail of Tears as it's called, was in appearance and demeanor very straight-forward and direct in her manner. That manner was the occasion for the widow, Mrs. Smoot, ordering my family, my father and mother and me to move from that place. Speaker 1: Was there an incident or something that-- Speaker 2: There was no specific incident. There was merely a, shall we say, a clash of personalities. Story_ID: 32900 Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened next? What did your family do next? Speaker 2: Uh, my, the family moved to what was then called the Deanwood area in Washington, D.C., specifically into a little house on Kane Place, K-A-N-E. I was not yet old enough to go to school. And from there to a house on Meade Street, M-E-A-D-E, in the same general area. And from Meade Street, I started in elementary school. Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I do. I recall chasing chickens around the backyard to bring to my mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson] who would be fixing them for Sunday dinner. The area we lived in was quite rural. We had pigs, shoats, the young pigs, I call them, in the backyard, and I do recall holding a jar to catch the blood as it was time to butcher the hog. He was held up by his hind legs and my father would cut the throat. I held the jar, the pitcher, for the blood. And my mother would make soap from the blood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, of course, I do remember the rural area because I also in the summer would go down to what was then called the old Benning Race Track, beside the, a branch of the Anacostia River. And invariably, in the summer I would catch poison ivy. And a little bit later on, there will be another reference to poison ivy, and you'll understand why I remember that day very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have siblings, brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Uh, I have a surviving sister who was born in 1923, and she's now eighty-eight, plus a few weeks. I also had a brother, John, who was born in 1925. He died long ago in the 1980's. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the oldest of the family? Speaker 2: I was the oldest of the three. Story_ID: 32901 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now we always ask this question. Can you describe where you grew up, and give us an idea of what some of the sights, and sounds and smells of growing up were? Speaker 2: Uh, I recall in adjacent to the summers spent either in summer school or with my father, learning how to drive. It was then quite a challenge because this was long before such aids as automatic transmission, and things like that. Uh, and also he taught me how to throw baseballs, things like that. And I discovered in foot races that I was not going to be a champion sprinter. I discovered also in boxing matches that my height, my lack of height, rather, and my long neck made my jaw very accessible, so I was not going to be a champion boxer. And by elimination, it became clear to me that I was going to have to make it with my brain, whatever I could do with it, rather than my looks. Because I also, as is obvious, I know I was born with a conspicuous facial disfigurement, whose technical term I understand is Hemangioma, and which incidentally, caused some additional expense to my parents, because I had blood moles around my neck to the point where the rubbing with a collar caused them to bleed. And although they were quite low in income, they had to pay a surgeon to remove those moles. Story_ID: 32902 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, well, I was asking you about some of the sights and smells and sounds of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I remember with some pleasure was watching the steam ribbon railcars and locomotives of the day. And also the automobiles of that day, which looked like rooms with wheels, with narrow tires and so forth. And also, I remember with a great deal of pleasure, my attempts to learn from my father [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.] some of the manual trades--carpentry and automobile repair, changing tires, things like that. And also from my mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson], cooking and things like there. Story_ID: 32903 Speaker 1: Did your father [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.] ever talk about what it was like to grow up in Gees Bend [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: Or did he grow up there? Speaker 2: He, his life in Gees Bend, was relatively uneventful, I believe, until he came back from World War II. Speaker 1: World War II. Speaker 2: Right, right, and recognized it would not really be safe or pleasant for him to remain in that area. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Um, now, what did he [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.] do for a living in Washington after the chauffeur's job? Speaker 2: Uh, he was able after a while, doing odd jobs, to apply to and be accepted by the Metropolitan Police Force, as it was called at the time. And his main occupation, his way of making a living, was as a Metropolitan policeman at a time when there were relatively few people of his race on the force. Speaker 1: Now, did he have, are there stories from those days that he tells about what it was like to be one of the early black police officers here in D.C.? Speaker 2: This was, he served at a time when dealing in alcoholic beverages was the crime of the fashion. Speaker 1: So, he served during-- Speaker 2: This was during the day of Prohibition. And his assignments as a policeman were for the most part were in the southwest area of the city, which was the locale for most of the alcoholic dealings--the moonshiners, and so forth as they were called then. And so it was heavily patrolled by the police for that reason. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One thing I do recall was that later when I was in high school I was able to acquire some proceeds as a high school student. And he would ask to be assigned to the area around the high school I attended in order to see me drilling in the high school yard. We'll get to that later. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 32904 Speaker 1: Now, did you grow up in northwest [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: Uh, I grew up in several places. First, after the elementary school period in the Deanwood area in the northeast, my family moved to the Anacostia, [Washington, D.C.] area, specifically to Shannon Place, which is the last street before you reach the Anacostia Flats, as they were called then. And it was there that I attended Birney Elementary School on what was then called Nichols Avenue. I believe it's now called Martin Luther King. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me go back. Now, the first school you attended was in the Deanwood-- Speaker 2: It was elementary School. Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school? Speaker 2: I think it was called Deanwood. I'm hazy on that because I moved away very quickly. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like first to, first grade, or-- Speaker 2: Ah, yeah, first grade and sixth. And after finishing there--that was about the time that I, my family moved to Anacostia, and we remained there for about two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was, how do you spell Birney's School? Speaker 2: B-I-R-N-E-Y. Speaker 1: B-I-R... Speaker 2: Birney was a civil war general, Union of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have fond memories of Birney School because my favorite teacher, whose name I do not recall, was a lady who was almost blind, but extremely conscientious, competent, and a real inspiration. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: I think it was Robinson. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 32905 Speaker 1: Now were you, you said you realized at a certain age that you were going to have to use your brain. Were you a good student? Speaker 2: Uh, I was so classified. I finished fairly high up in my--yeah, each of my schools. We were, my family was in Anacostia only for a short while, then moved to the northwest section, specifically on Third Street, Northwest, in the LeDroit Park area. And I attended Shaw Junior High School, again, a school named for a confederate general--not confederate, for a civil war general. I should mention too, that an unforgettable experience when I was living in Anacostia, was, from my second floor window, to watch the veterans from World War I being burned out and driven out by General MacArthur's troops in the so-called Anacostia--the veterans, where in some cases called massacre or eviction. Speaker 1: Now that was the bonus army. Speaker 2: Yeah, the bonus army. I watched the smoke rising because I had a bird's eye view, so to speak, from the second floor facing, overlooking the whole area, when the troops came from Fort Myer to drive the veterans out. Speaker 1: Now, this is one of the little known chapters in American history. Now, can you just give us, from what you understand, what was the bonus army, and what were they trying to do? Speaker 2: Uh, this was during an economically depressed period, and Mr. Hoover and the Congress did not see fit to activate promises that had been made to the veterans for their service. Speaker 1: World War I veterans? Speaker 2: World War I veterans. And they proceeded with their families in their dilapidated automobiles and by foot to march on Washington. And after marching down Pennsylvania Avenue, proceeded to settle there on the Anacostia Flats. And the unpleasantness which resulted was caused by their resistance by efforts to get them to go back to wherever they came from. Speaker 1: Okay. So, these are, so, yeah, General MacArthur turning the U.S. on the veterans of World War I? Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Under the orders of President Herbert Hoover? Speaker 2: Yeah, books have been written about that incident. Speaker 1: So, did your father have an opinion about that? Speaker 2: Uh, I believe that he was stationed as a Metropolitan policeman on the bridges or roads on the other side of the river through which the troops from Fort Myer had to approach the Anacostia Flats during that period. Speaker 1: So, um, that's a really sad chapter in American history. But-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: But what did you, when you, so you saw all the, what did you actually see when you saw this? Speaker 2: Uh, I was too far physically, well, two or three hundred yards from the nearest border of the camp itself. So I didn't see, I could not see individuals, I could see the flames of the burning huts, and of course, the noise, shouts. The commotion was unmistakable. Speaker 1: Now, this would have, you would have been how old? Speaker 2: About twelve, I think. This was about '33' [1933] or '34' [1934], somewhere in that neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in the depth of the so-called Great Depression. Story_ID: 32906 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, you were, we were saying you were in school. You were a pretty good, you were a good student, right, so you would say? Speaker 2: I was so classified. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Uh, mathematics has been my favorite topic. Speaker 1: Alright. And you mentioned the teacher Mrs. Robinson in Birney School. Did you have a favorite teacher in middle school? Speaker 2: Uh, I don't recall the name, but I do recall learning the rudiments of the French language at Shaw Junior High School, which was the next school that I attended. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Shaw, was that school named for Robert Gould Shaw, the-- Speaker 2: It was, yeah, right. I don't know if--I think it has a different location now. It was then located at Seventh and Rhode Island Avenue, up in that area, and quite close to where we were living, in the 1800 block of Third Street, Northwest. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this was a black school? Speaker 2: Right. Segregation was rigid, rigidly enforced at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. And Robert Gould Shaw was a white colonel in the Union army. Now, do you want to tell us his story? I know you know it, so-- Speaker 2: Uh, may I say that I have the honor to have a son [Walter Sanderson III] who could expound for hours on Robert Gould Shaw, because he happens to be active as a civil war re-enactor. As a matter of fact, he is a founder of the local unit of the 54th Massachusetts Infantry of Volunteers. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. And-- Speaker 2: And he was very helpful in helping the makers of the movie, 'Glory'. As a matter of fact, he was paid to be part of their cast in their famous charge, and to recruit other re-enactors. Speaker 1: I believe that movie was made around 1992, or so? Speaker 2: He can give you the precise details, because he was there. Speaker 1: Yes, alright, okay. And, yeah, that's one of the, it's a chapter in the Civil War where the 54th Massachusetts... Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: ...participated in an almost suicidal charge, but they didn't all die, and some survived, and they went on-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It was a great act of heroism during the Civil War. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Shaw himself was killed. He was a white colonel, young white colonel in charge of the group. He was killed on the spot there at Fort Wagner in South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this, now, when you were going to school, did you know those kinds of things about who the school was named after and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: I did. One of the characteristics which I had was, having been born disfigured, I was seldom invited to social affairs, uh, and therefore studied a great deal and became quite a history buff. Story_ID: 32907 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, my grandfather's [John Wesley Manning] history was something which I still marvel at. I cannot imagine the kind of courage it took for him, knowing the condition of the South, to immediately go back down to the South, when he could have remained in a relatively secure environment and not go down with the prospect of possibly losing his life among the defeated and embittered confederates. Speaker 2: You know that's one thing I did not ask you then, and I feel ashamed that I didn't ask you. I didn't ask you about his parents. Did his, did he ever re-unite with his parents that put him in that trunk? Speaker 1: Uh, I cannot say that he did. I'm not sure. I believe--I know it would be difficult to do that research, and my daughter-in-law and my son [Walter Sanderson III] are attempting to get some answers to that very question. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I had to ask that. I thought about it, but we, in the course, I forgot to ask you. So, I'm sorry. But that's being, they're doing research. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. So, now you attended Dunbar High School, right? Speaker 1: Dunbar High School, right, was the next step after Shaw Junior High School. And I entered Dunbar, I believe it was 1934. I graduated in the class of 1937. Now, Paul Laurence Dunbar was a special high school in the nation. Speaker 2: That is true. Speaker 1: Named for--just tell us who it was named for and why it's special. Speaker 2: It was named for the poet, Paul Laurence Dunbar. And I was fortunate to be one of the students who seemed to enjoy his life at Dunbar. As a matter of fact, my scholastic record was, it accorded some praise. Uh, I had, my final grade in every course but one, was A. I had a B in one class because I was late getting my notebook, which would have cost ten cents, but it happened at a time when the Depression--ten cents was a lot of money. And as a result, in the yearbook that I still have, the little quotation under my name that says, "Although our friend is rather shy, his A reports, we cannot tie." And I was one of the two salutatorians of the class of 1937. And would have been one of the valedictorians had I not received that B. We had a couple of kids who had all A's, and there was one other chap like me who had one B. So we were the joint salutatorians. Story_ID: 32908 Speaker 1: I could mention that I was introduced to courtside military life at Dunbar High School at a time when it was compulsory for male students to participate in the high school cadet corps. Speaker 2: Okay, now, they didn't call it ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] then? Speaker 1: Oh, no. As a matter of fact, at the high school level, it was simply a cadet corps with no official or formal association other than with the local city. And my first promotion was the degree of corporal, and in 1936 I was promoted to the grade of major. There were two cadet battalions at that time, each headed by a major. And I was one of the two majors. I made mention, too, that one of the unforgettable experiences of that year was that I was the personal escort to Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt when she appeared to dedicate a housing project somewhere in the northeast of the city. I've forgotten precisely where it was, but that was quite an honor. Speaker 2: Do you, do you have any stories about Mrs. Roosevelt, a story about what she may have done or said? Speaker 1: Uh, I read a lot about her and admired her, and remember so well the condemnation, which her husband suffered at a time when the anti-communist feeling was very strong in this country, as you may recall. He was accused of being a Bolshevik and everything else because of his so-called New Deal. Speaker 2: Okay. And-- Speaker 1: And the Civilian Conservation Corps, called CCC, and so forth, things like that, much as the president is being a criticized, as being a criticized socialist. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're being criticized for using public money to boost the work of the, to reduce the unemployment figures, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 32909 Speaker 1: Now, let's see. Did you, what other activities were you involved in in high school? Speaker 2: Uh, my parents were very anxious to help me overcome the shyness which resulted from this, my deformity, and encouraged me to be more outgoing. One of the methods that they used was to give me assignments to recite poetry, things like that. And I would, and also to participate in choral groups, things like that, so that... And I believe that they succeeded sufficiently, so that I had no hesitance in giving commands to six or seven hundred students on the cadet field at Dunbar. And also to speak to the assembled class at the time of class days, both while as a student and also in later reunions of the Class of '37' [1937]. And also, as we will get to it, as a participant in college and after college, in public affairs. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you, I know you said you were a shy student, but what did you find to do that was enjoyable? What did you like to do when you were a teenager? Speaker 2: Uh, sports. I loved baseball. I was an outfielder and I did not make a profession of course, obviously, of it. At that time no one of my race was even active in professional sports. But I enjoyed it quite a bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I also enjoyed swimming because we would frequently visit the resorts along the Chesapeake Bay. And I was able to splash around in the water and I learned how to swim and also was able to swim in the various local swimming pools. I enjoyed that quite a bit. Speaker 1: Okay. Were the pools segregated in those days, too? Speaker 2: Yes, very much so. Speaker 1: Did you like the movies, or music? Speaker 2: Uh, occasionally I was able expense-wise, to attend very few movies. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about music? Speaker 2: I became a patron of classical music, thanks to my mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson], and still enjoy very much, certain operas and certain composers. Franz Schubert is a great favorite of mine. And that love of music, as we will find later in this discussion was passed on my daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were a teenager when Joe Louis, I think, began fighting? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about--well, let me pause here and I'll ask you when I come back. We've got to take a little break first. So, I'll ask you about Joe Louis. Story_ID: 32910 Speaker 1: What about Joe Louis? I know he was a young fighter-- Speaker 2: We followed, we, people who were teenagers, of course, followed his career with great interest because obviously, he was a pioneer--and at a time when there were few people of this race prior, you know, in that field. And Louis Armstrong, people like that. But I had no personal acquaintance with him, except to admire him, you know, for the way he conducted himself. Speaker 1: Were the fights cause for excitement in the community when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, naturally, he was a role model for so many youngsters. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about Jessie Owens? Now, your junior year in high school--the '36' [1936] Olympics took place in Nazi Germany-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's true, yes. He also was a role model. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we followed the '36' [1936] Olympics very closely. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were a teenager, was there any admiration for Paul Robeson? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. And as a matter of fact, I still have some of the old records that they, recordings, you know, on the platter type of records, platters, you know, of Paul Robeson. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you, ah, I know Marian Anderson was a star then and-- Speaker 2: I remember so well when she participated in a concert at the DAR Auditorium [DAR Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C.], and it received quite a bit of publicity because it was a rare thing. Speaker 1: And who were some of the, were there any people, any of your parents' peers that you admired in those days in the neighborhood that you grew up in? Speaker 2: Ah, yes. My daughter's music teacher was a strong influence on her life, Mr. Barbour, B-A-R-B-O-U-R. He's passed on, of course, long ago. But he had a great influence, positively, on my daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was largely responsible for her strong interest in music as a career. Story_ID: 32911 Speaker 1: Okay. Uh, so as a teenager then, as a senior in high school, uh, what were your career aspirations? Did you know what you wanted to do when you grew up, when you graduated? Speaker 2: The range of opportunities for people of my race was relatively narrow. Because of my grandfather's [John Wesley Manning] career and my father [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.] and my mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson], I aspired to be a teacher of mathematics. That's what was on my mind as a possible career. And when I graduated from Dunbar High School, the 'Washington Daily News' was offering tuition scholarships to a black boy, a black girl, a white boy, and a white girl at a local college of that person's choice. I was selected as a recipient of the scholarship for the black boy, and used that scholarship to enter Howard University in 1937, in the fall of 1937. Story_ID: 32912 Speaker 1: Okay, now, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], much like Dunbar High School, was a powerhouse of black achievement in those days. There are lots of names listed here, but who are some of the people at Howard that you remember, and for what reason? Speaker 2: One of the people that I recall was a political science professor. I believe his name was Dorsey. And I believe that his evaluation of my knowledge of foreign affairs, especially as they related to Africa, was largely responsible for me having been selected to receive the new scholarship to Howard. The other contestants were brilliant students in their academic subjects, but he told me that I showed a greater interest in foreign affairs, an understanding, you know, of what was going on outside the States, which caused him to rate me very highly, which is why I was admitted with that scholarship. Speaker 1: Alright. So-- Speaker 2: I was also very much impressed by my mathematics professor. There were two or three, and also by the two officers, white, each of German ancestry, who were in charge of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program at Howard University. Speaker 1: Okay, who were they? Speaker 2: Zuppann, Z-U-P-P-A-N-N, Colonel, and a Light Colonel, Boetcher, B-O-E-T-C-H-E-R, I believe. My spelling may not be completely accurate, but he was at that time lieutenant colonel. Those two gentlemen were in charge of the ROTC program at Howard University. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, uh, in those days ROTC was mandatory, was it not, in-- Speaker 2: It was. ROTC was mandatory for male students who did not have a physical disability. And the result, for the first two years I drilled as a participant in the ROTC program. And at the time I was maturing, and it was a mark of maturity for a young man of that day to be a smoker. And I had become addicted to smoking, and they were offering, I think it was ten dollars a month, or something like that, to successful members of the senior ROTC the last two years. So I signed up to be a member of the senior ROTC. I applied for it and was accepted. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, are you saying that you applied for the senior ROTC before you were old enough? Speaker 2: Oh, I was old enough. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: Yes. Uh, and having finished the first mandatory two years, participation in the senior ROTC was something that you applied for and was purely optional, at the discretion, you see, of the people who ran the program. I was a non-commissioned officer in the ROTC unit there at Howard. The next year, '36' [1936], I was the commander, student commander of the ROTC detachment for my final year. I graduated from Howard with a degree in mathematics in June of 1941. Story_ID: 32913 Speaker 1: Then I was sent out to Fort Meade, Maryland to be a participant in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] summer encampment, which ended in, I believe, in August of 1941. Speaker 2: Now, you had to be aware of the fighting that was going on in Europe at that time? Speaker 1: I was very much aware, and as part of my courses at Howard University, I went out of my principal area of interest to take a course in German, hoping that having been exposed to military life, that if I were to be called to serve in the military, I might be sent overseas to Germany to fight. And my attitude toward the German Nazi philosophy was strong enough so that I hoped that my knowledge of German would cause me to be able to inflict some damage on people because I definitely felt that their views, you know, were not correct. Speaker 2: So, I guess as a result of the Olympic Games and some other--there was the Schmeling, Louis fight and some other things that occurred that black America in those days knew that Nazi Germany was a racist state. Speaker 1: There was no question about it. I had learned enough French when I was in junior high school so that I knew some of the local songs and the French National Anthem, and I was disheartened when the Germans defeated the French army and occupied Paris. And then, well, I decided to go ahead and learn some German. And I took a course in German, in the German language so that I would be able to yell "camarade" and so forth, and as an auxiliary reward, possibly learn the lyrics in German to some of the Schubert melodies that I liked so much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The serenade, especially. Speaker 2: So, you were excited about the war and the whole, you know, everything that loomed before you. Do you think in retrospect you were kind of naive about it, or-- Speaker 1: Uh, no. As a matter of fact, I was hopeful that I might be sent to fight the Germans but when December, December of '41 [1941], of course, the date of the Japanese attack, changed the local picture. Story_ID: 32914 Speaker 1: Now, I have here that you were working at the post office? Speaker 2: Yeah, I applied for a job at the post office because they were then, the post office was then off rank. Uh, it what was we call war time indefinite appointments, something like that, which after a period they decided to make me permanent. And I should add, that at the same time I was hoping to express my disdain for the German approach to life. I was not at all satisfied with the treatment of this country, and I can give you one example. The Weather Bureau, the Interior Department, was advertising for people to hire as to interpret and go over old ship records made over the years about weather on the English Channel. I found out later that the purpose was to analyze those records in order to select the proper time and place for a cross channel invasion which became what we know now as D-Day. What is interesting in this discussion, however, is that about 150 or so people appeared to take the quality test and examination for these jobs, and about eight or nine of us were asked, the top scorers, to appear for, to be interviewed personally. When I appeared, the only non-white person in that group, immediately the chap who was conducting the interview called me aside and told me that I was too late, he had already hired a janitor. That impressed me as a good example of the relative priorities of patriotism and racism. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: And when I told him that I was there because I had been asked to report as one of the highest scorers on his examination, he said, "Oh, that just wouldn't work, because we can't have anyone of your color working here." Speaker 1: So, this is-- Speaker 2: And that was the end of my attempt to become an employee of the Weather Bureau. I had boned up for about oh, a couple of months on all the terminology and skills required to satisfy their requirements, which is why I was able to score so high on that examination, but it was obvious that priorities on their part were in a different area. Story_ID: 32915 Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: This was also, as you recall, long after the December 7, 1941 attack by the Japanese. At the time that I finished my summer camp in 1941, in August of '41' [1941], I was then 20 years old, too young, under peace time rules, to be commissioned in the army, in the infantry branch. But when war was declared, I assumed that I would be able to serve. I had received what is called a certificate of eligibility to be commissioned as an infantry officer. Uh, when I completed summer camp--and I was expecting almost daily to receive notice to report for duty, however some time elapsed before I received any communication from the army, from the war department, and when I did receive communication, it was to be drafted as a private. And it took intercession by the chairman of the draft board, who was my former physics professor at Howard University with the War Department, in order to ask that I be given my [final flight?] physical and called to active duty as 2nd Lieutenant of Infantry. The climate at that time was such that the United States had really no interest whatsoever in blacks with firearms. What blacks were being called to duty and deployed were in non-combat roles--supporting troops, automotive and so forth, and digging ditches and the trenches and running the roads and so forth for the white troops, and that was the way the situation was presented. As a matter of fact, we'll get into military service later on, but that attitude was very strong at that time. Speaker 1: Right. I've heard that if you joined the Navy, you would be a cook, you'd be in the kitchen. Speaker 2: Precisely, yes. Story_ID: 32916 Speaker 1: So in the, so when you, so you did receive a commission as a 2nd Lieutenant, I think? Speaker 2: Right. As a result of those letters, and I think I still have copies of them, I was given a final flight physical, and fortunately, I think under the pressure of war time (unclear), uh, the young general practitioner who examined me added a paragraph indicating that although I did not meet the physical characteristics and appearance normal for an officer, that my attitude was such that I did not suffer from it, and that people responding to me would not feel uncomfortable, or words to that effect. And this was an addendum they added after the formal report. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The result was then I was called to active duty. Speaker 1: Now did your medical condition have any physical effect on you being active and serving at all? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Alright. And you said you were involved in sports and you were active? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, otherwise you passed the physical? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, how did they deploy you? Now, this is a dilemma, isn't it? How do you, how are they going to use you? Speaker 2: Uh, I was assigned to the 93rd Infantry Division, then based at Fort Watuka, Arizona, right down there on the Mexican border. I was then assigned within the 93rd to the 25th infantry regiment, an old line unit which was then preparing to go to Louisiana for field maneuvers prior to being shipped somewhere else. The interesting thing about that particular tour was that although we were United States soldiers preparing to go to fight for the country, we had to patrol the area around our camp to keep us from having contact with the local United States citizens who were un-use to people of our complexion with firearms to the point where--I don't want to use the 'N' word--the children would run around in fright when they saw groups of us with rifles marching down the trails and so forth in the back woods along the Savion River and swamps. And to lighten the mood of this conversation a little bit, I can recall, unforgettably, that in conducting our maneuvers I led my platoon, I had a 40 man platoon, on a night march through the woods, and we were exhausted. And finally after brushing through briars and fighting off the snakes and other things along the river, we saw a nice place that appeared not to have any heavy undergrowth and so forth, lots of nice soft plants, and the whole platoon of us, including me, bedded down. The next day when we woke up we found that that had been a former pig sty and the poison ivy leaves were like palm trees. The result was the whole platoon was put in a squad tent, and gave the medics, who were also in training, plenty of practice. We were all stripped naked. The guy would fill a five gallon bucket with his solution, and carrying a wallpaper brush, he would start at one end of the camp, go down one side and then the other, and then when he got back to the front again, we'd turn over and he would paint us on the other side, all of us butt naked there in the heat of Louisiana. Speaker 1: That's quite-- Speaker 2: And the stuff that he painted us with was purple. Story_ID: 32917 Speaker 1: Now, I have here that they called the 25th Regiment the Blue Helmets. Speaker 2: Well, the division itself was called the Blue Helmet. Speaker 1: Okay. And the regiment was a regiment of Buffalo Soldiers. Speaker 2: Uh, it was, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, the 25th, because it had a long history, its regimental symbol was a stylized rock house, because their claim to fame was that they had rescued then Colonel Theodore Roosevelt during the war with Cuba. Speaker 1: Right, the charge of San Juan Hill. Speaker 2: That's right, yes. And because they had quite a few career soldiers, they were used to form the nucleus of the 368th and 369th infantry regiments, which were the other two regiments in the 93rd infantry division. Speaker 1: Now, again, the rule of the day was rigid and complete segregation. As a result when young, inexperienced white officers were assigned to the unit, they were careful to assure that these young officers would not have to report to a person of color. There were separate officers' clubs on the base. And all the usual rules of racial separation were followed. Speaker 2: And, so you were, just to be clear, you were not, there were no white soldiers that you were to command at all? Speaker 1: Uh, yes. The enlisted ranks were entirely all black. In fact, I don't recall any white enlisted personnel in the unit. The 93rd infantry division was a black unit, but with a white senior officer staff. Speaker 2: Who was the white senior officer when you were there? Speaker 1: I don't recall now, uh, who had that job. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I'm pretty sure that there were changes too. It was not, as you can well imagine, the most desirable post for a white ambitious senior officer. Speaker 2: Right, that's, I can imagine. Uh, were they, there are lots of southerners that are in the Army. Would you characterize your officers as being mostly southerners or were they mixed? Speaker 1: It was true then, and it was true throughout my active duty in the military. Uh, I should mention, too, that although at the time I was far too busy to be acquainted with the thinking of the brass about international affairs and assignments and so forth, it was fairly obvious that the War Department, as it was called, was not really anxious to commit this bright unit, the 25th infantry, to combat. So, after completion of this maneuver session, maneuver practice, in Louisiana, we, this unit, was shipped out to, of all places, the Mojave Desert in California. I believe, although I have no evidence to prove it, that it was simply because they didn't know what to do with us. And also because they wanted to use this isolated post at Fort Watuka to train the other black division, the 92nd division. And, of course, the post couldn't hold both of us, so they shipped us out and parked us in the Mojave Desert. Story_ID: 32918 Speaker 1: Okay. So, how long did you stay there in the desert? Speaker 2: Uh, just a few months before they found a job for the unit to perform in the Pacific. Specifically, we were shipped to, first to the Guadacanal Island, which then had been pacified by the Marines, oh, five six months before then. And while at the Guadacanal, my company was ordered to move to Bougainville Island about 400 miles away. My company commander ordered me to be flown to Bougainville to, or shipped, I'm not sure which it was, as the advance man to plan for the arrival of the rest of the company and to coordinate their arrival with the American troops and the Australian Fiji Island troops who were already there. And I did that, and after about a couple of weeks or so, the company arrived, Company G, George--the George Company it was called--of the 25th Infantry Regiment under Captain Conway Jones. And it was while there only a few days after our arrival that I had my first combat live fire experience, which was written up in very florid language by the 'Pittsburgh Courier', I think, and the other black newspapers. Speaker 1: Now, what happened, what happened? Speaker 2: Uh, the Japanese assaulted us, coming quite close, because of a thick jungle and so forth. And I believe they were, they under-estimated our spirit and ability to resist, because they had been, it had been reported to them that quote "native troops had arrived." The Australians had a unit of Fiji Island troops there and relatively Pacific, with no great attempts to patrol and so forth into the jungle. And it was assumed, I think, by the Japanese that we were of the same ilk, because of our color. Speaker 1: Fiji Islanders have, they have like very kinky hair, they are dark skinned-- Speaker 2: Precisely, right. And as a matter of fact, we were positive that that was what the report was, because the Fiji's had captured a Japanese non-commissioned officer who had written his report describing us that way. So, they assaulted, the Japanese assaulted us, and then in a four or five day period, attempted of course, to wipe us out. The report of the '[Pittsburgh] Courier' says that, I think, somewhere in excess of 40 of them were killed, and we had oh, eight or nine of our troops, of our own wounded. There are a couple of things there, instances there, that should be reported. Specifically, my, I was their first platoon leader. My platoon sergeant, Barry Bullock, got something, either a grenade fragment or a bullet through his hand, and he was weeping. I was quite close to him at the time and I asked why he was weeping. He said that it was not for the pain, although it was severe, but because he had been a brick mason in life, in civilian life, and he had a wife and child and he would not be able to support them when he got back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the last time I saw him. Story_ID: 32919 Speaker 1: The other incident, which is also something that's unforgettable, is that shortly after we had won this little fire fight, I was standing around the area on this trail which we were trying to block to keep the Japanese from using it. And I came across a couple of white enlisted men who were repairing the wires, communication wires, along this trail. One was kneeling and the other was standing beside him. And as I came through the woods, I noticed that the one who was standing had his foot against the jaw of this Japanese soldier. The other one was using his wire pliers to pull his teeth, the Japanese soldier's teeth. I hoped that the Japanese soldier was already dead. He was dead then. Whether they had assisted to the great beyond, I don't know. I would not have been surprised had they not seen to it that he was dead to keep him from moving and squirming while they attempted to extract his teeth. And I was revolted by that scene, even though that dude had been possibly trying to kill me a few hours before, as I had been attempting to kill him. But that was something completely shocking to me, and I think it was at least partially because I was fully aware that I was part of a race held in contempt by the people I served, and that I had as much in common with that chap on the ground, possibly more. We had simply been born on different parts of the earth. He was wearing a uniform and I was wearing a uniform. And the way he was being treated offended me. So, I was carrying a .45 at the time. I un-buttoned the flap. I didn't pull it, but they got the idea, and they stopped while I was there. I'm sure they resumed after I left, because I couldn't stay long. They told me later that, I mean I found out later, that it was very common and it was a common practice of the Marines in the Guadacanal always to pull the teeth of any casualty they could find, for the gold. That's the sort of thing that hardens attitudes toward flag waving and excesses of patriotic fervor. You recognize that underneath us all, we're just flesh and blood, human beings. Story_ID: 32920 Speaker 1: Well, well, so, uh, so what else happened on the island? Speaker 2: Ah, patrols. In fact, not only on that island which is called Bougainville, uh, but also at the next stop which was Halmahera in New Guinea. And the next stop after that, I've forgotten the name of the little island, but we were constantly on patrol and doing guard duty and so forth. And I believe that because we were a relatively small unit, we were not used in any of the landing operations which were taking place, to be the first soldiers to assault. The exception to that came much later in my World War II service when on a little island called Morotai, uh, about oh, I'd say about three or four hours away from Japan, which was being used by the Air Force as a base for B-25 bombers taking off to bomb Japan. The guards there at the, around the airfield, reported seeing Japanese soldiers, and so it causes the Air Force personnel to be quite nervous, as you can well imagine. So, uh, their low level flights had convinced them that there were Japanese encampments further up the island, well about 40 miles away. So, my unit was ordered to do what we could to wipe them out. And my company commander assigned me as the first platoon leader--I was then a first lieutenant--to take my platoon, about 40 men, augmented with some extra machine guns and mortars in landing craft, just 30 or 40 miles away, up the island to patrol and to attack any Japanese we might find. I did so, and that was, I can remember quite well the feeling that ran through my head, because I knew that the lives of all of those men depended on my decisions. I was landed along with them early in the morning. The boats then returned and we were there with no support or capability of receiving any support. Story_ID: 32921 Speaker 1: I was a youngster then. This was in 1945. I was about oh, 23, 24 years old, and I felt the weight of responsibility very strongly, and we were fortunate. The enemy, because their submarines and seaborne re-supplies had been weak, they had been simply living off the land. And they attempted to create resistance in a short fire fight and so forth, which was unsuccessful in doing any serious damage to us, but we killed quite a few of them. And in one instance when my sense of responsibility took advantage of me, I ordered my men to follow the trail which led to their little encampment and to destroy the utensils, improvised helmets and things they had been using to try to survive, off the verbiage and the vegetation and so forth around them and whatever they could find, because their seaborne supplies were very erratic, thanks to the surveillance, you see, of the seas from the Air Force. And I ordered my men to destroy them, and I'm pretty certain that as a result of my decision to do that, I probably condemned a number of them simply to starve, unless they were somehow able to find some other method of living off the land. As I say, I was overcome and motivated by a sense of responsibility for getting my men back down to the shore in time to meet the return just before sunset, of the boats which were to take us back down to the base, which they did. We captured one chap alive and he was a Japanese soldier. Unfortunately, before they could get very far interrogating him, he was so emaciated that when the doctors attempted to feed him, his vein was collapsed and he died right there on the dock. Story_ID: 32922 Speaker 1: However, my actions as a commander of that little unit so impressed my company commander that he recommended that I be promoted from First Lieutenant to Captain, and that's how I became a captain in the infantry. And shortly after that, the war ended and my unit was moved to the Philippines, specifically to the southern island in Danoi, where we waited on a Del Monte pineapple plantation for a ride back home to the States. Speaker 2: Now, tell me this. Now did you, do you remember, I have a note here that one of the highest ranking Japanese officers in the Pacific was captured by the 93rd Division. Did you all have any part, play any role in that at all? Speaker 1: I did--I have no memory of that at all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had very little communication, uh, because of the way we were separated in small units in different places. The 93rd was never employed as intact as a division, which it was a pretty large unit. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, I think it was on the Island of Morotai that this took place. But, so, when you were going to, so you're waiting on a pineapple plantation to come back to the States. Um, and you were to come back for good, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: To the United States. Speaker 1: This was at the end of the war. I believe that the bomb had been dropped on Hiroshima [Japan]. Story_ID: 32923 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you, you seem to take a moral attitude about the war in the sense that, I mean you are cognizant of how black folks are treated in the United States, and you're cognizant of your place in the world and what you have in common with other human beings. Did you, do you, how do you account for your attitude? Does it come from any religious experiences you had growing up? I mean, were you, did your family go the church? Or was it just, you think, just basic humanity? Speaker 2: Uh, my father and mother [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr. and Yale Scott Manning Sanderson] both were quite broadminded and tolerant in their attitudes toward the segregated world in which they grew up. My father, for instance, was an elder and very active in the Presbyterian Church close to where we lived. And my mother, too, was active, playing for the church, you know, playing the piano and so forth. And also, they individually were very strongly, strong characters. And they had a long and happy marriage which ended just before I came home in 1946, and each of them re-married. There was no intense bitterness involved, I understand. I was still overseas, you know, when they separated, but they worked together as a family, something which unfortunately is now rather uncommon. Story_ID: 32924 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's, so you're back in the U.S. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, did you have any thoughts then of continuing on in the Army? Speaker 2: Uh, my first job coming back was to make a living. And I had taken a precaution to apply for and be accepted in the postal service as a clerk with the proviso to be assured re-employment when my active duty in the military was over. And as a result, I could immediately go back to work. I also had met a young lady, uh, and developed an attraction to her, and got married soon after I returned. And the result of that marriage was my first child, a daughter, born January 1, 1947, New Year's baby. She was my World War II baby, as I call it. Speaker 1: And she inherited the interest and talent in music which was displayed in her mother. Unfortunately, as I related earlier, the multiple sclerosis took away opportunity to develop her talents. Speaker 2: And what was your daughter's name? Speaker 1: Leslie Gale Sanderson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And her married name was Swift. Leslie Gale Sanderson Swift. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: Her, after bearing two children, her husband, Mr. Swift, left, leaving her with the two small girls to raise by herself while cripple. Story_ID: 32925 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, okay, so you're back in the United States, you're working in the post office, you've got a new daughter. And why in the world did you re-enlist? Speaker 2: Ah, I decided to retain a connection with the military by remaining in the Army Reserve, having reached that rank with a fairly clean record, and fearful, given the unsettled situation, that there might come a time when I would have to be re-called to active duty. And, also, because there were certain advantages, discounts and things on purchases and so forth, which might make it advantageous to have that title. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but, so, as you are in the Reserves, the Korean Conflict emerges, right? Speaker 2: Later on, right. Yeah, there was also a monetary reason, because the summertime actives, temporary active duty sessions, usually at Fort Benning, Georgia for infantry officers, were paid trips, and I could earn a little extra money for a while later to help with my financial expenses because I was buying a house at that time. I've never had to rent not one day. Ever since, I have been independent. I have been paying for a mortgage. Speaker 1: And when the--and so, I remained there at the post office. As a matter of fact, I understand that some of the tests which I took set records for speed and accuracy. I was what we call a mail distributor in the old days when mail was handled letter by letter. And as a result of my proficiency there, they promoted me to the supervisory level in the postal service, and also eventually to the personnel section of the post office, where I had the opportunity to conduct trials of new methods of handling mail and also select the first group of female clerical employees, a job which required me to have access to their police records and things, which I know were embarrassing to them. But because the postal service was very security conscious, we had to look at those, too. Story_ID: 32926 Speaker 1: Okay. Um, so in 1947, A. Philip Randolph and Grant Reynolds founded the Community Against Jim Crow in Military Service and Training. And in 1948, Harry Truman issued Executive Order 9981 on July 26, 1948. That was the order that set in motion the desegregation of the U.S. Army, armed services. So, did you, what did you think about that at the time? You were a reserve then, right? Speaker 2: Ah, I was startled and surprised and aware that my status would probably call for me to serve, as it soon did when the international situation, the rivalry between the two Koreas and China and the two elements of the Chinese, following-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, uh, so, when were you, were you deployed in 1950 or did-- Speaker 2: Uh, I was re-called to active duty I believe in 1951 and sent to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, the home of the 101st Airborne Division. They were quite surprised, I'm sure, to see me because there were very few non-white combat service type officers in the military at that time. And after some delay, I was assigned to head a, to conduct training in map reading, starting and patrolling, and related subjects for newly and drafted enlisted people who were going to be assigned to go to Korea. One of the documents which I prize is a letter from the head of that particular venture praising me because I had been able to raise the passing grade for the subjects by 16 percent over the previous chap. And I know that it was a great surprise to him, because I was the first non-white officer to be in that position. The only other non-white officer personnel around was the chaplain and the people in the non-combat agencies. Story_ID: 32927 Speaker 1: But to be in charge of teaching people how to conduct themselves, you know, in fire fight situations and so forth, was something which was new. I recall some of the analogies and so forth. I told them, I asked them how they would feel if through misreading a map they appeared at the wrong time or wrong place and got shot. And after a little while I asked them how they would feel if they had shot someone else who had made a mistake in reading a map. And they became very thoughtful. And I think little allegories like that, little stories, sort of kept their interest in a very dry, per se, type of subject, and that possibly had something to do with the fact that we had paid it attention. And although many of them were poorly educated, they, as the report says, their passing rate on the exam which I gave them was greatly in excess of the previous instructors. And I'm pretty sure, too, since so many of them were black, that the fact that I was black may have had something to do with their reaction to what I was trying to do for them, and also the fact that they could see that I had been exposed to the kind of thing that they would be facing themselves. Speaker 2: Now, did the, did President Truman's order to integrate increase the number of black volunteers in the military? Or, well, before you couldn't volunteer, right, I suppose, unless there was a draft, right? Speaker 1: Uh, that part I don't know. I don't know what the background of the people who were coming in was. Uh, I do know that it was always quite a surprise to the people to whom I reported when I showed up. Story_ID: 32928 Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, after my session at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, after a short break I was shipped overseas to Japan--yes, to Japan--and then, of course, flown over to Korea. Speaker 2: Okay. Is this still in 1951? Speaker 1: Uh, very late '51' [1951] or very early 1952. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, it must have been very early '52' [1952], still in the winter, because I know that on my first night there, I slept, I was sleeping on the ground in a sleeping bag, and when I woke up the next morning, the zipper on the sleeping bag was frozen and there was snow on it, but I was exhausted and I just slept through it. Speaker 2: Okay. So, it's cold in Korea. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, right. As a matter of fact, they're catching it right now with their food shortage and cold. Speaker 2: So, the U.S. Army was actually fighting in--was it actually fighting in what we would consider now North Korea, or in South Korea? Speaker 1: Uh, at that particular time, the 2nd Infantry Division to which I reported was preparing to go into a so-called rest from the, from a period of active engagement at the front. They were in North Korea, but planning to move south, and I was assigned to command Company I, Item Company, 30th Infantry Regiment, and with the troops marched and also by truck, moved down to Koji Island. That was an island just off the shore of Korea where prisoners--captured, mostly Chinese prisoners, practically all Chinese in fact, in previous engagements. They were housed in Quonset huts behind barbed wire fences. At that time, too, on the international front, there was great friction and argument between the so-called Red Chinese and the Chinese element based in Taiwan. That resulted in fights between those prisoners who were followers of the Red Chinese and those wished to win repatriation and go to Taiwan. As a matter of fact, it was not just an argument, there were actual fights and brutality. As a matter of fact, my unit was patrolling the roads outside the fences, and I recall an occasion in which a human head came over the fence and rolled down the road in front of one of my young guards. It frightened the heck out of him, as you can well imagine. And screams and protests and so forth because of torture in those Quonset huts was not uncommon at all. Story_ID: 32929 Speaker 1: Now, this is the torture of Chinese prisoners by the United States? Speaker 2: No, it was torture, usually of people who wanted to go or be repatriated to Taiwan by those who wanted to, or who had loyalty to the then Communists, North Koreans. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Chinese prisoners in conflict with each other? Speaker 2: Yes, this was their internal fighting, yes. Speaker 1: And did the, did our government make any attempt to intervene and protect those who wanted to repatriate? Speaker 2: You have put your finger on a very serious question. I was assigned as the commander of Company I to plan and conduct the first raid, as we called it, to pacify one of those camps because of the international interest and furor over what was going on, just as what is going on now in Syria overseas. Speaker 1: Just to get, just a question. So, these are large camps you're talking about, these are large units of-- Speaker 2: We're talking about thousands of people, thousands. Speaker 1: So, within that group of thousands of people in this camp situation, they have formed their own pecking order and own little sub-government? Speaker 2: Precisely, precisely. Ah, and therefore, I was assigned the task with my company of planning and conducting a pacification of a camp which would result in marching those people from their present encampment into a more secure camp which had not one, but two barbed wire fences topped with razor wire and so forth, which had been constructed in order to keep the, be able to keep those people securely and observe them more closely. Also, there was international interest in how these United States troops would treat these unarmed prisoners. Uh, I was concerned for fear that some of my men might be surrounded and taken prisoner, or that some of my men, because we were carrying loaded firearms, would lose his head and start shooting some of these unarmed prisoners and cause an international uproar, just as now has happened just recently in the Near East. I was fortunate. I had some fine officers and non-commissioners, all white, all from the South under my command. Story_ID: 32930 Speaker 1: Now, this is something that I want to ask about. What happened the first time you gave an order to a white subordinate? Speaker 2: Army discipline is such that there was no visible reaction. I'm sure there was a lot of discussion, because all my five subordinate lieutenants were from, except one, were from the south. In fact, my 1st Sergeant who was sitting as close to me as you are or even closer, in this little camp we had, was from Mississippi, a career enlisted man. And my first platoon leader was a young chap who had just finished ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at the University of Georgia. And the relationship was such that we became quite friendly. As a matter of fact, I didn't bring it with me, but this 1st Sergeant that I mentioned from Mississippi had earned a so-called rest break, and oh, it was ten days or so, in Japan proper. And he surprised me by bringing back a beautiful desk ornament, about this long, with "Captain Sanderson" on the front of it, that he had paid for with his own money, or perhaps by collecting money from some of the other people, and presented it to me in front of the entire body of troops, of the 220 odd men that I had. And I think only about a half dozen were non-white. Speaker 1: Let me ask you. Did the government or the Army provide any transitional training for you as an officer in that situation? How did you develop that kind of--I know you must have thought about it yourself for a long time. Speaker 2: It was such, as the regiment in a well-organized military unit, that saluting--priorities, you know between ranks and things like that, is that competence is its own open door. And I believe that in my particular case, after the initial shock of seeing that I was not white, that the fact that I was able, frankly, to do the job that was called for, caused a certain warmth. The result was, for instance, that that young 1st Lieutenant who just graduated from the University of Georgia and I became very good friends. We used to play chess together. And after the war he was traveling to England when unfortunately he came down with Parkinson's Disease, and I haven't heard from him. Story_ID: 32931 Speaker 1: Also, I could relate this to the colonel who was a native of Florida, white, of course--all the other officers were white except the chaplain. That officer admired what I was doing with the company so much that when he had a vacancy on his personal staff, he made me his intelligence officer, in charge of planning the patrols around his unit and advising him on what the situation was in his immediate vicinity. And as it so happens, he was ordered to mount an attack on a hill just west of Pork Chop Hill called Old Barley. When he was ordered to mount an attack and his all deployable units were already in the East, he said "Sandy, the rest is over." So, in this headquarters tent, I went down both sides of that tent and any soldier there regardless of rank that I felt could be spared, I ordered out to form a line. We had about 40 all together. I ordered them to count off by twos--one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one two, in great hurry. I then ordered, "Ones go with the colonel. Twos go with me. Take off." That was it. And in broad daylight, on a nice hot day in September, we flew under Colonel [James C.] Fogel--there was a little rise and so forth that alerted the Chinese, and their mortar fire intensified, and it was already going on so heavily that all the parts of this battalion were engaged and pinned down. And then I came along and I was immediately aborted myself, which is why I'm walking on one leg now. I mean, I didn't lose a leg, I just lost the use of it. But I was fortunate and I was knocked down beside one of our tanks that had just been knocked down, which is why they couldn't really get a good shot at me. And I had another thing that hit the side of my helmet, but it was a weak fragment and didn't go through. And this is the remarkable thing which addresses the question that you asked me a little while back about relationships. My jeep driver was a young white guy from West Virginia. Like the other folks, he was driven back, but in broad daylight, 2:00 and 3:00 in the afternoon on a bright day just like this. He went back to his headquarters tent and made the case to a young white officer who was the forward observer of a field artillery unit which was supporting us, to where I was. And the two of them with this lieutenant general driving the jeep, came back up, oh, about 800 yards or so to where I was lying on the ground beside this tank, picked me up because I couldn't walk, threw me across the back jeep and hauled us out, which is why I am alive. Because as is customary in war, if I'd been on that ground overnight, the Chinese soldiers would have finished me off. Because I couldn't walk, there was no point in them trying to take me prisoner, they would just finish me off. I mean, that's the way things are. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And to that young man, I owe my life. And also to that young officer. I don't know what he told that young man, but it convinced him that he should risk driving on an open battlefield like that, back into the army. And the combat was still going on days later. I don't know if they survived themselves. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is, now you received a Purple Heart for-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's my Purple Heart, yes. And also, after I was sent back home and out of the hospital--I was in the hospital in Japan for, oh, about six weeks or so. I received through the mail my second Bronze Star Award. I could tell by the way it was written--it was written personally by Colonel [James C.] Fogel. I attempted to correspond with him afterwards, but I discovered that the poor guy had Alzheimer's or something. At any rate, the strain, and it was a difficult period, had taken away his senses. Story_ID: 32932 Speaker 1: So, you're in the hospital now. Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting, and you mentioned my moralization of our combat. And I believe that the contrast between the two periods of service is something that in itself is a commentary on the fragility of human relationships. I was killing Japanese folks in World War II, and five years later being waited on conscientiously in a Japanese hospital by Japanese personnel, (pause) and in a little town, Sasebo, Japan, from which because of its location it is quite possible that some of the people for whom I was responsible in killing had been the brothers, sons, and fathers of some of the lady nurses who were in that hospital. The odds are strongly against it, but it's certainly possible, because Sasebo is a seaboard town. That's just the way things are. Speaker 1: That's right. People don't often talk about that aspect of war. Speaker 2: I recognized it, and that is why, for instance, as I related, my reaction when I saw what was happening to that Japanese soldier on the ground was such that it was offensive to me. And even though he was a quote "enemy" unquote, who had been trying to kill me, he lost and that was the end of it. Speaker 1: Well, do you think, do you think it's, you think, what role do you think leadership plays in determining those disrespectful acts of World War I? Speaker 2: I believe it's in the nature of this mammal we call man. There was a report I think, today, that I heard part of it about the similarity in relationships between human beings and between gorillas. We are not so different. We are able to fly into space and walk on the moon and so forth, but we're also able to kill millions of people with, by pushing a button, and do it everyday. Speaker 1: Well, that's certainly something-- Speaker 2: We're doing it right now. Speaker 1: That's certainly something gorillas don't do. Speaker 2: Yeah, we do the same thing. We're motivated in the same way. We're just more clever at it. And we can kill--these drones--they're never really sure, and they don't really give a darn. So, a guy can sit in Los Angeles, push a couple of buttons and wipe out people on the other side of the world. That's the way it is. Story_ID: 32933 Speaker 1: One other aspect of this war--and I just want to--when you, you came in during this transition period when the army was integrated. Did you witness any, or did you hear about any of the conflict in Korea between the black and white soldiers? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. The news of something like that really hardly ever floated down, especially to me, because you can imagine we were all pretty well occupied. You know, there were only two--on Koji Island it was the prisoner situation and so forth, and then from there it was into the battle around the front and so forth. It was either one or the other all the time. So, our daily routine was such that we hardly knew what was going beyond our own immediate surroundings. Speaker 1: Yes, another thing is that I, from the time that I was growing up, and when I grew up my dad fought in World War II, but all the Korean War vets that I had met had been wounded. You know, my neighbor next door, a cousin of mine, my father-in-law, just everyone I knew that had been in the Korean War was wounded in some way or another. Speaker 2: The unit to which I was assigned, the 38th Infantry Regiment of the 2nd Division, had more casualties than any other regiment in the Korean War. It just happened to be engaged at the front, in the hot parts of the war. Speaker 1: Yeah, would you say the Korean War was more, the combat was more intense than in other-- Speaker 2: It was. Yeah, it was, it was confined to a limited space and so forth. Story_ID: 32934 Speaker 1: Uh, one result of my experience there was although I went back to work with the postal service after coming back home, the getting out experience then reached the front pages. And the military down with the Pentagon advertised for people who might help them with ventures they had in analyzing warfare with the use of this brand new thing called the computer. And the fact that I had combat experience and a mathematical background was such--and also a sufficiently clean record that I could hold a top secret security clearance, caused them to offer me a very profitable job with something called the Strategy and Tactics Analysis Group of the Army. And as a result I was hired and given responsible for a systems analyst, they called it. And I had the opportunity in the early days, in the '60's [1960s], to be sent up to the IBM plant in Poughkeepsie, New York to learn what these new machines were all about. And, unfortunately, after I retired--and I had to retire early when I was still in my fifties, because everybody else in my family required help. My mother [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson], and father [Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.], and my daughter [Leslie Gale Sanderson] by that time was completely helpless. My wife was sick, my mother and father were aging. Now my house is so full of wheelchairs and walkers that I can hardly move around--that they used, but I'm still around. Speaker 2: Okay. So you worked as a-- Speaker 1: The title varied. I think it was mathematician at some times and systems analyst at others. As a matter of fact, I think I retired as chief of what they call their modeling division. By model, of course, that's used in the mathematical sense. The attempt, and it was obviously futile, in the light of the Vietnam War was to somehow use a computer and mathematical analysis to visualize warfare from the enemy's standpoint in order to determine what his moves would be, and counteract them. It was sort of a probability test where you could rank certain probabilities and anticipate and prepare for his actions. Story_ID: 32935 Speaker 1: Now, the character of warfare--yeah, on the front lines, though, had changed after Korea. It was just obvious, because Vietnam was the first of the so-called modern series of undocumented, unplanned, casual, unperceived incidents which constitute warfare. So, Vietnam was an entirely different thing, and there really is no way to analyze that in a formal way with lines of troops as in the case of the American Civil War, for instance. And by measuring the heights of the hills and who has the advantage, which firearm has the most effective range or anything like that. It's all superfluous, when all the guy has to do is to step on what looks like a rock and it explodes and blows his leg off. Speaker 2: So, guerilla warfare... Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: ...doesn't really lend itself to that type of formal analysis... Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: ...that the computers were trying to-- Speaker 1: And that's what we face now, of course in the East everyday. And that's the way it will be for this country [the United States]. I don't think there's another country in the world which has the ability, much less the desire, to confront this country in the old-fashioned type of warfare which is why, to express the enmity, they resort to what they do now. Speaker 2: Guerilla tactics and-- Speaker 1: Precisely, right. Story_ID: 32936 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you retired as a systems analyst in-- Speaker 2: I believe the, my title at that time was systems analyst. Speaker 1: Okay. And you retired in your fifties? Speaker 2: Right. I retired, I think, in 1977. I was just fifty-six years old. I had been recommended for a promotion, but I decided it would be better for me to simply get out of the whole thing. And I retired also from the, from my commission as an infantry major at that time as well, because I felt that what life I had remaining would be better spent doing what I could for the disabled members of my own immediate family, since my sister and my younger brother were unable to do anything much for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Uh, now, when you look back on your career, what do you see as your legacy, when you look back on it? Speaker 2: I think my son, uh, yeah--in his own life, in his attitudes and his ambitions has every favorable quality I ever once showed, grace exponentially. And my desire now is to minimize the load that I place on him by becoming enfeebled and living so darn long. And, of course, my poor daughter [Leslie Gale Sanderson] has no control at all of anything below her neck. She has to be fed by someone because she can't hold a spoon, or drink from a cup. Her sight is so poor she cannot read. And she has feeble motion with her hands, but cannot hold anything. She cannot hold the telephone. So, she simply lies on her back waiting to stop breathing. Story_ID: 32937 Speaker 1: How have all these experiences in combat and in the family affected your philosophy of life? Speaker 2: Uh, it gives me the desire to do as much as I can as long as I can for those who mean so much. The result is that I contribute heavily to charities, to the Multiple Sclerosis Society, to the veterans' groups, to the people in--there's a Catholic mission down in Selma, Alabama I contribute to heavily, which is all I can do now. I can't physically do anything else because I no longer can drive or actually move around. But I feel that that's a small price to pay for my continued conversion of oxygen to carbon dioxide. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, once again, if you look back at everything you've done, is there anything if you could go back and change it, would you go back and change? Speaker 2: Uh, there are things which I really--as I mentioned, my actions on that--at the Morotai excursion are something that prey on me. But again, it is highly irrational for me to allow too much contemplation, because what is done is done. One thing about the mathematical mind is that there isn't much room for speculation, or undoing what is done. Story_ID: 32938 Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Uh, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: I'm hoping that the present trend of our youngsters being at the bottom of every measurement of academic skill will somehow change. There's no reason to believe, given the present situation, that it will happen, but I hope that it will. That's the only way I can express it, because there's no evidence or firm basis for any certainty that my generation, having opened the doors to places which were formerly forbidden, that they will go through those doors. They will not even stay in school enough to even graduate from high school, much less enter colleges. Meanwhile, the people from the Far East, as you know, are taking advantage of whatever opportunities they have, developing new techniques and equipment and will within the next fifteen or twenty years, dominate the world, leaving this country behind. And I foresee a deepening of the gulf between black youth and the legislative headquarters of the country because of the rise in crime and delinquency on the part of blacks, black youth, who populate the jails out of all proportion to their numbers, and also populate the rolls of the indigent in all proportion, out of all proportion to their numbers. And until they make it their business to acquire the skills that are necessary to earn an honest living in this highly technical society, that situation is going to continue. Story_ID: 32939 Speaker 1: Now, what significance--now, you've lived a long time, and you've seen a lot of change. Uh, what significance did the election of Barack Obama as President in 2008, what significance does that have, I guess going forward for you, having seen so much? Speaker 2: Uh, it causes me to be hopeful that the violent rhetoric which even members of Congress express about "I'm running in order to get a change in the White House" and so forth, that that will not result in some irrational behavior on the part of some half-drunk or mentally disturbed chap taking a shot at Obama or some member of his family. Such things have happened previously. Abraham Lincoln and so forth, and other presidents under similar circumstances have been the target of violence. And certainly the intensity of the feeling of "let's get rid of that guy" on the part of some of the Republican candidates for presidency, it is quite unusual, and they make no bones about it. And the people who support them express the same sentiments. Story_ID: 32940 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your parents [Yale Scott Manning Sanderson and Walter Benjamin Sanderson, Sr.] think about your success in the military and-- Speaker 2: Uh, one of the things which I do have some satisfaction about is the small honors I received in schooling and in supporting my family. I know that given the struggles that they have had to endure, let it raise their spirits to see some of their offspring having some measure of success in the world. Each of them, you see, lived past the age of ninety, and it really caused pleasure to them, as I know, for me to escort my mother to these bridge games and so forth, and to visit my father in his home and talk with him. Speaker 1: Alright, sir. Um, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I hope with forgiveness for the way that I've had to neglect my physical surroundings--we're in my cluttered house. And as someone who valued the life that my wife and my daughter [Leslie Gale Sanderson] and my son have left. They are, in their own characters, evidence of the kind of love which their mother and father have had for them. My daughter, for instance, somehow manages to maintain--at least when we're around--cheerful, even though she knows she is incurably and painfully ill and there is no cure. And my son continues to struggle in every way that a human being can to carry on. Speaker 1: Alright. Well, thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Story_ID: 32941 Speaker 1: I need you to come in and tell us about that photograph please, sir. Can you tell us what we're looking at? Speaker 2: Yeah. That is my father in his army uniform. Uh, it must have been taken about 1918. Speaker 1: What's your father's name? Speaker 2: Walter B. Sanderson, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, on the left, please? Speaker 2: On the left, that ugly dude is me, and it's taken after the, after World War II, but before I went back to Korea. Speaker 1: And on the right? Speaker 2: And on the right is my son, Walter B. Sanderson, III in his St. John's College uniform. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that is a later picture of my father. Speaker 1: Is it for an occasion or anything? Speaker 2: Uh, there's nothing to indicate a special occasion except that it is obvious that he is much older than the earlier photograph. And that was, is, a photograph of Yale Manning Sanderson. Yale Scott Manning Sanderson. Speaker 1: That's your mother, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is my mother, yeah. And that picture shows me in the uniform when I was a part of the 93rd Infantry Division. You can see part of the Blue Helmet patch on the left shoulder. Speaker 1: Uh huh. Speaker 2: And that is the love of my life, Juanita Bird Sanderson, who was my first, and our first marriage...