 Story_ID: 614488 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Mr. Sci [Frank Sci]. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: LaVerne Kenon Sci [HistoryMaker LaVerne Sci], L-A, capital V-E-R-N-E, K-E-N-O-N, S-C-I. Speaker 1: Okay, now is Kenon your-- Speaker 2: Maiden name. Speaker 1: --maiden name, okay, all right. Now, do you have a middle name otherwise? Speaker 2: Yes, Cecile. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: C-E-C-I-L-E. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your, oh, well, yeah, I have to ask you, what, what nationality is your last name? We have to get this on tape, so, what-- Speaker 2: It is a Sicilian name and it is one that has been changed due to political circumstances. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, the pronunciation of it or the whole thing? Speaker 2: The spelling, yes-- Speaker 1: The spelling, too, okay. Speaker 2: --and the pronunciation as well. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and that's, that's from your husband's side of the family? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 3rd, 1940. I was born in Jacksonville, Florida, even though my family resided in Lake City [Florida]. I was born in Jacksonville, because my father [Reubin Kenon] did not want his children to be born into a separate but equal facility, and the hospital in Lake City had a separate delivery room for black mothers and a different one, of course, for white mothers. The delivery room for white mothers had all lifesaving equipment available that was current at the time, and in the black delivery room, there was just only basic materials: a table, a stool, a light. And my father chose, in case of an emergency situation during the birth, that he would take us--take my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] to Jacksonville and she would remain there until she delivered and then once we were old enough to travel back, we came to our home in Lake City, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That was a legacy, a very special legacy. It told me something about him because he was such a quiet spoken person, I understand, but he was a person of action and I think that that demonstrated his thinking. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 25th, 19--24th, February 24, 24th, 2008 [sic. February 25, 2008]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're sitting in the visitor center at the Paul Laurence Dunbar State Memorial [Paul Laurence Dunbar House]. Speaker 1: Okay, in Dayton, Ohio? Speaker 2: In Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there, oh, I'm sorry, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am historic site manager of the Paul Laurence Dunbar State Memorial, here in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the facility is governed by the Ohio Historical Society [Ohio History Connection] and I am an employee of the Ohio Historical Society. Story_ID: 614489 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask everyone by management and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not particularly. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I'm between purple and various intensities of yellow. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I find spring to be so renewing and refreshing and every spring really accents, for me, a new beginning. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I would have to say probably Bangkok, Thailand (laughter), yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Pause) Seize the day. Story_ID: 614490 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Reubin Kenon] side but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Thelma Olivia Moore [Thelma Moore Evans], T-H-E-L-M-A, O-L-I-V-I-A, M-O-O-R-E. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 16th, 1913 in Vienna, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, is that V-I-E-- Speaker 2: N-N-A (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) N-N-A, okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can trace them about two generations back and they--my mother's people were Gartrells who were out of Savannah, Georgia and who resided in Washington, Georgia near--out from Washington, Georgia, on a very large farm. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Gartrell? Speaker 2: G-A-R-T-R-E-L-L, Gartrell. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, are there any stories from that side of the family about what they were doing two generations back? This would put us around 1850 or 1860, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes, they had a very expansive farm, large enough if they needed fish, they would just pull up baskets from the river. They raised sheep, horses, cows, had workers on the farm, because the crops were too vast for just the family. So families lived on the farm and they remained on their property until it was purchased by the United States government for the purpose of creating a reservoir. Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories from slavery or Reconstruction on that side of the family? Speaker 2: There's a very big story. My great-grandfather, whose brother was a senator in the State of Georgia, was very taken with my great-grandmother who had admixture, evidence of the admixture in her blood and as a result he could not marry her according to the laws of Georgia. Speaker 1: Now he was white then, apparently (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and his name was Frank Gartrell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he established this very large farm, like a plantation, out from Washington, Georgia and lived with my grandmother as his legal wife although they could not be married by the laws of Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: She was fair skinned and she was a descendant of probably a mixture in the previous generation. Speaker 1: Okay, now was he able to, well, in those days, I guess, you, you'd only have to deal with your neighbors, I guess, if there's going to be some kind of negative feedback. Did--how, how did people react to his, you know, having a black wife? I mean, in, even though it was, it had to be informal rather than formal? Speaker 2: They lived a semi isolated life and when they did have any interaction, he was a person of money and power. So he did not have to worry about intimidation or any difficulty socially in the community. Story_ID: 614491 Speaker 1: They lived a very fulfilled life. All of their children went to boarding school for school beyond grammar school and, and that was at Paine College. Paine had a high school, a boarding high school, Paine College, in Augusta, Georgia, and they all went to boarding school and remained at Paine College in Augusta, Georgia for college entrance and study at the college level. Speaker 2: Okay, now, is Paine--so, I guess, deducing that Paine College is a, is a black school [HBCU] or-- Speaker 1: It is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a Methodist school. Speaker 2: Okay, was it named for Daniel Paine [sic. Robert Paine]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, in Augusta, all right, all right. Now this is, okay, so, so there are, all the children were college educated? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And what did they do? What did they do? Speaker 1: Well, many of them--oh, well most of them are now deceased, but one worked at Paine for years and my [maternal] grandmother [Mattie Moore] became a full time housewife, because she had several children, many children to care for and my [maternal] grandfather [William Moore] was a minister. It was very interesting, he wrote her, after he left, after my grandfather left Paine and he had entered Gammon Theological Seminary in Atlanta [Georgia], he wrote my great-grandfather [Frank Gartrell (ph.)] a letter for permission to wife my grandmother and permission was given. They got married and she raised six children, although she had more than six. Two died in infancy and early childhood and so she was a housewife. The other, they were teachers and for the most part they attended summer school and they did cultural things (laughter). They were very productive people. I can't say that, at that time, I would consider any of them working for change in any way. That was a time when African Americans were pretty much beginning to think of themselves as being bluebloods or high society (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, so they were part of the high society-- Speaker 1: In that-- Speaker 2: --black community? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 614492 Speaker 1: So your mother [Thelma Moore Evans] was, was born in Vienna, Georgia. Is that, is that near Atlanta [Georgia] then? Is it, or-- Speaker 2: It's probably closer to Macon [Georgia]. It's right near Cordele, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's right near Cordele. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you? Or what do you know about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well, her father [William Moore] was indeed a trained theologian who, as I said earlier, had not only gone to Paine where he met my grandmother [Mattie Moore], but her father was also one who would seek business opportunity. He ran a store in the community and he was also a Methodist minister. So, the focus on a level of entrepreneurship really did influence my uncles in their early life and it was a family kind of grocery store. And he was later transferred from Georgia to Danville, Illinois. See, the Methodist church transfers the ministers, and in Danville he also established a successful family grocery store and he was minister of the church there. It was at that time, however, that my grandmother died and the children were separated. My--they were separated according to age and relatives who were able to take them, because my grandfather then was later called to Texas and to Dallas, Texas, and my mother then went back to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] where she had--where my grandmother had gone to high school and early college. My mother then became a student at Paine College in Georgia with her sister, Theratha [Theratha Moore]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So mother moved back to-- Speaker 2: Georgia. Speaker 1: --Georgia, to Paine. Now this is in Atlanta now, right? They're, they're, Paine is in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Augusta. Speaker 1: Augusta, Augusta, that's right, you said Augusta, Georgia, that's right. So they're in Augusta so she, she grew up the rest of, her growing up was in Augusta? Speaker 2: Pretty much excepting for the fact that she spent her summers with her aunts and while living with one aunt, Aunt Ida [ph.], she met my father [Reubin Kenon]. They met and married and then my mother moved to Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her sister met and married a little before her, the son of Dr. William Decker Johnson who was a bishop in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church and they moved in a different direction but my mother then moved to Florida. Story_ID: 614493 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Thelma Moore Evans] have any stories that, about growing up that, you know, would be interesting to us? Speaker 2: Yes. My grandmother [Mattie Moore] would never let them play with white children, and that was because many years back, it was not uncommon for whites of certain economic levels, to live in a general proximity with blacks and their children would play together and form a friendship. But society would separate them within--well society would separate them as they grew up, as they went to different schools and went to different churches and then they socially moved away from each other. Well, there was this white family, they had a little girl that they were very proud of, she was maybe five years old, and she would often play with the black neighbor and one day the family found the little girl dead in the ditch. And without asking, they immediately went to the little boy's family, knocked on the door, demanded they surrender him, they took him and killed him in revenge, because they decided. And after they had killed the little black boy, the hit and run driver that had hit the child came back to confess and apologize and to try and make, make good, a bad situation, and that's when the white family realized that they had rushed to judgment on the little black boy, but he was dead and it couldn't change, nothing could change. Speaker 1: Okay, so this happened when your mother was growing up-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Augusta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Not necessarily in Augusta, maybe when they were in Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my grandmother would never let her children play with white children. I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause, I guess, the implication is if something happened to them, then the black children would be blamed for it? All right. Speaker 2: Oh definitely, yes, without question, without, so, my grandmother was very, very cautious and I heard about that story so many times until, as you can guess, my mother did not allow us to form any close allegiances with--of course we didn't have much of an opportunity because we lived in a strongly divided town, separate but equal town, in northern Florida [Lake City, Florida] and we did not interact with whites except in business and political situations or medical situations but on a daily basis, it was possible to go through an entire week without seeing a white person and that wasn't problematic at all. Story_ID: 614494 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Reubin Rushen Kenon [Reubin Kenon], R-E-U-B-I-N, R-U-S-H-E-N, K-E-N-O-N. Speaker 1: All right, now is there any story behind the middle name, Rushen? I've near heard that before. Speaker 2: No, I can only say that my great-grandfather, who was a slave, the little research I've been able to do on that side of the family, was named Briton [Briton Kenon]. Briton was my slave ancestor and his wife was Amanda [Amanda Kenon] and Briton's sister was named Lear [Lear Kenon], like King Lear. So, I cannot, I've not done any research on the name but Rea [ph.], Reubin Rushen Kenon, they all had unique names for the most part. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born August 6th, and I would just have to say, thirty-eight years before 1944, because I don't often think of his date of birth. I know he died in 1944, two days before his birthday. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born, well let's see, he was born before your mother [Thelma Moore Evans] then, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was older than my mother. He was born, I'm sorry, he expired August 4th, 1944 at thirty-eight years of age. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: And I might add that though I do not have very many memories of him, I have had many stories of his work and sacrifice to share--shared with me from his relatives, my mother, people in the community. But most of all I'd like to say that my father grew up on a farm. His father [Andrew Kenon] raised crops, and he did not want his sons to go to school. My grandfather's thinking was, his farm was sustaining for generations; all they had to do was work that land. My grandfather had, I believe, five sons and he enjoyed assigning the farm work and the field work, like hoeing the potatoes, to his various sons and then he would hold them to completing that work. Well, my father was the only one in the whole family that had a burning desire to go to school, and my grandmother [Nancy Kenon] was very tolerant of his desire. So, she would get him up, four o'clock in the morning--the moon would be in the sky--and would go out to the field and help him to hoe that crop. Let's say my grandfather had assigned him five rows to do, long rows, my grandmother would help him as much as she could that morning. Then he would leave and go to school. One day, my grandfather came home and counted the rows assigned to each son, and my father had not finished his, because he went to school and he took the leather line off the plow, the hand plow, and beat my father until he was unconscious. And after that point on, my grandmother always, if my daddy had not finished his work assigned him, she would get it done throughout the day as she had a few moments. My grandfather was a very handsome person who would hitch up his mule and wagon and leave during the day and leave the farm and leave work assigned. And my grandfather, I'm sorry, my father walked to elementary school like that and then he walked to high school which was in Quincy. This is Quincy, Florida. He lived in an area called St. John out from Quincy, Florida. Story_ID: 614495 Speaker 1: And then after high school, my [paternal] grandfather [Andrew Kenon] had no tolerance for my father's [Reubin Kenon] dreams, because my father really wanted to go to college and my grandfather just saw no need for it. And there was one other person in his community that had the same kind of desire and that was LaSalle Leffall [LaSalle D. Leffall, Sr.]. So my father and LaSalle Leffall-- Speaker 2: Now this is LaSalle Leffall who becomes the-- Speaker 1: That's his father. Speaker 2: --international--okay. Speaker 1: That's his father. Okay. Speaker 2: My father and his friend, LaSalle, Sr., walked to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] from Quincy [Florida]. Often, the only food they had was just the food their mothers had put in a bag for them more pieces of cake that they could take back with them. And as they walked those miles, they walked to school and when they went home for Christmas vacation or Easter vacation, if they dared to go, because both of them had to work in order to stay in school, but if they dared to go, they would have to walk all the way back to Quincy. And then once my father got in Quincy, he had to walk to the other side of Quincy on to St. John [Quincy, Florida] which was a few miles further. I think LaSalle Leffall lived a little closer to Quincy or right in Quincy, on the edge of Quincy, as my father did not. And as they walked, they dreamed in those days. They said, "Well, our sons won't have to do this because we're going to make doctors out of our sons." And it is ironic but true that LaSalle Leffall, Sr. is the father to LaSalle Leffall, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.] who is internationally respected as a cancer researcher and a professor in the school of medicine at Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. He is the, yeah. Speaker 2: And his, even his daughter, Dolores [Dolores Leffall], is a--LaSalle sister, LaSalle Jr.'s sister, is a very recognized librarian and I think she retired from the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. [sic.]. So, it's really interesting how these experiences allowed us to touch other people at other state, other dreams, allowed other people to develop and it's really interesting to see how some of those dreams were fulfilled and how many have gone on to serve as the result of those who were downtrodden having the desire to dream. Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you about the deep ancestors going all the way back to slavery. Do you know anything about them on your father's side? Speaker 2: Yes, my [paternal] great-grandfather was Briton [Briton Kenon] and my grandmother was Amanda [Amanda Kenon]. They were not allowed to marry before the abolition of slavery. They had several children, because they had been put together by the master of the plantation and having several children, they desired to keep their family unit and their son, Andrew [Andrew Kenon], was my grandfather. I don't know a lot about Amanda but I might say, I did a bit of research on Briton, who was my great-grandfather and when I found out (crying), he was sold at public auction two times, and I've read about the auction in Atlanta [Georgia], how degrading it was and when I thought about my great-grandfather encountering that kind of human degradation, probably standing on the auction block nude, probably the victim of sexually explicit, explicit demands, I found it very, very disturbing. Story_ID: 614496 Speaker 1: Could you repeat some of what you said about what happened to your grandfather and LaSalle Leffall's, I mean, father, I mean, your father [Reubin Kenon] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) LaSalle Leffall's, LaSalle Sr. [LaSalle D. Leffall, Sr.] and my father -- Speaker 1: And your father. Speaker 2: --being very good friends, kind of kept their schedules close together and because it was Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] at the time, they got jobs in the barn. They had to take care of animals and they really had time to study but they had almost zero social life. They did not have time for social activities. It was a very focused time in their lives and they both, surprisingly, ended up doing pretty much the same thing. LaSalle's father became principal of Gadsden County Schools in Quincy, Florida and my father was principal of Columbia County schools [Columbia County School District] during the separate but equal days. He was really the director of black education in Columbia County [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was colored education in those days. Speaker 1: Okay, so they both became principals of, of colored-- Speaker 2: Of high schools, of colored schools. Speaker 1: Colored schools, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Or Negro schools at the time. Story_ID: 614497 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: My mother [Thelma Moore Evans] was with her Aunt Ida [ph.] on their farm which was a very big farm, and my father [Reubin Kenon] was principal of a school nearby, there in Georgia. And the principal asked to visit my mother and they decided to marry and I'm trying to--Byromville, Georgia is where that big farm was, Byromville, Georgia, and-- Speaker 1: Byromville, okay. Speaker 2: --it was the Tinsley farm. That was a time when African Americans really owned expansive farms in terms of acreage, and so my mother married there. Speaker 1: So was your mother a student of your father's or, or what wa- ? Speaker 2: No, my, my mother was at my aunt's when she met him but she had been a student at Paine College [Augusta, Georgia]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Paine College, and that's where she went to college. Speaker 1: And your father, at that time, was a principal of a school in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Byromville? Speaker 2: Out from Byromville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was another town, I don't remember just which town it was but adjacent to Byromville and, was another little town-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he started keeping company with my mother. Story_ID: 614498 Speaker 1: Now, in that central house, there in Byromville [Georgia], is where, I think, my [maternal] grandparents [Mattie Moore and William Moore] married as well in the home, house there, on that farm. And my grandfather's best man, I'm told, was, I believe, Howard Thurman. Howard Thurman and my grandfather were friends and roommates during their early training. Speaker 2: Okay, so they were both--well, your grandfather was a theologian, you said-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --on your mother's side? Yeah, right, okay, all right. So maternal grandfather's friend, Howard Thurman, okay, and Howard Thurman, just for the record here, so somebody listening to this who doesn't know, is a great theologian-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Howard University [Washington, D.C.], considered a mystic in theological terms, you know, one of the great orators of the 20th century, I guess, in terms of theology. Speaker 1: Yes, he went on and stayed in his career. My grandfather later had the burden of college educating six children after the death of his wife. So, his children pretty much took his focus, they became his raison d'etre, getting them out of college. Story_ID: 614499 Speaker 1: So your, your parents [Thelma Moore Evans and Reubin Kenon] meet down there, near Byromville [Georgia] and they're married? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met or just, they just, you just know they met there or-- Speaker 2: I just know they met there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, so they get married about what year? Speaker 2: Around 1936. Speaker 1: Okay, 1936. So this is the mid-Depression-- Speaker 2: Which was June 16th. Speaker 1: Great Depression, okay. Speaker 2: June 16th, I believe, 1936. Speaker 1: Okay, and where did they live? Did they stay there first or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I think my mother was in Georgia with him for a short time but he was in the process of relocating to Florida, because he wanted to get back to Florida. And it was about that time that he attained the position in Columbia County, Florida, or Lake City, Florida, and they went to Lake City. Upon arriving in Lake City, they rented spaces with two families to live, like a bedroom, until they built a house and my father found a piece of property, fourth of a city block, cleared it himself and built our house, himself. Speaker 1: So he did the con- the building work himself? Speaker 2: Yes, he really enjoyed the process of construction. Even after our house was built, he built some of the furniture that was in our house and during his principalship there at Richardson High School in Lake City, Florida, there were times when they realized that they were just really crushed for space and the instructional space for the courses that they needed to offer just wasn't sufficient. So, my father stayed after school and got the larger boys to stay with him when they could and together they built an agricultural building that was still in use even when I was in high school. It was a very sturdy building and a very attractive building. On one side was room for instruction, and then another side there was room for activity, constructing activity with the various machines and what have you. And I might say, from that time, I was not in high school at the time, I was really little, but at that time, those young men who stayed after school to help work on the building surprisingly went into the field of construction and many of them have had very successful careers as contractors of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They learned the basics. Speaker 1: So when your father went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], he learned all the agricultural and mechanical skills, I mean, he, he learned how to put things together with his hand, own hands. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And, that's remarkable. Speaker 2: And as, and as well as to care for animals and to--he learned agricultural, but he qualified for educational training, too. So he was a principal after he left. Story_ID: 614500 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember being with my daddy [Reubin Kenon], who was always busy. Being with my daddy, in the back, it was like a porch, but it was really the white school, and we were picking up books, putting them into the back of his car. And some of the books I would, I noticed, I would carry maybe two, and he'd carry an armful and he was putting them on the backseat and the back floor of the car. Some of the books didn't have backs on them, they had chewing gum, pencil marks, some had missing pages, they were torn. But those were the books he was picking up from the white school to take to the black school for the coming year, because at that time, all new books in the county [Columbia County, Florida] went to the white school. I also remember when he'd have to go to faculty meetings at night. I really hated to see him go. I'd wake up in the morning and there would be a box of butter cookies on my pillow. They were kind of square and long in a yellow and white packaging and, oh, I would be so happy when I'd wake up and find those butter cookies and in addition, I remember the terror too. I think I might have even been younger. We would sit on the sofa with my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] and all lights would be out and there would be sirens going in the neighborhood, that was during World War II [WWII], and I guess I was a baby and my father was a--like a air raid warden for the black community and he'd put on some identification on his shoulder and get these lanterns and he'd go out and he would always say, "I have to help out people." He would always tell me that, "I have to help out people." So that whole concept of really staying in touch and helping out people was something that was driven home to me at a very early age. Story_ID: 614501 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: In my elementary school, we didn't have any organizations as such because segregation was really good as I look back on it, because our community was so cohesive at the time. I find that as a result of integration, we are far less cohesive as a people but in a segregated community, we all had a common enemy and we all knew where we stood and we all just knew the facts as they were. And as a result, there was so much unity. We didn't have a lot of school organizations but we had such a close knit community that we had special church programs and even if there was a big church program and singers at one church, we all attended. And, additionally, segregated facilities on our playground when I was a child in elementary school, rendered us with just really dirt. You know in Florida, there's sand, they rendered us with just dirt for the most part and plants, and the grass wasn't always cut. Sometimes, the grass was a bit wild, but, you know, that's when we rose to a level of creativity that we found so much fun. As a very young child in elementary school and I know by fourth grade, we would go during recess and we would sit over on the side of the campus where the wild grass grew in a patch and we would take it and pretend it was hair and we would practice our braiding. That's where I learned to braid hair, braiding the grass. Additionally, we had an opportunity to do things arithmetically on campus. A lot of our games that we played, we had each other to play with, a lot of our games were just full of rhythm like (singing), "Shake, shake, shake, I am a funny little Dutch girl, as funny as funny can be," those kind of games we got so much enjoyment out of. Or we could take a stick and draw a line in the sand and create a court and we could play what we call, handball with the basketball. Then, you talk about fun. We would take a log and a board and put that log across the board like a seesaw. The only thing is it would be lower than a seesaw today and then one person would jump on it and the other person would go high into the air, then come right back down and that person would go high. The skill became to do what you call, jumping springboard and do tricks. Open your legs, do a split, put your arms up and all of those activities were so skill building, so creative. Of course, there were accidents and people did get hurt, but by the time I was, I guess, fifth grade, we had swings on the playground but they were those big heavy swings that once they hit you in the head or something, you were, you were really damaged and additionally, I was swinging just one time and the person would hold onto the seat to push you higher and the person almost pushed the seat out from under me and I was going higher and higher. Then the person started holding my ankles to push, to thrust me forward and subsequently pulled me out of the swing and once I had that good fall, I wasn't much of a swinger anymore but that's when they had the big heavy steel swings. We did have a swing set but other than that, we really did not have playground equipment but it stirred our creativity and we found all kinds of fun ways to stay busy, playing singing games, rhythm games and our water fountain outside, of course this is Florida where it's warm, after we played our running games and our activities, of course, we were thirsty before time to go in. We didn't have water fountains, we had like a long trough, a wooden trough with just many spigots and we'd hold the hand like that to catch the water and drink the water and it was wonderful water (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have to pump the water at all or didn't it just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --was it just running all the time? Speaker 2: We had spigots. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we could turn on the spigot, take your hand and hold it and drink the water. Story_ID: 614502 Speaker 1: Now, in first and second grade, I attended a country school and it was in the country and, yes, we would have to pump the water then. It was a two room school. The first room had first, second and third grade, I think, and the next room had fourth, fifth and sixth, and half of that room, of course, there weren't many by the time you got that high, was seventh and eighth, because there were no school buses in those days. So, it was, this was immediately after my father's [Reubin Kenon] death and my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] started working for the first time as a teacher. She was assigned to that country school. There was no child care for young African American children. So, the superintendent told my mother, "Well just take her on with you." And as a result, in that two room school, serving through the eighth grade, I sat with the first grade group, and the superintendent came out one day and said, "Well, just let her go on with the group." I was four years old. So, as a result, I started school when I was four at that country school, King's Welcome was the name of it. It was a very sandy school. We could go out to play and come in just really full of sand. Speaker 2: So that's your first school, King, King's Welcome? Speaker 1: King's Welcome. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was no elementary school, it was just King's Welcome School [Columbia County, Florida] and children who had finished the eighth grade or who had exhausted participation in that school who wanted to go further, would often come to the school, walk to the school and meet us at the end by where our cars were parked when my mother was getting in the car. And I remember one young lady had really big eyes, and her eyes would just be full of water and she would come and talk to my mother and wanted to know when were they going to get school buses, because she wanted to go to high school. And my mother would always say, well, you know, I thought they were going to have them this year and she'd give them, give the information. Well, that young lady went on to, she finally got a school bus to take her to high school and she went on to great heights in the State of Florida and she majored in home economics and she's in my hometown now and she's one of the most contributing, most developed people in my town, in my community and I remember when, out of her big eyes, tears dropped because she so badly wanted that school bus ride to go to high school. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: I'll just give the first name. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her name was Celestine [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 614503 Speaker 1: Now, were they--now this is Florida, now did, those of us who haven't grown up in Florida, did, now were there, there, did you encounter crocodile, I mean, no, alligators and such or big snakes and things down there in Florida? Speaker 2: Well, of course, but, you know, animals shy away from places that are noisy and, of course, once or twice a year there was a snake that come across the school grounds and, and in some cases they might have been dangerous but adults were summoned and they took care of the problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Most interestingly was in high school [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida], we had a teacher who would always take us as juniors or seniors in our civics class, to Olustee, Florida. Olustee is a location that Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] wrote about and we would go to Ocean Pond which was this-- Speaker 1: Right, it was a site of a Civil War battle-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --where black soldiers-- Speaker 2: Three black soldiers-- Speaker 1: --one, yeah. Speaker 2: --three black, black units perished, pretty much in that lake. And we would go, that's Ocean Pond, it is a colossal lake. At night, when those soldiers were preparing to cross, they couldn't see the other side. They had no idea that lake was that big. I had no idea that that was the lake I had grown up visiting as a child. Well, when we would go for our school picnics or our school celebrations, major senior trips, the girls would change into their bathing suits on the bus and the boys would change in the woods for the most part and then after changing, we'd look way across and we could see the cabanas and the umbrellas and the, the symbols of middle class beauty on a lake that we didn't have. All we had was a pier and water and cypress tree knees and pine trees but that didn't make any difference. We would just have fun. We would get out, we would make noise and upon making noise, we knew that most creepy crawlers would move away and in many cases we'd see a V forming and it would be an alligator moving away, and after some time we would go into the water. But, yes, we were taught as children in elementary school in Florida to always walk looking down because you can step on a dangerous snake. You could step on a snake but in Florida there are three very potentially deadly snakes that are native to the area. Speaker 1: I think there's another thing that I, you know, come, come to mind is that, now was food easy to come by in Florida with, with the great growing season and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Even now, the farmers will many times, when your--when their crops are depleted as far as the selling for the season, they will invite people in the, in Lake City [Florida] out to their farm to pick all they want, because the food is still abundant on the vine. Growing watermelon, they don't really ship them after a certain level of ripeness so if a person has say, five acres or ten acres of watermelon on the vine that's very, very ripe, they'll just ask the people to come out and get them themselves and get all they want. So food is abundant in a warmer area. Speaker 1: So that didn't make it, that kind of ameliorated some of the effects of the Depression [Great Depression], I guess, up to-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, plus there are longer growing seasons there, too, because it is a different climate. So, through the various growing seasons, people didn't have as much difficulty. And keep in mind, there were just so many natural foods that grew naturally. Wild grapes are good. Plums, you could just be going through the woods and come across a plum tree and so many natural fruits are available in Florida. Story_ID: 614504 Speaker 1: What were you like as a little girl? What did you like to do and-- Speaker 2: Well, as a little girl, I had experienced the trauma of losing one of my parents very early and-- Speaker 1: So when did your father [Reubin Kenon] pass away? Speaker 2: My father passed away when I was four years old, and I didn't understand the concept of death, but his coffin was brought back to our living room for the wake, a long wake, all night, before the funeral the next day at the church, when he was carried and people walked behind it to the church. He had two funerals, as I recall, one in Lake City [Florida] and one in the church that he grew up in in Quincy, Florida. And the one in Lake City really confused me, because when I got to the funeral, people were carrying long swords and there were, these men had on hats that were different, and I looked at my father's body and there was this apron that he had on in the coffin. Well, I understand now that he was a 33rd Degree Mason, but that's when I came to see the, the--another side of my father that I was not aware of, but I was really, really focused on that. And then a lot of the bishops came to speak at his funeral and I remember the funeral in Quincy. We had two funerals. Story_ID: 614505 Speaker 1: And I was, I think I started a love of dance very early in my life and I so much wanted to dance. I wanted dance training and my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] could not find a teacher of dance in Lake City [Florida] who would teach me. So she drove me sixty miles to Jacksonville, Florida to--for instruction, dance instruction, which was on a Saturday and the teacher at Stanton High School [Stanton College Preparatory School, Jacksonville, Florida] did not have the facility of the gym to teach me on a Saturday because she too was at home and I could only go on Saturday, because my mother was teaching. And so she just moved her coffee table back, would pull her furniture back, and her living room became my dance studio and I learned some skills there in her living room that carried me through a long experience in dance, very, very basic skills that I continued to use effectively on through elementary school, high school [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida] and to college and I danced with the Hampton orchesis [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] as well. Story_ID: 614506 Speaker 1: Yeah, your first days in dance. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And fortunately by the time I was in the tenth grade, a teacher came to Lake City [Florida] named Mrs. Burnell Turner who just really was herself, a very developed dancer. And she chose me as head majorette and at the same time I danced solo with our high school dance organization [at Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida], and that was the beginning of my exposure to more extensive choreography, because we're still talking about the days of separate but equal, and we had very large programs, once or twice a year. Because our community really thrived for those annual programs that were expected and it was something like the spring revue, was like a follies. We would all have costumes and we would have our routines all practiced and every family in the community was sitting there in anticipation of their child's performance and it was just an exciting time to be black in my community. Our, our programs were always delivered to standing room only crowds and when we danced, we learned to dance various forms of dance. We did a minimal of tap. We did modern. We did just a bit of ballet. We did jazz and then we did some things that were typical of the time and a little bit of, say, maybe the old days like (singing), "Hit that jive, jive," (makes sound), you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, so some of the popular music. Speaker 2: Some of the more popular things, yes. Speaker 1: Now, was it--did you become attracted to dance in school? Were they teaching dance already in school when you-- Speaker 2: Well, she had a dance group in high school, and she was a physical education teacher and, of course, many-- Speaker 1: I, I'm asking when did you become interested in dance? Was it because of your teachers or did you see yourself-- Speaker 2: I really became interested in dance from about second or third grade on when my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] would take me to my dance lessons in Jacksonville [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was so interested in dance that I convinced my aunt, who was living in Champaign, Illinois, to let me come live with her for a year there in Champaign and go to Champaign Junior High School [Champaign, Illinois] when I got in seventh grade, as she did, then I had a chance to study dance and violin, my favorite instrument and piano and at the same time but I got to missing my mother and my home, so I went home for eighth grade, then I went back to Champaign for my ninth grade year and I graduated from junior high school in Champaign, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, well let's, let me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had danced every step of the way. Story_ID: 614507 Speaker 1: Let me walk you through--now you started off at King's Welcome School [Columbia County, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was your next school? Speaker 2: My next school was College Park Elementary [College Park Elementary School] in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You see, after two years at King's Welcome School, my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] became dean of women at Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Edward Waters College is pretty much like Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], it's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school. Bishop Tookes [Henry Y. Tookes] was the bishop who was there at the time. I was in the third grade and only for that one year because by the time I was in fourth grade, my mother went back to her home in Lake City [Florida] and she started working in the public school system year, that, that year, and from that point, fourth grade on, my mother remained employed in Columbia County [Florida], but in seventh and ninth grades, I did go to Champaign [Illinois] so that I could study dance. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of your school in Champaign? Speaker 2: Champaign Junior High School [Champaign, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Champaign Junior High School, okay. Speaker 2: And there I really enjoyed the photography club and taking pictures of speakers at assemblies and participating in the orchestra. It was the first time I had ever played in a group because I was never a member of a band but I did participate in the orchestra. Speaker 1: Now, there's one other big feature about Champaign, I guess, it would be different from, I assume it's different from Florida. This is an integrated school, right, at Champaign? Speaker 2: Yes, it was integrated, yes. Speaker 1: Now how did you, this is the first time you were in school with white people? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you--how did you find that? I mean, was it, I mean-- Speaker 2: It wasn't problematic because all of my teachers were accommodating and kind, and I did what they expected me to do. Although socially in the seventh grade, I shared my music stand with a little white girl who became my really good friend. She would call me in the evenings and we would talk on the telephone and two or three times we decided to meet downtown and go to the movie, at the Orpheum Theater [Champaign, Illinois] and afterwards we went to the ten cent store and we had a cherry Coke [Coca-Cola] together, then we got on our respective buses and went home. She-- Speaker 1: Now they didn't make you sit in the balcony at the Orpheum, now? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, in my hometown we did, but not at the Orpheum in Champaign. We enjoyed a movie together, we'd go back to the ten cent store, sit down together and have a cherry Coke, then she would get on her respective bus and go to her community, I got on my bus. And we had so much fun that year as seventh graders and when I went back as a ninth grader, I had just bounced in that school, because I had sent her cards during the year that I was away and I, I couldn't wait for my orchestra class that day and I said, "I'm back," because she hadn't looked me up and I had written her and told her I was coming. So, I went to orchestra class and I just greeted her with a big smile and she just looked down and I couldn't understand her coldness. So I asked for a restroom pass and I went to the girls' restroom and I cried. That was the first time I had blatantly faced that kind of disappointment and she must have been sensitive to it because she came into the girls' restroom while I was still standing there, and I didn't want her to see me crying, I remember that and standing right by the sinks, she said, "Oh, LaVerne [HistoryMaker LaVerne Sci], you know I remember you and you'll always be my friend. You know I liked you, I still do but you see my mother said that I'm growing up, and I'm becoming a young lady, therefore, I must have white friends and I can't be your friend anymore." And, you know, when she said that, she turned and she walked away and, you know, it was the first time that I really felt like something dirty just because my skin was brown, that I was not deserving of her appreciation or her family's appreciation because from my point of view, my people were college trained people, I had been exposed to better things than she had but yet she looked down on me just because of the color of my skin and I think that was my first major encounter with race jumping up at me and, of course, I had pride. You know, like Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] said, "We wear the mask" ['We Wear the Mask']. So, for the rest of that year, if she was sitting over there, I was looking over here, playing my violin or I made it very clear that I didn't need her in my life. I did not go around saying, "Oh please, let me be your friend." No I didn't and--but I would have to say deep in my heart-- Story_ID: 614508 Speaker 1: Then by the same token, at that level in my life, there were--it was confusing because there were other white kids who went out of their way to do something for me. For instance, I had always wanted to be a Girl Scout and there were girls in my class, particularly in the ninth grade, who were advanced Girl Scouters, and they said, "Oh, LaVerne [HistoryMaker LaVerne Sci], I'll get you a costume." No, it was my seventh grade year, "I'll get you my--." I was always small at the time, "I'll get you my uniform, you can take my uniform and you can come join our troop and you can come to our church, our church troop." Well it never dawned on me, but they told me to come, I asked my aunt if I could go, she said yes. So after school that day, on the other side of West Side Park [Champaign, Illinois], I went to that church and when I walked in there saying I'm joining the Girl Scout troop, it took the scout masters about three troop meetings to tell me that I did not belong there. Now, ironically, I was invited by the scouts and dressed by the scouts, but it was the scout masters who told me that perhaps I would do well to start a troop in my church and this was a scout troop for members only of that church. I felt rejection and I've got to admit, when I became a Girl Scout leader for my daughters [LaFrae Sci and LaTania Sci] when they were in elementary school and junior high school, I wrote the Girl Scout foundation [Girls Scouts of the United States of America] and I told them what year I was refused membership in a troop just because I was not a member of that church and they credited me. You know, in the Girl Scouts, there's a record of your membership. They credited me for all those years and I thought that was so very kind of them. Story_ID: 614509 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up for you? I mean, I know your [maternal] grandfather [William Moore] was a minister-- Speaker 2: My grandfather was a minister, my uncle in Champaign [Illinois] was a minister. My mother [Thelma Moore Evans] was always an organist in the church so I was always there when she was there and she would usually go early because prelude has to start before the service and so the musician has to be there. So-- Speaker 1: So this is the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What's the name of your church that you-- Speaker 2: Mt. Pisgah A.M.E. Church [New Mt. Pisgah A.M.E. Church] in Lake City, Florida is the church I grew up in and, yes, it was a part of my life experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Plus Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida] was an A.M.E. school, and my mother had been dean of women there and I, the bishop there gave me a gold watch, I remember that. I'll never forget my gold watch that Bishop Tookes [Henry Y. Tookes] gave me plus he had a little mini zoo at a time when zoos were not frequented by black people and museums were not readily available to people of color and other cultural institutions. Bishop Tookes, in his backyard, had cages of exotic animals that were well cared for, and we could go in his backyard and see monkeys and parrots and other animals that we could not see in a zoo. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: I think it was T-O-O-K-S, [sic.] Tookes, Bishop Tookes. Speaker 1: Okay, I know some Tukes in Chicago [Illinois] spell it, T-U-K-E-S, but I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't know, that was 1946. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 614510 Speaker 1: Where'd you go to high school? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to the school where my father [Reubin Kenon] had labored to build and embellish for our community [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida]. My father had taken some big criticism for things that he believed in, and one item that I knew was controversial, and had been controversial, was the fact that my father remained at work one day, many days really. But on this particular day, it was about five o'clock and he was asked to come out to the athletic field where the football team was practicing, and one boy had been tackled and he did not get up, and to my father's regret, sincere regret, he then touched the boy and the boy was already dead. His neck had been broken in that practice scrimmage and his neck had been broken because he was not wearing sufficient equipment. There again, football team equipment came from the white high school, the stuff that they were throwing away, and the football players would take the shoulder pads that were ripped and padding had come out of, they would take it home to their mothers and their mother would skillfully and painfully stuff it again and sew it up, and my father looked at that boy on the ground and my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] often told me that he decided at that juncture that there would be football at that high school again when those young boys would have proper equipment to protect their lives, that it was not worth--they wanted to take that because they knew they could get scholarships to go to school. It was a, it was a ticket out to a better way of life. And my father, when he saw that it was a ticket out of this life for some, he just limited football participation, and when football started again, when I was in elementary school, it was pretty much the same practice. The football players who were in my class still were using old outdated equipment from the football team at Columbia High School [Lake City, Florida], but all of that started to change with the nearing of integration and integration itself. Story_ID: 614511 Speaker 1: So, you went to, did you go to Richardson High School [Lake City, Florida]? Is that-- Speaker 2: Richardson High School, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. So, you were there all four years and now you said you were a cheerleader, that's one thing-- Speaker 2: High school, high school was tenth, eleventh and twelfth at that time. So, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay, so three years. Speaker 2: --I was there for all three years. Speaker 1: Okay, now were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: I would have to say so. You've got to remember I was young and when we started our dance, many times we could get excused from our classes to go to dance practice. It was very easy to do during chemistry class, because the chemistry instructor had only two, I believe, two beakers, a Bunsen burner and a little bit of sodium, and once in a year he would throw the sodium on the water for the reaction, voom, and then we understood that chemistry was about chemicals reacting on each other. But he was single when he first started teaching us so he would go out and buy items to do experiments and to make his classes interesting, but after he got married, he no longer had the money to spend for supplies to supplement his classes. I think he became a little disgusted, and if any of us had to go to band practice, if we had to go to majorette practice or dance practice or if we had anything to do, we could go to him and get admission to do it during his class period. However, that's not to say that we didn't learn something about chemistry. We learned the periodic table. We learned rote items that we could learn theoretically, but we had no--we had two big desks with a sink in the room and we just did not have sufficient laboratory equipment or chemicals to move very far in chemistry. So that was just an example, and I think I would often try to say, "Well, I need to do such and such at school today and, yes, I'll do that during my chemistry period," so. Speaker 1: Okay, so what are some of the other activities you're involved in? Were you still in orchestra then? Speaker 2: No, there was not violin instruction in my high school. I had done that in Champaign [Illinois]. But I was head majorette; I was the acrobatic majorette. I did flips, cartwheels, turned two fire batons at one time (laughter). I did one very well but I did twirl two. And when I say one very well, I really focused on doing most of my skills and stunts with one baton for safety and I did two occasionally just for effect. But aside from being a majorette, I worked with the school girl patrol, and we would raise money because we always had a dream of going to Washington and we never made that trip. But we wanted to go to Washington to see the monuments and the buildings and to see Washington, D.C. and we were never able to get that trip to become a reality. We ran from one hurdle to the other but you better believe we sold small potato pies at basketball games. We sold potato salad, we sold boiled peanuts. Boiled peanuts are, if you ever go to a Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] game, they're a staple for people who go to athletic activities in the southern part of the United States. Speaker 1: Yeah, the boiled peanuts are specialty items from there and they sell them in cans now. You can get 'em but it's not the--it doesn't-- Speaker 2: Well, these, we would have ours in a bag. We would sell boiled peanuts and potato salad with salad, with soda crackers and in addition, like I said, the little potato pie, in the small crust, we would sell. We worked hard and we, we worked and dreamed that it would happen but it never did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, did you have a favorite class in, I'm sorry, is there something? Speaker 2: I enjoyed my literature class and I enjoyed civics. Story_ID: 614512 Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were talking about Mrs. Lofton [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs. Lofton was our English teacher [at Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida] and she decided that just because we were in a all-black school on the black side of town, it didn't mean that we didn't--couldn't learn good literature. And though we did not have books per person in each class, she, as a teacher, had the work that she wanted us to learn. So she would start on this bulletin board with the poem like 'Thanatopsis' [William Cullen Bryant], let's say, and she would write it on this board, the next board, the next board and on and around the room and then when she finished over here, most of us had finished the first part of that, she would put the rest of 'Thanatopsis.' We would memorize so much. We studied the greatest wri- of American writers and memorized so much and I find myself thinking back. That memorization process etched those lines into my brain. Thomas Paine, Thomas Paine's, 'The Crisis' ['The American Crisis'], "These are the times that try men's souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of its country, but he who stands it now, deserves the love and thanks from man and woman for tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation before us, the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph." And I've used those lines in my thinking at various junctures in my life when I face challenges, I think about some of those lines that she had us to remember. "The harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph." That is so true. So, she taught us about, oh, it was there that we learned Paul Laurence Dunbar and 'Little Brown Baby' and she taught us Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne] as well but she gave us that mix of the classics that gave me a background that never disadvantaged me in the field of literature out of all of my activities and out of all of my experiences in my life. Civics, yes, Ms. Jones, Ms. Valworth Jones-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --the one who would take us-- Story_ID: 614513 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just wanted to pause and go back to the literature, because of where we're sitting here, at Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio], and your job today. I was just wondering like, how, what was the status of Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] as a poet in school? Now I'm, you said they taught Dunbar at, you know, in, at Richardson [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Dunbar, I know at one time, you know, every black high school, that was being erected was being named after Dunbar. They've got it from Little Rock [Arkansas] to Washington, D.C., all over the place, but, but what was the status when you were in high school at Dunbar, what did people say about him and what was the, how did you all feel about him? He, I'm, well, and was he the only black poet discussed? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Not at all but Dunbar had the advantage of having been the friend of James Weldon Johnson and Rosamond Johnson [J. Rosamond Johnson] who lived in Jacksonville, Florida. He spent more than a month with them and during that time, they introduced him to the school systems throughout Florida, and Dunbar's works became a part of the curriculum in the State of Florida. Believe it or not, James Weldon Johnson was, at that time, principal of Stanton High School [Stanton College Preparatory School] in Jacksonville, Florida. So, Dunbar was always a part of my learning experience. Plus I had a mother [Thelma Moore Evans] who loved Dunbar and on days after church when we had little to do, other than to sit on the porch, the side porch, we would then ask mommy to read 'The Party' [Paul Laurence Dunbar] or to recite, she knew it from memory, to recite 'The Party' or to recite 'Little Brown Baby' [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and my mother would read or recite Dunbar's works for us and we would laugh and enjoy them so. Additionally, throughout growing up, my mother had to tell me, no, about a lot of things socially that I did not particularly appreciate. I was two years younger than my classmates, and there were public dances in Lake City [Florida]. I couldn't go, and even in my senior year, of course, with the age difference, I still wasn't eighteen but I wanted to go and the gentle way that she would just break it to me was always, "Little brown baby, with sparkling eyes." I knew, no, was coming when she would say that. It was her way of getting to a very gentle, loving no. Story_ID: 614514 Speaker 1: My mother [Thelma Moore Evans] had to--we only had three little jukes. Do you know what a juke is? It's an entertainment spot. I think here in Dayton [Ohio] you may call it a club because you may have-- Speaker 2: Or they'd call it a juke joint, I guess, a juke, you know. Speaker 1: Well, we'd just call it, jukes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had three jukes in town, and there were colored lights and, I was anxious to go see them, you know, and to be in them, a jukebox and usually booths where you could sit and eat food and a dance floor. And 'til today, I really enjoy the juke joints, because you are not compelled by the rules of society in my hometown. If you put on a piece on the jukebox and you want to dance, you can dance by yourself and your dance is not criticized, it, it, you just have an opportunity to be the individual that you are in a juke joint and--but I couldn't go to the jukes very often and there were times. One place sold very good fish sandwiches so I could go and--even when I was in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], very often I had very limited social accessibility to other activities in my home commun- in my home town. There was a big place called the Casino [ph.]. It was just a really big building that we would decorate the inside of for our proms and that's where they played basketball games, competitive basketball games through the years. Other than that, all of, we didn't have a gymnasium, all of our sports were outside, basketball to be included. For years, there were just lights over the courts but the Casino was a place where it became a venue for public dances. Ruth Brown would come to town. LaVern Baker would come to town and those kind of singers. Of course, all the good blues singers would come to town and there would be a big dance but I could never attend because there was always the possibility of a fight breaking out and disharmony happening and my mother-- Speaker 2: How old were you as a senior in high school [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida]? Speaker 1: Fifteen and sixteen. Story_ID: 614515 Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, what were your prospects? What did you want to be and how did you think you were going to get there? Speaker 2: I really wanted to be a medical doctor, but I knew that I was fearful of competing in situations with students at college who were from those very good high schools that had a good chemistry and math background. You see, I didn't even know how to bend equipment, bend the tubing and set up an experiment. We didn't have that kind of experience in my high school. Secondly, my high school was not accredited. My mother [Thelma Moore Evans] had me to take the GED [General Educational Development] examination in my senior year just in case I applied for a school that would only accept students with accreditation. Speaker 1: Now Richardson [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida] was supported by the State of Florida, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was a public high school? Speaker 2: Yes, but it was not accredited sufficiently, and we were afraid that many colleges would not--I didn't want to just go to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], I very much wanted to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. My father [Reubin Kenon] had wanted me to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] but-- Speaker 1: Now was, was, do you think that the board of education against the State of Florida, or whatever educational authority they had, really had no interest in accrediting the colored schools or is that, how, why do you think that was that-- Speaker 2: I would like to think that--I'd like not to think that they had no interest in accrediting the colored schools, it's just that they had neglected materials and supplies and infrastructure for so long that to have replaced those things suddenly would have been so expensive that they never did and given not even textbooks, workbooks, desks. Did I tell you that in some of my classes, we didn't have a desk? I would put a flat notebook on my lap, then take, maybe two big old books and make a platform on my lap and then write and use it as a lap desk. We all did that. We learned, we learned a lot of skill in writing in a notebook on our lap because we had classes with no desks in some cases and the chairs that we used were just those lightweight chairs for some classes. In fact, some students would push back in them and lean on the wall in order to listen to the class discussion. So, it--I think the State of Florida would have been required to have spent so much money, such an outpouring, that it was impossible to do. It was just better to leave them uncredited and with the coming of integration-- Speaker 1: Well, history's shown it wasn't impossible, they just didn't do it. Speaker 2: No, but with the coming of integration, that kind of took care of educational experiences for children in the public school system because once they were combined with the white students, the courses were improved. The teachers, in many cases, were not as attentive to black students, and the teachers might not have been as dedicated as black students had known teachers to be. Teachers in the segregated system were extremely dedicated to the students that they were teaching. Their students were their raison d'etre and we did not find that in the integrated systems necessarily. If anything, I would say, black students were more confused in the integrated system and they ran into indifference, and that kind of indifference, of course, caused other problems. But at least they had the textbook in their hand, they had the chemistry supplies in the classroom. In the biology labs, they had materials to work with, so it's like you took one bad situation and replaced it with a slightly bad situation as well. Story_ID: 614516 Speaker 1: Now, as you applied to several schools, where--I mean, well tell us about, how did you chose your college that you attended? Speaker 2: I found it interesting that when I applied at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], I had to send a picture, and I did. I applied at Tennessee State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I applied to Florida A and M college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], or university, and I applied at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And my criterion for choosing Hampton was finding the school that had the best dance program that I could attend and Hampton had, at the time, a superb program in dance. Speaker 1: Now who, who headed up that program in dance? Speaker 2: Ella Gamble [ph.] was the director and they had a wonderful dance studio and a really good dance program, but the dance program was integral with the physical education major. So, I'd like to think of myself in majoring in physical education, I always liked to say, with emphasis on dance, just as later in graduate school [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I said, "I'm majoring in history and philosophy with emphasis on social change in America," so (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so now at Hampton you became the head majorette, I hear? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was junior attendant to Miss Hampton and I functioned with The Hampton Script newspaper. I even went to a conference one year, United States National Student Association conference in Delaware, Ohio through working with the Hampton paper. I was very active, and of course, I was a member of the dance group, and I was a frequent, not constant, but I was a frequent reader at the Hampton services of the scriptures at church. That was such an honor to put on the robe and walk in with the campus minister and I don't know if you've ever been to that very beautiful chapel at Hampton, but he would turn and sit and face me and I would go to this side and face him and then the choir, of course, was here and the Hampton service is just beautiful. Speaking of Hampton, Hampton gave me the same kind of thinking that my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] did that life was about giving, life was about doing and just not being and enjoying and the first week I was at Hampton, we all had to learn the alma mater and one of the outstanding lines in it was, "O Hampton, we never can make thee a song, except as our lives do the singing." And my mother really felt like the persons that she was trying to raise would--the persons would become apparent in the final product, and the final product should, in some way, care about others and give to the community. Story_ID: 614517 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers and mentors at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] that you remember and, well, other, other students as well? Who were some of the personalities there? Speaker 2: Well, I was very impressed with Dr. J. Saunders Redding who was a Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] scholar from Delaware, Ohio--Delaware, Wilmington, Delaware, whose father had been a part of black history. And we had a English teacher, a Mr. Kearney [ph.], who registered with students in a way that he came across with love, understanding and comfort about whatever the situation was. He never got excited, but Mr. Kearney was really a dynamic person. I had a biology teacher, her name eludes me right now. She had a Ph.D. and she wrote her thesis at a time when she discovered that the human embryo was bilaterally symmetrical in shape and therefore she saw a place in the development of the human being which was much like that of the fish. I found, I came to love her. I, I came to love her very much, and she had a mother with her and I visited her home several times. Of course, Dr. Bodine [ph.], who was the campus minister and his wife, was one who gave us an opportunity to grow. At Hampton, learning was formal and informal, and the nice thing at the time was most of our faculty lived right around the dorms. The--and as a result, a faculty member would say, "Lets discuss such and such book over at my house; my wife will bake cookies." And we'd go sit on the rug and discuss a book. We did that with the Bodines when 'The Prophet' by Gibran [Kahlil Gibran] came out. Oh, we would go back and see what he said about children and then we would go and discuss Gibran from other perspectives and vantage points and that was just such marvelous growth and that was the-- Speaker 1: It sounds like Howard University [Washington, D.C.], where Howard Thurman would do the same thing with students, bring them to his house and-- Speaker 2: That was the uniqueness of Hampton. We had an opportunity to interface with our professors and there was a Dr. Brichter [ph.] there from Hungary who was a refugee, and who was just so brilliant and so different and he brought about change that we certainly enjoyed. There were times when he would give an oral examination, and he didn't want to sit down in a stuffy classroom and give an oral examination either. So he'll, he would say, "Well walk with me over to the library steps. Let's sit on the library steps and look at the birds in the trees while I give you this oral examination." Can you imagine? It was just effective and impressive for us, quite so. I enjoyed my four years at Hampton very much, my, my four years there at my home by the sea, I can say probably did more to encourage my growth as an individual, because at Hampton I got a chance to sample my abilities, got a chance to try a little bit of everything and I came to feel secure in the things that I could do well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I left there knowing who I was pretty much and when I went from there to graduate school at primarily white universities, I had no difficulty at all. I had a very sufficient background to compete with. Story_ID: 614518 Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], that's 1960? Speaker 2: I left Hampton in 1960 and I took my completion work at the--in Evanston, Illinois at Northwestern University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that school was very different too. It was the first time I'd ever registered in school and in the process you're given a beach tag because Northwestern is right on the beach and you can actually go and sit on the beach and swim between your classes. I, I went there immediately after leaving Hampton which put me there in the summer. You see, I left Hampton in May and I went right there. And so, one of the first things I got when I got to Northwestern was, of course, a beach tag. Additionally-- Speaker 1: Now is there, was there--sorry--was there a reason for leaving Hampton without finishing, you know, with-- Speaker 2: Yes, there was question about, about a one hour course when time came to stack up hours at a university, I mean, for, for graduation. And because it was minimal but because it was in my major field, it was a big concern and to me, it was the first time in my life that I had confronted what I felt was truly an unfair situation that I could not handle. And my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] just said, well, you know, that's not the important thing, let's just forget about this and you can pick this up at Northwestern and mail it back, and that's-- Speaker 1: So did, did you actually have a confrontation with the administration about this? Or was a teacher or-- Speaker 2: No because--no, I, it kind of was a personality problem and the administration wanted to remain neutral and they did not really defend me at first as a student but eventually the, I had sent my grade back from Northwestern but she was later asked to resign and-- Speaker 1: The teacher who-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --who withheld the grade? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. See, that was in your major field and if that was in your major field, you could not graduate. Speaker 1: But you think, can you speculate as to what the reason was for her to do that? Speaker 2: Well because I don't know where this tape will go, I'd rather not say, but I was very disappointed. I, I, I had not anticipated anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 614519 Speaker 1: Was it difficult to get into Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for, you know-- Speaker 2: It really wasn't although that's one of the reasons why I knew I didn't want to stay there. Because I was constantly reminded that Northwestern had quotas and that I must have been very lucky to be there and I really didn't like that and then-- Speaker 1: By quotas you mean, the quotas that-- Speaker 2: Racial quotas. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, just so many black students they would take-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at any given, at any given time? Speaker 2: Yes. I even had some teachers to say, "Oh, you're very lucky. You must be a good student, 'cause, you know, only so many get to come here." It was maybe a thing of coincidence and timing but I could not live in the graduate hall either. I was told that I had to live in campus approved housing, and so that was another reason why I didn't want to stay at Northwestern very long because if I went to the library at night. I believe it was Simpson Street, well then no, I was living with the Simpson [ph.] family, but I would leave the library and I would have, of course, in the summertime when I first started going there, it wasn't dark until about nine [o'clock] but still I had a long walk to where I lived off campus and I was not living on campus, because I was not given student housing. Speaker 1: Now did you live in the black community of Evanston [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I lived in the black community and I got to know people in the black community. And it turned out to be a really delightful experience. Story_ID: 614520 Speaker 1: But I left there, and I went into the public school system in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And after time in Chicago-- Speaker 2: So you graduated in, in, then from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] in what year was it? Speaker 1: And after I-- Speaker 2: Was it 1960? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And I went to Chicago and I started teaching. And Chicago was not a fun place to be at the time, not for me anyway, because there was a vacancy in my field at Morgan Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] and I lived at 119th South [119th Street] so I passed Morgan Park to go to Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] every day and I was assigned to Farragut simply because I was an African American, I guess. I had to travel two hours, practically two hours a day because from 119th South, I changed buses about three times to go over and then up Kedzie Avenue-- Speaker 2: Up to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], yeah, where Farragut is. Speaker 1: Yes, but I had to go over and up, and I was working at Farragut and Mr. Krob [Joseph Krob], the vice principal told me that I was the most idealistic person who had ever stepped through the portals of Farragut High School. And I enjoyed Farragut very much, but then that same Mr. Krob turned and one day he caught me in my homeroom embellishing the bulletin board for the students at about 4:30. He actually got angry, "Why are you here? You need to be out of the building." "This school ends at 3:20, you should be on your way out, ten minutes after three. Have your coat on, walk through the door at 3:20," and he was so, but I later found out, I was not aware, that that was a school of gangs and before the year was over, that first year, several people had been raped, several people had been attacked and the safety of the school was one that did not alarm me. Speaker 2: Right, now Farragut, give us an idea of the demographics of Farragut. Speaker 1: At the time, the last Hungarian students who were there and the last Polish students who were there-- Speaker 2: Now is this a, just so, I know you probably know this but, but Kim Novak went there. Speaker 1: Kim Novak would come around Christmastime to-- Speaker 2: Pat Sajak also went there. Speaker 1: Yes, and to say hello to the office, people in the office, yes, Kim Nojak and, Kim Novak and Pat Sajak, but the school had been largely Polish and in my classes, we had all levels. I just found it depressing. The highest level of very bright students, accelerated students, were all Polish. They all had Polish names. Speaker 2: What a coincidence (laughter). Speaker 1: Names that I had difficulty saying from day to day, Nowaski [ph.] and Konikowski and then the, in the lower levels, were the black students who had recently integrated that community. Most of the students with economic means had left Farragut, and had gone to private schools. So it was a school of social strife and economic strife at the time and of the black students who were good students, they had a hard time getting in those accelerated classes. So, I remember having a student who was so outstanding and I said, "Why can't he be in this top accelerated class? His grades dictate that he should be." And I was given the answer, well, and I said, "Here, I have Polish students sitting in this highest level, accelerated class, that's all white, in a predominantly black school, and they're not performing. They're making Ds and Fs." And the excuse that I was given, "Well you see, they have the equipment. They have what it takes. Once they light their fire, they will take off." And this young man who was so outstanding, two levels down, I spent two years trying to get him moved up and I was not successful. Story_ID: 614521 Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, last week I interviewed John T. Hooker [HistoryMaker John Hooker] who's now vice president of, of Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] of Chicago [Illinois], big executive, but he went to Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and very poor, he had family out of Mississippi, he was talking about the few black teachers that were there and just, and you know, what the atmosphere was like and how he was really never really encouraged-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --at Farragut. It was just last week. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a car in those days so when I took the bus, many times I would stop into a drugstore on the corner before I would go into the school, particularly if I needed cough drops or something like that in the morning. And when I would walk in, at the time, I was young enough that many times the owner of the business would react to me as though I was a student. Speaker 1: Now you were only, you were what, twenty then? Nineteen, twenty? Speaker 2: Twenty-one, or so, yes, uh-huh, yeah. I forgot, I didn't go right into the Chicago school system [Chicago Public Schools]. Fayetteville State Teachers College [Fayetteville State University] was looking for an artist in residence to establish a dance program. So I went to Fayetteville State Teachers College in Fayetteville, North Carolina immediately after leaving Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton Virginia], although I had been to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. Yeah, I had been to Northwestern, then I went to Fayetteville State Teachers College and for one year I was there as artist in residence, then I went back to the Chicago area. Because I started to see early on, from experience, that many of the people who were setting policy were not any smarter than me. The difference was just a piece of paper that it took a year to, to obtain. So, the whole concept of seeking a higher degree became more of a reality to me. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you stay at Farragut? Speaker 2: I think I stayed two years. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you know Harold Charles [Baba Hannibal Afrik] by any chance? He taught biology and chemistry? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He's another black teacher, but-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe he wasn't there yet, I don't know. Okay. Speaker 2: This was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Yeah, he would have been there. He came in sometime during the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 614522 Speaker 1: And from there I decided to--that I had to go to school. So, I had been down campus, of course, having an aunt who lived in Champaign [Illinois], I was very familiar with the campus of the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And most of the people who went down campus to the University of Illinois were farmers anyway so I decided to go to school with the farmers. Because at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] the school was primarily Greek and I have joined many service organizations in my life but I've never been a member of a Greek letter organization. I was always a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], of the Urban League and, or the Phillis Wheatley Society [Phillis Wheatley Literary Society] which is a fraternal or sisterhood kind of organization that is uniquely Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] which has to do with poetry but the, I used to hear little snide remarks at the, when I was at Northwestern, "We're the Ivy League of the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference]." And I just decided that I needed just a plain college campus and the University of Illinois, of course, was an adjustment because it was so very, very big and its, its African American enrollment was indeed very small but I went to there, and it was there that I entered a combined master's/Ph.D. program in history and philosophy. Story_ID: 614523 Speaker 1: So we left you enrolled at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] in a joint master's/Ph.D. program. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five [1965] or thereabouts. Speaker 2: It was a joint master's/Ph.D. program but it was also a school with a very appreciable dance department. (Laughter) And so, I was in dance as well although later I pulled away from dance and was later just in history and philosophy of education and it was in moving forward--I completed much of my course work and I started dating. Oh no, my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] had her problem and after my mother had the problem, the integration problem, and things were working themselves out, I decided to get married and I never did finish my work at the University of Illinois. Speaker 1: Now let's go back and track and just, just make sure this is clear that your mother had a, she was a pioneer in integrating-- Speaker 2: The public schools-- Speaker 1: --the public schools in, in-- Speaker 2: --of Columbia County [Florida], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then she experienced white backlash, I guess, because of that. Speaker 2: Yes, because after she walked the students into the school to register because a number of black men in the community were hesitant in fear of reprisals and retaliation. And my mother just had the courage, though she was a widow and a divorcee and a single mother, it never crossed her mind that the superintendent would not be very happy. So she walked those children in. She told them to look straight ahead at their goal, "Do not look right, do not look left at jeering faces and ugly words," and to keep their mind on their goal and that was to get inside that office and register. And I think each one of those students, now that they're mature, a college graduate, productive in fields. And the interesting thing is, the superintendent said to my mother immediately that she should have known that it was not permissible for her to work in the system and show that kind of activism at the same time, because it went against his personal philosophy in his school system so she could not go to work that year. The next year, after then, came September, she could not go to her classroom, and she secured the services of an attorney, an African American attorney, and we felt that he would be the answer to our prayers. It turned out he was so expensive. His services were exorbitant and-- Speaker 1: Then the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] didn't come to her aid with legal assistance? Speaker 2: No, no, none of that was available and after say December--up until December of that year of not going to work at all and having no income, her funds were getting low, because--and I was helping her as much as I could-- Speaker 1: Now this is in 1965, right? Speaker 2: This was the year of that poem. This was the year that I then took a job in the public school system and as-- Speaker 1: In, in Champaign [Illinois]? Speaker 2: In Champaign. Speaker 1: To send mother--money back to your mother to help? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because--any monies over and beyond my expenses. Story_ID: 614524 Speaker 1: And you know, that, again, the black community is, is unique in that there was a lady who knew my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] and knew what my mother had done. Although she lived in Champaign [Illinois], she learned of my mother's plight, and she got in touch with me and she said, "You know, LaVerne [HistoryMaker LaVerne Sci], I cook at a sorority--at a fraternity house and I bring enough food home for both of us so don't you go to the store and buy groceries for yourself here in Champaign, you come over to my house and eat in the afternoon because I eat by myself anyway and we will be company for each other." And here was this one lady offering to serve me dinner for as long as it took for me to help my mother in her situation in Florida. That was Mrs. Anna Lee [ph.]. I'll never forget her kindness and, yes, I went to her house in the afternoon, after school, I would eat and sit and talk with her, then I'd go home for the evening. And my mother got her job back in March, and I think probably her first check in April, and she hadn't had a check all year long. Speaker 2: Now, now what, did she win a legal decision or what happened? Speaker 1: It's ironic. She had tenure as a teacher, years of tenure, but it was disregarded and the attorney awarded the right for her to return to her classroom and be paid, but she never received any retroactive pay for all those months that she was not allowed to work [in the Columbia County School District]. Speaker 2: And then the attorney charged the high fee for-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --his services? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] didn't help her? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, that's, that's odd for those days but okay. And so-- Speaker 1: I think at that time, they were probably heavily burdened with so much going on at the time that they just weren't available for everyone who needed help. Story_ID: 614525 Speaker 1: Now, 1968 is a big year, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Cause now your, you remain a teacher in the Champaign public school system, you don't go back to school? Speaker 2: I, I took courses, I was writing a thesis and I was on campus all the time but I was actively employed during the academic year in the Champaign public school system, Unit 4 Schools [Champaign Unit 4 School District]. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm trying to think, now we interviewed Frank Churchwell [sic. HistoryMaker Charles D. Churchwell], he was in, did you know him, the librarian? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah, Frank Churchwell and, or did you know Dee Brown, the librarian? They were both in the library there. Speaker 2: Dee Brown rings a bell. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's author, 'Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee,' there. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, he was here and Frank Churchwell went on to become like a big time librarian, you know, at the University of, of, Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Well see, I spent a lot of time in the library, because every year--well I was writing a lot and then I had my own cubicle in the, after you started writing, you can get a cubicle. I had my own space where I could leave my books and, at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I took advantage of every game. Instead of going to the football games and watching Chief Illiniwek march, I would always give somebody my football ticket. Every year at registration, I would get a ticket in the Block I formation and you were obligated to put on a color so that once you had it on it was the let--it was the Block I that you could see from across the field. So I had a seat in the Block I formation, and I just gave my, my ticket away and I would go to the library instead. And that was the time when the library was quiet and less used and I could be most productive. And so I got to know most librarians pretty good. Story_ID: 614526 Speaker 1: But in 1968, now you met, you met your husband, Frank Sci-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now he's, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: He was in the Air Force and he came to campus, I was there ahead of him, he came to campus as a part of the AFIT [Air Force Institute of Technology] program and in reaching out to, for higher education, he applied through the Air Force, though he was a captain at the time, and they gave him residential assignment, I'm sorry, they gave him a university assignment. And little did he know, apparently, that the central AFIT program is here at Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], at Wright-Patterson home, Air Force Base, which is the home of technology. They award master's and Ph.D.'s in very, very technical fields and it is extremely strenuous as well. When I say strenuous, most people who--the divorce rate is, is very, very high here at this program here at this AFIT program but they have a campus residential program and he was surprised to find himself assigned to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Now-- Speaker 1: Now he was at Chanute Field [Chanute Air Force Base, Champaign County, Illinois] or-- Speaker 2: Well, he was always a navigator. He was in KC-135s [Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker] and C-5s [Lockheed C-5 Galaxy] and C-130s [Lockheed C-130 Hercules], the C-130 gunships. And he was assigned to the University of Illinois because Chanute was there and because he was on flying status, he could still get in his hours and go to school as well. He was in the discipline of electrical engineering at the University of Illinois, and when he completed his work, his next assignment was Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], and Okinawa was a staging point for airplanes flying into Vietnam. And they would always go in, maybe in two weeks and come out and have a turnaround of two weeks for rest and recuperation, then go back in. And once he found out that he was assigned to Okinawa, he asked me to marry, and we got married and he wanted me to go to Okinawa. And I have to admit, I was eager for the opportunity for international travel, because I had not ever experienced it. I really thought that leaving the University of Illinois at that time really wouldn't be problematic because I could always come back. I rationalized the growth and the experiences that I would have in foreign countries would probably be unparalleled to anything else I could have here at home. So we got married, we went to Okinawa and fortunately I got a chance to spend time in Bangkok [Thailand], Korea, Japan. However, when I returned, we had two small babies [LaFrae Sci and LaTania Sci], and after I became a mother, it was as though the world redefined itself for me, because I then saw the world totally differently and my total raison d'etre was the care and the upbringing of my children and living such a mobile life as a Air Force family, not really knowing people well, I just wasn't very happy about leaving my children anywhere for child care. So I became at that juncture in my life a full time mother and housekeeper. Story_ID: 614527 Speaker 1: Had Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] been assassinated before you were married or after? Speaker 2: Dr. King was assassinated about the time that I was married and-- Speaker 1: It was April 4th, '68 [1968], yeah. Speaker 2: And, yes, what happened is I would go visit Frank [Sci's husband, Frank Sci] at his base because I was still teaching in Champaign [Illinois] after the wedding. He wasn't to leave for Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] until the summer and he was transitioning to a different kind of C-130 [Lockheed C-130 Hercules], something like maybe if he had been an A model, he was transferred--being trained for the B model and that particular airplane training was in Nashville, Tennessee at that base. So, frequently, I would leave on weekends, Champaign, and go down and I had the surprise of being on this bus and we stopped somewhere in Indiana and the bus driver got on and said, "Is there a [HistoryMaker] LaVerne Sci on this bus?" And Frank had driven over to Indiana to try and intercept me before I got into the bus station in Nashville, because that's when the demonstrations were going on because of the death of Dr. King. And it was unnerving to drive back to Tennessee that night with Frank, or to drive to Tennessee, because every car that passed us, white people in the car were staring to see if we were black or white, and we were fearful of a bullet, a stray bullet coming our way. And then when we got into Nashville, the National Guard was all over Nashville and particularly out around the university, Tennessee State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and-- Speaker 1: And Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: --at that time, a National Guardsman looking at me just didn't know that he wasn't looking at a Nashville native, of course, just because I was black. And they had some horrible looking expressions on their face. They didn't look like they were very concerned about maintaining peace and order. It just seemed to me that their body language was indicating they were transacting anger with their present stance and situation, and they were looking for an excuse. So, we got away from there and went on to the air base and we didn't go back until I had to leave Nashville. Story_ID: 614528 Speaker 1: Picking it back up, now you traveled, you were at, you lived in Ja- in Tokyo. You said and you got a chance to travel to a lot of places. Now it says here that you lived in Montana for a while too? Speaker 2: Yes, you see, in the [U.S.] Air Force, certain bases tend to attract certain fields. Hypothetically in your field you just may end up going to one of three bases for the duration of your career. Well, at that time, Frank [Sci's husband, Frank Sci] left airplanes and was assigned to missiles so we went to Malmstrom Air Force Base in Great Falls, Montana for a year and from there we came to Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio]. After being here at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base for seven years, he was then assigned back into airplanes and we went to, yes, we were here in Dayton [Ohio]. I came and visit-- Speaker 1: Well from, from '72 [1972]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --until-- Speaker 2: For, for seven years, we were here in Dayton and then-- Speaker 1: So until about 1979, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, '78 [1978] or '79 [1979]. Then we were transferred to Yokota Air Force base in Tokyo, Japan [Yokota Air Base, Fussa, Japan], on the edge of Tokyo, and he did a full tour there in Tokyo. The interesting thing about an Air Force assignment in Japan, the government understands that there is an economic problems for Americans living in Japan. Therefore, dependents were cleared to fly on any flights going out of Yokota Air Force base. Some dependents would go to Australia, some would go to New Zealand and we were encouraged to go to places like the Philippines for summer clothing if you had children in school. You could go to the Philippines and get clothing for the summer, and in the wintertime, you would take trips to Korea be- and you could fly free of charge on the military aircraft. And many times they were truly military aircraft too, like the C-130s [Lockheed C-130 Hercules] with the side seats and all but you could go there and in the, in Korea you could buy all the giant suits and tennis shoes you needed for your children, sweaters and the heavier clothing. So, travel was very available for families because of the economy in Japan. Speaker 1: Okay, now what rank did your husband attain in the Air Force? Speaker 2: He retired as lieutenant colonel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 614529 Speaker 1: When did you come back to Dayton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: We came back to Dayton around 1980--circa, 1982 or '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a joy to move right back into the same community as we had lived previously, the same house that we owned that we just rented out during our absence. And my children [LaFrae Sci, LaTania Sci and Travis Sci] got an opportunity to rejoin the classmates that they had started kindergarten with and up through first and second grade or third grade and they ended graduating with kids as a result. It was a line of continuity. Speaker 1: Now what high school did they go, did they come out of? Speaker 2: One went to Carroll High School [Dayton, Ohio] and Beavercreek High School [Beavercreek, Ohio] and the other one went to Beavercreek High School. Speaker 1: Okay, Speaker 2: Although at one juncture, I had a daughter [LaTania Sci] to become mysteriously ill and unable to walk and as we were dealing with that medical problem which ultimately took us to Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota]. We had to take her out of the public school system and she became a student at St. Luke School [St. Luke Catholic School] which was a Catholic, is a Catholic school in Beavercreek [Ohio]. And as a student at St. Luke's, I had, I found it interesting that she said to me, "You know, maybe it's because I live in the [U.S.] Air Force," she was junior high at the time, "maybe it's because of my Air Force association, I do not understand what it's all about. I don't understand what the racial problem or the topic is all about in America. Do you mind if I go home and live with my [maternal] grandmother [Thelma Moore Evans] for a year and maybe living in Florida in what is, what has been a separate society, I will get a chance to understand the American thinking on race?" So I told her she was just very happy to go. And so I did have the one child to go to school during the junior high years, one year in Florida. And I would have to say that it matured her a lot, and she came--she developed a different understanding because on one hand suburbian--suburban schools really don't have any interest in the development of the black child. If anything, they worked to break down their confidence. She had had, the daughter who asked to go and live with her grandmother, had had black teachers, I mean I'm sorry, white teachers here in Beavercreek to tell her, "You're just a B, a B plus student. Don't you even try to work any harder, you're a B plus student. That's all you're going to ever be." And-- Speaker 1: This is such a common counseling story that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 614530 Speaker 1: And the same daughter [LaTania Sci] who was here earlier, in seventh grade, in the Beavercreek schools [Beavercreek City School District], I believe it was seventh grade. Well, at any point, she took the kind of test where you, your counselor is able to determine your natural skills and recommend a career field for you to consider as a lifetime undertaking. And her counselor told her that she had strong, beautiful hands and that her testing had revealed that the manipulative powers are for hands, really showed that she would make a wonderful hairdresser and when she came, she was just so proud that the teacher told her that. She was smiling and I said, "Yes, I agree, you would make a wonderful hairdresser and you know what, beauticians make a lot of money, but it's not about money. I hope that you have the courage to pursue the field that you've always wanted to pursue. When you were a little child and you were at Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota], and all the other children died except you, because your prognosis was better, you formed then a desire to become a medical doctor, and I'd like to see you continue on that path and not become a beautician just because your high--your counselor has said that that's a good field for you." I was surprised at her reaction. She said, "Oh, mommy, you're just saying that because you're my mother but you see, that's my teacher," (laughter). "She understands my capability and she's objective about my abilities." Can you imagine, your children can get that brainwashed in a suburban school? Needless to say, she is today a physician, but--and when she looks back at those days, she laughs herself but that is the danger of integration. We have entrusted our children into the care of indifferent, unconcerned teachers. Speaker 2: Now that's worse than indifferent, that's, you know. Speaker 1: Yes, who would almost destroy them with a smile, and as a parent I found that I had to be, I had to be vigilant and sometimes misunderstood. Do you have time for me to share one such experience? Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, go ahead. Story_ID: 614531 Speaker 1: I was to pick up--well, I drove carpools so that my children [LaFrae Sci, LaTania Sci and Travis Sci] could participate in after school activities, and I would have to be at the school on a certain day ready, as soon as the bell rang, to pick up everybody. So one day I arrived a little early at Beavercreek High School [Beavercreek, Ohio] and not wanting to sit in the car I got out of the car and just walked into the high school, 'cause I knew I had time to kill. And I just meandered into the library, and when I walked into the library I saw four big columns in the room with artistic drawings and the artistic drawings on one column, I mean, on one column were these artistic drawings with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] looking up like this with fear and Ku Klux Klansmen [KKK] over his head looking down with scorn and I, I was just really confused and I went to the librarian, and I said, "Could you tell me what's happening?" She said--well, I said, "I don't understand that artwork." And she said, "Well, that is the senior project in progress. It is typical for the seniors of each graduating class, those people in art, leave a gift to the school and that's going to be their gift." And it was my feeling, heavens, what a gift because I had children going to that school and that's not the way that I wanted Martin Luther King to be interpreted by them. So, then she said, "I can't tell you anymore, just go speak to the art teacher. She'll tell you." So I went to the art teacher and I just said, "Could you maybe just plug me in a little bit on that drawing in the library. I don't understand it." She took offense. She flipped her hair this way, she flipped her hair that way and she said, "Who are you to be questioning my students' art project." I said, "Well I'm just a parent who pays taxes and I'm also a parent that has two student--two children in this school, and I'm not criticizing because the point is, I don't understand it. I'm asking for enlightenment." And she said, "I don't have to tell you anything. I'll let the principal tell you because he okayed it." So then I went to the principal and the principal said, well you see, they decided to take these four columns in the library and symbolize man--inhumanities to man through the years and in doing the 20th century column, they put Martin Luther King there and the Klan is looking down on him because we know Martin Luther King was assassinated and blah, blah, blah, blah. So I still did not think that it was the proper way that Martin Luther King needed to be portrayed in a suburban high school. So, he then said, "I will not say anymore, this is the way it is. Man's inhumanity to man has been going on since the beginning of time." He also had the Jewish insignia there that they would have found insulting. So, I went home, and I called the Jewish community, I went to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio] and I got in touch with their housing and had them to understand they have a sociological thrust in communities. They--where they let their--where they recommend their soldiers for housing has to not show bias in any way, and military families were recommended the opportunity to live in Greene County, in Beavercreek [Ohio]. Story_ID: 614532 Speaker 1: So, here we are, the Beavercreek High School [Beavercreek, Ohio] and this mural, so what, what happened? What happened this-- Speaker 2: I then got in touch--well because the swastikas had been painted on the, were drawn in, on the wall, it had to, had not been completed, I got in touch with people from the Jewish community; the housing people at Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], because I was only in Beavercreek [Ohio] because we were stationed at Wright-Patterson and many of the families; and I got other supportive organizations to come forward with me and speak to the principal. And at that juncture, the principal really became a listener and he participated with my way of thought and yet things were still happening at school that caused a lot of difficulty for my daughters [LaFrae Sci and LaTania Sci]. Some of the teachers became very, very difficult for them to deal with, and they said things that were not very kind and made one of my daughters cry. So, I decided if it was problematic and difficult for my children, other black parents needed to be aware of the intensity of the problem. Because once the newspapers got in touch with me, I was reported as screaming and yelling and demanding, it was written so stereotypically I guess as they had imagined, it might have happened and that was what surprised me that the newspapers would actually juice it up to make it more exciting for people to read. And I shied away from newspaper reporters after then, and I got in touch with the principal who became a--kind of on my side. And he appreciated me for informing him that newspapers had been trying to call me, because he knew he would stay away from his telephone. It went on until they came up with this artist that they said they would respect his objective opinion and the artist was Bing Davis [HistoryMaker Willis Bing Davis] and it was the first time I got a chance to meet him and, of course, Bing Davis had to think about it and think about it and think about it and think about it and think about it and think about it. But in the meantime, while Bing was making his decision, I pulled together the parents of every black child in that school. I made an appointment with the principal and when I walked in for that appointment, every black parent walked in. It was right around the lunch hour because even parents from Wright-Patterson who were on active duty came to that appointment. It was just that important to them. One of the parents was a full general, and when the principal saw the concern from other black parents in the school who felt the same way as I did, he then favored our position and it became the position of Bing Davis, the person in art, that the artwork should not go up but instead it should just be painted white. Then there were faculty members, my student, my, my children's teachers, who then said, "Who do they think they are? They move into our communities and tell us what to do. Well, they do sit-ins so I think the children in this school ought to do a sit-in in front of the library to keep the art, to keep the columns from being painted white." The teachers really encouraged the students to do a sit-in to keep the columns from being painted white, because it had become an administrative decision that it would enhance harmony in the school to have nothing on those columns. And with that, it created a lot of difficulty for the principal. Many of the faculty members turned on the principal, and shortly after then, the principal was able to announce that out of sixty-five applications to the Oakwood school system [Oakwood City School District] for principal of Oakwood High School [Oakwood, Ohio], he had been named, because that situation there in Beavercreek showed the community that he had the ability to stand for the right principle. Speaker 1: And we have to point out that Oakwood High School would be the plum of-- Speaker 2: It was, is-- Speaker 1: --the schools around here, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --educationally, prestige, everything. So, he left Beavercreek where many teachers still were very cool to him, if speaking to him at all, to become the principal of Oakwood High School. Story_ID: 614533 Speaker 1: Let's get you to Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio]. Now how did, how did this occur? Now, in, you, you were hired in 1989 but what, what happened? How did you find out about it and what was the process? Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say, first of all, there was an economic pull. Both of my girls [LaFrae Sci and LaTania Sci] were in college, and I had decided it was time for me to go to work. Up until then, I had just pretty much been driving carpool and been the support person running the house, and jobs were really difficult to find. School systems--I had too much experience for the average school system. I had taught in Chicago [Illinois], Champaign [Illinois], at Fayetteville State [Fayetteville State Teachers College; Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, North Carolina] and rather than pay me for my graduate work and my experience, they could get a person right out of school, day one, and to do the same duties. So, I found the school systems, plus I didn't know the Dayton [Ohio] school system very well and even as far as subbing concern, was concerned, I didn't know where the schools were and I realized that would be a problem in getting there on time. So eventually I heard about this opening here at the Dunbar House, and I applied and I was interviewed three times and the last interview was in the Dunbar House. And I was giving up on the job because the application process started, I want to say, in January or February and I was not, I did not get word officially of being hired until March, and I was hired effectively March 9th, 1989. And since coming here, I've had a chance to witness a lot of change, architectural, structural change, policies and procedures. There were buildings. I've, I've had a chance to experience the expansion of the site. We've gone from one building to perform all functions, to five buildings on two acres of property. Story_ID: 614534 Speaker 1: Okay now, the one building that was--just a little background, I guess, we, you didn't grow up here but when I was a kid, the, growing up in Dayton [Ohio], the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House] was--had a marker outside and there were rumors that people could tour it but we never, ever, and the schools I attended were close by, we never, you know, went through the house. And I think it wasn't until the '70s [1970s], the mid-'70s [1970s], that I, that I think regular tours were set up in the Dunbar House but the one site is the, is the home that Paul Laurence Dunbar purchased for his mother, Matilda Dunbar [Matilda Murphy Dunbar]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in, around 1900 or so? Speaker 2: He purchased it in, the, near Christmas of 1902. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's like four years before he died (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they moved in 1903. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Keep in mind that the Paul Laurence Dunbar home is the first shrine established by a governmental organization to honor a black man in America. So in 1936, when this property was purchased by the State of Ohio, it was placed under the auspices of the Ohio Archaeological Society [Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Society] which later evolved to become the Ohio Historical Society [Ohio History Connection]. Speaker 1: Now this predates Cedar Hill in D.C. and Frederick Douglass' home [Frederick Douglass National Historic Site, Washington, D.C.], as a-- Speaker 2: I would almost have to say yes. I'm not familiar with Cedar Hill but I know Hallie Quinn Brown really worked to help establish the Frederick Douglass home. That was one of the great contributions during her lifetime, and Paul Laurence Dunbar died in 1906 but in 1936, this became the first state memorial established by a governmental organization. Once it was put under the Ohio Archaeological Society, which is now the Ohio Historical Society, they have maintained governance since that time. There was not a need, initially, it was not seen to be a need to make this a museum, instead just a site where Dunbar had lived. Speaker 1: Now I just wanted, one other thing I want to point out too is maybe that his mother lived here actually until 19--'til the 1930s, right? Speaker 2: Thirty-four [1934]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: She died-- Speaker 1: So Matilda, so this is two years after Matilda Dunbar dies, I think. Speaker 2: Yes, she died in 1934 and, in fact, she died February, 1924. February 24th, 19--what did I say, '34 [1934]. Speaker 1: Thirty-four [1934], yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, and the Ohio Historical Society at that time really kept it as a house. They would have a housekeeper to come in, check on it, take care of it but the desire to open it as a museum and an instructional center for learning, was established by the late Honorable C.J. McLin who-- Speaker 1: Okay, he was a state representative from here in Dayton-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --black state representative, right. Speaker 2: And he procured funds that allowed the purchasing of additional properties. We now have five properties on two acres of city property. Story_ID: 614535 Speaker 1: I just want to go back again a little bit. I think you told me at one time--and you had some details about this--that for the years that it was not really in use some, some valuable material was lost from the building, right? Speaker 2: Well, keep in mind, when Mother Dunbar [Matilda Murphy Dunbar] died, the very first person who saw this place as a valuable resource for the city was Charles Kettering [Charles F. Kettering]. You see, he felt like the history of Dayton [Ohio] was being threatened if the City of Dayton did not keep this house. Because already the Wright brothers' [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright] house had been taken away and-- Speaker 1: Right, well, that, this and knowing that, but that was taken by Henry Ford, right-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for the Greenfield Village-- Speaker 2: Village, yes. Speaker 1: --museum in Detroit [sic.]. They actually dug the house up and took it to Detroit. Speaker 2: Yes they did, and you know something, the-- Speaker 1: To Dearborn rather [The Henry Ford, Dearborn, Michigan]. Speaker 2: --the historians there tell me that when he got the house on the truck at, in Michigan, he said, "Wait, let's send trucks back down there and get the topsoil that the house stood on." So they came back to Dayton and scooped up the topsoil, and today the Wright brothers' home is standing on the topsoil that the boys played on when they were growing up here in Dayton, Ohio. And Charles Kettering felt like because, he also took Dunbar's [Paul Laurence Dunbar] carriage to Michigan as well. But Kettering felt like Dayton was missing an opportunity to save pristine Dayton history if the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] should be lost. So, because he was so respected, the City of Dayton came forward and they pretty much took ownership of it. I don't know whether they leased it or what the legal arrangement was, because the house was left by Mother Dunbar to her one living son, Robert Murphy who was living in Chicago [Illinois] but the city of Dayton had admission to care for the home. Speaker 1: Now, now there's one thing that just occurred to me that Charles Kettering, who invented the electric starter in which his company became Delco, Dayton Electric Company [Dayton Engineering Laboratories Co.; Delco Electronics]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and became the division of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --may have, there may have been a rivalry between him and Ford, you know. A General Motors man and a Ford man [Ford Motor Company]-- Speaker 2: It could have been, it could have been and-- Speaker 1: --Kettering being from this area. Speaker 2: And keep in mind, Kettering had been a part of the original group of innovators. Dayton, at that time, was like Vienna [Austria] in the 15th century when all those musicians intermingled and inspired each other. Dayton, when Dunbar was growing up, intermingled with other people who were just so capable of innovative thought. The City of Dayton at the time had more patents per capita than any other city its size. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you had NCR [National Cash Register Company, Dayton, Ohio], with the Pattersons [John Henry Patterson]-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and Charles Kettering knew Paul Dunbar and he was a part of that thinking circle and-- Speaker 1: The Wright brothers-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and as a result, the City of Dayton did heed Kettering's direction but they moved roomers into the house, and when some of the roomers moved out of the house, they took more than they came with. Right now, I have the telephone number of a young man who says he just needs the money for medical reasons, but he says he has Dunbar's small writing desk in his house that his aunt brought out, or his uncle, when they moved out of the house and he hates to want to sell it back to us, but he really needs the money for his medical bills. So we don't have the money to purchase it back from him. We would be very pleased if he would donate it to us and replace it back in the Dunbar House where it was when Mother Dunbar died. But, yes, many things walked after then. Dunbar had over a thousand books in his personal library. His books represented the classics, the very best, the Greeks, the Romans, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], just a span of books that you would not see in one collection. Well today, we have four hundred, just a little more than four hundred. Over six hundred of his prized books have disappeared and I'll tell you truthfully, you don't find black people stealing books too often (laughter). If you don't want your car broken into in a city, just put books on the black seat, on the back seat, if you are in the black community. Speaker 1: Now, that's an old, yeah, thing that's been so, said for years that if you want your car broken into, put, put audio equipment or records on the seat (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --and, but if you don't, put books on it. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It repels a lot of people. Speaker 2: A theft. Speaker 1: But, yeah. Story_ID: 614536 Speaker 1: So when you, when you ascended to this position in 1989, there's the one property, Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio], and just kind of describe the condition of it. It was maintained but, but what was there and what-- Speaker 2: Well, let me just go back a second. When I first walked into the Dunbar House to visit when I came to Dayton [Ohio], my heart was deeply saddened, because the house had really been neglected and much of what I saw--there were manuscripts of his standing on the floor that had never been archived. And the lady who was the keeper of the house at the time, let me open the closet in Dunbar's room and his clothing was on the floor, that's why so much of his clothing had--it--Dunbar's history and significance had been sadly neglected for whatever reasons, I don't--I cannot begin to go into. Speaker 1: So this is like eighty-three years-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --after his-- Speaker 2: Well this was in '70 [1970], this was in the early '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --when I first came to Dayton and even black historians who were visiting black sites said, of all the crumbling sites in the nation, that the Dunbar site was probably the worst that they had seen such, I think they called it--benign neglect, that was the term used. And so, plus the roof was leaking, and so when I came in 1989, the Dunbar it--the Dunbar House, per se, had been redone entirely and the roof was no longer leaking, the living quarters in the back where the keeper would usually live, had been taken out. Because earlier, there was one keeper of the Dunbar House who lived there and kept foster children and would have the foster children, I know them, to clean upstairs. And early on, only the living room and Dunbar's loafing holt were shown to the public, and they pretty much used the other rooms for their living needs. Well, all of that was improved and in 1988, and with the movement of Senator McLin's [sic. Representative C.J. McLin] dream to make this a cohesive site that would inform any visitor of Paul Laurence Dunbar, the man, his times and his legacy for a complete interpretative understanding of Dunbar, that only came about when I came. The person ahead of me left so we focused on the Dunbar House because the center house that had been acquired was boarded up and desperately in need of restoration. The corner house [Mundis House], we would enter and use. We did not use the center house at all but the corner house, we would enter and we did a few programs in that front room when we could, but if it started raining, it would rain so that mold accumulated on the walls. And it rained so in there until conditions--there were no chairs here when I came. If I wanted to have a program, I'd go to a funeral director and borrow chairs. And I figured at the time, since I was going to be carrying the chairs, a maximum count for participation was going to be twelve and that was a big--just to get somebody to come here for a program. So I would carry the chairs and then promised to have them back on Monday and then my task was to fill the chairs. So I'd bring my little boy [Travis Sci] and I'd bring other relatives of people that I knew in order to create an audience because there had not been the acceptance of the Dunbar House as a museum, because it had never been presented as a museum. And we have been able to make that transition with the restoration and renovation that has taken place. Story_ID: 614537 Speaker 1: We have, we're now developing a library in the corner house of the Mundis House. That library will be a Paul Laurence Dunbar resource library. I hope one day it will link with Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and other Dunbar resources so that any student or scholar will be able to come here, or parent, or person, and sit down and research Dunbar and be able to connect with the best resources of Dunbar in the United States, Hampton Institute library [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], places where there are significant Dunbar materials archived. Then, the center house, the upstairs in the corner house from being the library downstairs, actually houses staff; all staff offices are upstairs in the corner house or the Mundis House. The center house, now restored fully, is used as an annex downstairs with volunteer space upstairs for storage and meetings and various activities that volunteers would have. The Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] is pristine, it's, it just greets the visitor as a pristine museum, and it looks like Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] might have just walked right out of the back door before you came in. Speaker 2: Now, yes, it's been fully restored, right-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --to, to its 1906-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --condition. Speaker 1: Including the lighting, the other lighting that was added, has been taken down to the lighting that was probably there when Dunbar was in the Dunbar House, living there. The urban barn has been restored, and it's very, very functional. We like to use it in the summertime; it's not insulated for winter activities. We like to use it for storytelling and children's activities, birthday parties and, of course, we have long needed this visitor center which gives us a room for assembly, for more than seventy-five people. We have a maximum count in terms of fire safety of 100 people in this room and if chairs are very close together, we can get that many in but a comfortable count is anywhere between sixty and seventy-five, and we have a gift shop now here in this visitor center. We have little connecting breezeways connecting the visitor center to the two houses that you see from the front. The Dunbar House is not connected at all, because we found that to connect it in any way would mean some kind of deviation from the original and with that happening, it could come off the National Register [National Register of Historic Places] and it was one of the first properties to go on the National Register when it was established. So, the Dunbar House has long been on the National Register. We don't want to upset that registration in any way or bring it into violation, so we leave it as it is, and, of course, the Urban Barn is the fifth property and totally the space that is involved here, is approximately two acres. Story_ID: 614538 Speaker 1: And so visitors come to the, basically, the visitor center first and then the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] itself, guides take the visitors over to that, you know, by going outside of the building into the, into the Dunbar House (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. The entrance to the site, operationally, is through the door on Edison Street and sometimes getting either a film or an orientation here, then advancing through the connector to the annex where there are some exhibits. The items exhibited in the annex there are items that were too large to put in the house like Dunbar's bicycle that was given to him by the Wright brothers [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright]. The suit that Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] wore in the inaugural parade, when he participated in the inaugural parade of [President] William McKinley, the Native American artifacts that he collected while he was in Colorado trying to get well living in the higher elevation so his lungs could heal themselves. There were no cures for tuberculosis in those days. There were no antibiotics so the only curative method for tuberculosis was to go to the higher elevation and let your lungs heal themselves, and that's what Dunbar did for the better part of the year. But then he met that Native American culture, and he was of a philosophy, you see, that he saw religion as a social and political institution, and he felt closest to God, really, when he was in the great outdoors. And when he got to Colorado and noticed a whole culture based around respect for nature, he embraced it and participated in it. He practiced shooting arrows. He went fishing. He smoked pipes. Oh, he became--and he taught the Native Americans to play checkers and then after exerting himself all day in nature, he would come home at night and stay up late writing a novel. He wrote a novel during that time. So you see, for all those reasons when he returned, he was dying of tuberculosis. He did not get well and he spent the better part of a year out there. In fact, there's a museum of the West [Black American West Museum and Heritage Center, Denver, Colorado], and the founder [HistoryMaker Paul Stewart] has told me that Dunbar left a lot of things and they have them out there. And some of those artifacts I would be so pleased if he would send to us but they feel that they are uniquely there, belonging to Dunbar, because he was there and for that reason, they aren't about to send them to us to keep. We could probably borrow some things in the future from them, just as we could borrow Dunbar's library--violin, from the museum in Chicago [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], because they are the recipients of Dunbar's violin. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dunbar got his start in Chicago [Illinois], I mean, his first official recognition was at the Columbian Exposition-- Speaker 2: Exposition. Speaker 1: --in 1893 [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's right, and-- Speaker 1: Frederick Douglass basically introduced him as-- Speaker 2: Not only that, he ran into George Washington Carver there, and George Washington Carver was a painter at that time. He was exhibiting his yucca plant. He had not yet developed peanut butter. He had not yet gone into all the great things that he did but that World's Fair in Chicago was a time that Dunbar was there, he was not only--it gave him a chance to function as a journalist. See, Dunbar wrote every form of the language and wrote it well and he wanted to prove that as America's first black professional writer that he was well rounded so he embraced essays that were published in The New York Times, the San Francisco Chronicle, The Denver Post, he embraced novels, he embraced short--volumes of short stories, yes. Story_ID: 614539 Speaker 1: --The junior college in there at one time, Loop College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: I went to, I took a few courses, was that Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] right there on Michigan Avenue? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, you have speed, roll seven. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: I took a few courses there, then I danced with the dance company that was up over the art theater, about ten blocks up, I mean ten, ten stories up. There's a, still a dance company there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I danced with that company when I was teaching. I would leave Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and go downtown and put on my leotard, then leave the dance studio at night and go back to Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 614540 Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar], but we were talking about Dunbar's different venues and I--during the break, he lived in Washington, D.C. for a period of time and New York [New York], writing song lyrics-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --for vaudeville and then you talked about him being in Denver [Colorado] and-- Speaker 2: Yes, well you see, Paul wrote over twelve songs and he just wanted to demonstrate that he could write every form of the language and write it well and he did. His four novels, his 'Sport of the Gods' ['The Sport of the Gods,' Paul Laurence Dunbar] is the foundational nov- black novel of America and all too often people forget to look at the fact that 'Sport of the Gods' once published in England, took on another title, it is entitled, 'The Jest of Fate,' as named by the English. So every now and then you run into pseudo Dunbar scholars that'll say, Dunbar published five, five, when in actuality he wrote four novels; one had two names. Because he was the first black writer to be published in England, Canada and the United States. Now there had been many good writers before Dunbar. Dr. Scarborough out here at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] was a writer of Greek textbooks. Speaker 1: Yeah, William S. Scarborough [William Sanders Scarborough]. Speaker 2: And he wrote Greek textbooks for other colleges and you know and I know such a publication probably the demand was only maybe a hundred. His audience was very small though his books were very technical and very advanced, he had a smaller audience. So that was the case with good black writers at the turn of the century. They were not necessarily exposed and they wrote for small audiences and so Dunbar was not the first good black writer. I would go so far as to say, Paul Laurence Dunbar was the recipient of love and kindness from people on both sides of the color line because right in Springfield, Ohio there was a Edward Blaine Henderson [sic. Elliott Blaine Henderson] who was a writer a little bit younger than Dunbar, but a very prolific writer who wrote dialectically a lot, who published about some six or seven books on his own, but just couldn't go but so far. Speaker 1: Sure, James Madison Bell of Toledo [Ohio], the Bard of the Maumee they called him and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes but-- Speaker 1: James Whitfield [James Monroe Whitfield]. Speaker 2: Dunbar's supporters came forward and encircled his career and made it possible for him to get to some of the--open some of the doors that he needed open to have a career as he had. Speaker 1: Yeah, there are many other black writers, you're right. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 614541 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I don't know if you know it but Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] was so revered and respected that even his grave was moved. Speaker 2: Now, you have to tell us that story. What, what happened? Speaker 1: Well, when Dunbar died, you know Dunbar died February 9th, and in February the ground was frozen so he was taken to that little chapel and they have a crank and they put him in the basement and they kept his body until, until spring when they could dig graves. Speaker 2: This is in Woodland, here in-- Speaker 1: At Woodland Cemetery [Woodland Cemetery and Arboretum]. Speaker 2: Yeah, here in Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Then he was buried on a spring day when the ground, but he was buried kind of where regular people were buried, poor whites, blue collar people, average blacks. And his mother [Matilda Murphy Dunbar] went to the grave and she observed that his grave location was not too far from a school, it was not too far from a brook, the very elements that Dunbar had put in his 'Death Song' ['A Death Song'], "Lay me down beneaf de willers in de grass, / Whah de branch'll go a-singin' as it pass. / And when I's a-layin' low, / I kin hyeah it as it go / Singin', 'Sleep my honey, tek yo' rest at las'." And she planted a willow tree next to his grave to complete the continuity of his 'Death Song' and it was put on a slate done by Tiffany [Tiffany and Co.], and that seemed to have been a very adequate place for Dunbar and the, the distinction was his willow tree and his Tiffany epithet until Judge Dustin [Charles W. Dustin] went out and looked at where Dunbar was laying. Judge Dustin was a local judge, highly respected here in the court system, and he just happened to have been white but he respected Dunbar as being one of the greatest Daytonians to have ever lived. He saw where Dunbar represented the creativity of Dayton and the very resourcefulness of Dayton, because he came from way down here to go way up there in performance and contribution to mankind. So he just decided that that was the wrong place for Dunbar to be buried. He went to Dunbar's mother and he said, "Do you mind if I exhume your son's body and inter him in another location in the cemetery?" And her response was, "Oh, it'll be all right with me as long as you save space for me." So, he kept his promise. He went to one of the most prestigious families in Dayton that owned that property, there to the right, and he just said, "May I buy some of your property at Woodland?" They were happy to sell it to Judge Dustin. We're talking about a year, probably circa 1915. They sold the property to Judge Dustin. I don't know that he ever said what his intentions of land use was really going to be, and he exhumed Dunbar's body with deliberate speed, placed him on the highest hill in Dayton with the founders of the City of Dayton. If you go up where Dunbar is, you can see for miles around. Woodland is known to have a very high hill. Dunbar is up there on the highest, and on that high hill with him are contractors who built Dayton, the people who brought cars and automobiles to Dayton, the founders of Dayton are buried on the highest hill there, and so is Paul there, and his mother is right next to him just as Judge Dustin promised. Speaker 2: Now this is significant considering that at that time, there were many cemeteries in the North that would not bury black people and white people in the same cemetery. Speaker 1: I'm telling you that Judge Dustin just would not hear of any discussion. Now, where Dunbar was buried at the time, Woodland Cemetery will not say it was an all-black section because today they don't want to look back and say, "Oh, we had a segregated cemetery." But you know and I know that cemeteries were usually segregated, but they really want to say that it was more of a economically similar section that Dunbar was in and Mother Dunbar, after Dunbar's grave was moved, she sold it to another owner, another man, and the man who is buried today in Dunbar's first grave, I think his first name is Silas [ph.], I forget his last name, but there's another person buried in Dunbar's first grave. And I think that's a tremendous statement of appreciation for an individual, for Judge Dustin to be a white person to go and say, "Dunbar deserves to be resting with the founders of this city." Story_ID: 614542 Speaker 1: Now, you had something to do with, if I'm not mistaken, with the improvement of the grave at--for Hallie Q. Brown, as well as the restoration of the grave of Martin Delany in Wilberforce [Ohio] and, can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well, I really didn't do a lot. Early on as I have done research, historical research, it is impossible to complete any historical research without ending up in a cemetery, because those names and dates in the cemetery give us documentation to so much of what we need to know. And I found from experience that the Massie Creek Cemetery or the cemetery on Tarbox Road [Tarbox Cemetery Road] in Greene County [Ohio], actually housed a lot of historical figures. I was looking at one time at another cemetery in Xenia [Ohio] where the tombstone of the, I believe, the first or second black graduate from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], his tombstone was blown away in a tornado and I was trying to locate that spot at one time, and it was about a similar time that I started spending more time in Massie Creek. And, of course, I located Dr. Scarborough [William Sanders Scarborough] and I located Hallie Quinn Brown right there with her brother, Jerry Brown [Jeremiah Brown], and I do a first person interpretation of Hallie Quinn Brown, I'm doing one tomorrow. But most of all, I was really surprised to see Martin Delany because I knew he had been here but I thought he had gone. I knew the distinguished scholar who was the first Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Ph.D. had been here-- Speaker 1: Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew he had been here but I knew he had gone. I knew he wrote his dissertation in Shorter Hall [Wilberforce, Ohio] and I knew he and Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] had dreamed of an organization that would encircle the [U.S.] Constitution and enforce it for the rights of the black man and that turned out to be the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when, due to Dunbar's illness, William E. Du Bois finally had a successful Niagara Movement, Niagara conference-- Speaker 1: You mean, Niagara, 1905. Speaker 2: --three years after Dunbar died in 1909 [sic. 1906], the organization came to be but Dunbar was a part of that beginning dream. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a part of the American Negro Academy, too. Speaker 2: Yes, and I knew that Delany had been here, his presence had been profound, but I thought he had moved on like all the others, and then to my surprise, I found his grave. And, hurting me most, was the fact that his tombstone was crooked, barely standing, and I couldn't tell from the direction of the tombstone, it looked like the blacktop was over his grave, his original grave there, it looked like from about the waist down, was where the blacktop started, and I couldn't get anybody to help me assess that, so I turned to Bennie McRae [Bennie J. McRae, Jr.], my partner in research, and I asked him to get his shovel, some cement, he has a truck, and to take his truck and help and go out and I told him where to find the grave. Well, they went to Wilberforce [Ohio] and they didn't continue far enough down to Tarbox Road and they decided that they had passed Tarbox Road and in their confusion, they went by the museum and they said, "Can you tell us where to find Tarbox Road?" And they weren't too sure either. They said, "We're looking for the grave of Martin Delany." There again, that didn't ring any bells with them either. And so, there was someone there who finally decided they had to be looking for the Massie Creek Cemetery and showed them how to get there and that gave visibility to the placement of Martin Delany and different ones there found it, eventually, and then set aside this big effort to glorify it in a way that it should have been done years ago. Speaker 1: It sounds like a nine foot monument there now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, erected with the help of, I think the Dayton Power and Light Company [Dayton, Ohio] and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --other, WDTN [WDTN-TV, Dayton, Ohio]. Now tell us, now what, about what year was that when, when Delany's grave was discovered? Speaker 2: I would have to say mister--he took a person who was working here, maybe early, late '89 [1989] or early 1990. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 614543 Speaker 1: This place [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] is, I mean there's been a lot of work done and restorative work done and just, now I know you are considered a wonderful representative of, of Dayton [Ohio] and Paul Laurence Dunbar's legacy, what, what does this close association to Dunbar mean to you, I mean, emotionally? How do you, how do you feel about this? Speaker 2: I hear my mother's [Thelma Moore Evans] voice in his works. I recall my grandfather's bookshelf and Bishop Johnson's [William Decker Johnson] bookshelf when I'm looking at his books, his first editions. I--it really reviews my life, and this little place really represents the totality of my development as a person, because everything I ever have accomplished or achieved has been essential in helping me to take this place forward. Though I don't dance anymore, from my previous work, I just know that when I do a program here, there has to be a beginning, there has to be a development and there has--well introduction, a development and a follow through. You know, so many basic concepts that I've learned earlier, I've been able to employ here, and most of all I can't get over the coincidences that are here for me. And when I say coincidences, I still don't understand them. I don't try to because in no way am I related to Dunbar but Dunbar's oldest brother was named William Travis [William Murphy]. Now, is William Travis a usual name combination? But it just happens to be the name of my [maternal] grandfather [William Moore], it just happens to be the name of my Uncle Bill, my son, I named Travis [Travis Sci]. There are so--the last, if you, if I took you into Dunbar's room now, an unfinished work on his desk in his handwriting, was penned by him, January 3rd. Though it was a different year, January 3rd is my birthday. As I go around the house, there's so many prominent dates and associations to my own life until I shudder. There's some a little different. Dunbar's mother [Matilda Murphy Dunbar] died the 24th of February. My mother died the 24th of March. You know, but always, always, there have been coincidences that I am forever uncovering and discovering. Story_ID: 614544 Speaker 1: And I have had, I've had the experience of even taking a little doll to a preschool class, and I've asked the children, "What should we name this doll?" We're going to keep this doll at the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] and it'll be there when you come and one little child raised her hand and said, Elizabeth. I was shuddered, I was shocked because, you see, when Paul [Paul Laurence Dunbar] was fourteen months old, his mother developed, developed, delivered a little girl whose name was Elizabeth Florence [Elizabeth Dunbar]. Her two children born in freedom, she named herself, Paul Laurence and Elizabeth Florence. The two children born in slavery, the two older boys, she could not name, her master named them but Elizabeth was born sickly and Mother Dunbar [Matilda Murphy Dunbar] used every home remedy she knew, every one she could learn of, she tried. There was no money to take her to a doctor. And so Mother Dunbar, when Paul was four years old, went to him and said, "You know, Paul, I really think Elizabeth is going to go to heaven and live with Christ and be an angel," and Paul was so upset. I know that four year old fear of death, because I experienced it. Paul didn't want his little sister to die, like I didn't want my father [Reubin Kenon] to die as I visited him in Brewster Hospital [Jacksonville, Florida], he went to his little sister and he said, "No, Elizabeth, please don't die. I'll, I'll breathe for both of us, don't die," and she died and the sting of him, missing his little sister. Oh, when she died, by the way, there was no money to bury her sufficiently. She is still today buried in the pauper section of Woodland Cemetery [Woodland Cemetery and Arboretum, Dayton, Ohio]. We have symbolized her presence at the grave just to say the family is together, because it would have taken so many court orders and so much money to have moved her little body over with her mother and her brother and then we could have dug there and found little or nothing, because we don't know that she had a proper burial. She could have been in her blanket or a basket and the father [Joshua Dunbar] is out in the other cemetery [Dayton National Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio]. So, we now have ordered a Woodland Cemetery help desk to do it, a historical monument from the turn of the century with her name and date on it and Elizabeth Florence. Paul listened to his mother cry after his little sister was buried, like I remember my mother [Thelma Moore Evans] crying after my father died and the bereavement that his mother experienced affected him and it just so happened that his parents divorced the same year. You know and I know that divorce and death are two of the worst traumas an individual can go through. Well, I wasn't four when my mother divorced, I was a little older, but I too knew that kind of trauma and Paul handled his by going into himself just soaking up everything around him like a sponge. Story_ID: 614545 Speaker 1: He watched, he listened, and he observed so closely as he took words in his mind and he used words like, rat, bat, cat, sat, words that rhymed. When he was six years old, he wrote his first poem. When he was nine years old, he recited publicly at his church an original Easter ode. At age fourteen, his works were printed in the local newspaper, though he wasn't paid, it was just for the honor. At age seventeen, he owned the first black newspaper in the black community because he felt the black community needed a cohesive vehicle of communication and at age nineteen, a year late because he graduated, a year late, like I did, you know, he got ready to graduate from high school and he was called in and told that his algebra or his, his math scores could not be brought up in time for graduation. Paul [Paul Laurence Dunbar] didn't know how he was going to handle that because his mother had taken an enrollment to keep him in high school. High school was only for the privileged and Mother Dunbar [Matilda Murphy Dunbar] was determined to get him as much education as she could. So you know what Paul did? He started running and he ran and he ran and he ran until he was tired. Then once he sat down, 'cause he was saying, I'm not going back, I'm not going back, I just won't finish that, I'm not going back and once he sat down, he took his pen from behind, out of his shirt and he started writing 'Keep A-Pluggin' Away' [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and he decided after writing that poem, he would go back to school and he would finish. And when he went back to school, it was as though doors opened for him out of the sympathy of the fact that he was repeating that year. So I even knew that experience that Dunbar knew, and-- Speaker 2: I think he was valedictorian of the class when he graduated, right, from Central [Central High School, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 1: No he wasn't valedictorian-- Speaker 2: Oh, he wasn't. Speaker 1: --but he wrote the school song. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He wrote the words for the class song, rather. And--but the whole thing is, I have found so many coincidences that I can relate to. And Paul's father today, as you know, is buried at the National Cemetery [Dayton National Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio], and if you go to Washington [D.C.] and put Joshua Dunbar in the computer, the computer will spit out two certificates of accomplishment. Very few soldiers during the Civil War will you get two certificates for. He served with the 55th Volunteer Massachusetts Regiment [55th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment] as well as the Massachusetts 5th Cavalry [5th Regiment Massachusetts Colored Volunteer Cavalry]. So you see, there again, Paul had a father that he was very proud of, and I was very proud of my father [Reubin Kenon]. So, I felt like even though my father didn't live to see me to maturity, he certainly laid the groundwork financially in other ways that I had opportunities that I would not have had. You asked me earlier if I was one of the brighter people in my class, in high school [Richardson High School, Lake City, Florida], I would have to say, I was okay, and particularly when I tried hard, but I went to school with some kids who were brilliant. I went to school with kids in Lake City [Florida] who did not have the money to go further into higher education. I'm convinced that America's greatest loss has been the resource of the black intellect in America. Story_ID: 614546 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes for the future of the, or what are some of the plans, I guess, for the future of the, of the Dun- Paul Laurence Dunbar site [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well, sustaining itself to move way into the future so as to be a valuable resource for generations to come. In that process, I'm hoping that Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] will be elevated so that his proper place in literature will become apparent to all Americans and not just some as they learn more about him, particularly during this century and as he goes into the next century, he will go with greater, possibly, even greater distinction. Now, achieved at this juncture is satisfaction with where Dunbar is simply because I picked up several anthologies in various bookstores at the turn of the 21st century. Dunbar was included in them all. Dunbar was recognized as being a very vocal voice, a colorful voice at the turn of the century and the early 20th century and at the early, at the turn of the early 20th century, and I see now that he is still moving forward. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's been canonized, as they say. Speaker 2: Yes, and in 2003, Stanford University [Stanford, California] held a conference and they invited academicians really, from all over the world. I was so surprised when a professor got up from China and spoke of how the students in China read Dunbar, because he wrote about the disenfranchised in society. Likewise, a professor from India said pretty much the same thing. I was really taken aback when a professor from Romania spoke of Dunbar with such great fondness and the professors from Canada were just sold on Dunbar, and every academician from almost every major college across the United States really were able to give Dunbar glowing remarks. So my point is, Dunbar is growing in recognition because at the time of his death, it was so easy to see him as a black writer (laughter), and not necessarily a good writer and Dunbar's talents, I think, are being reviewed and recognized as much today as they will be in the future, and I hope it will continue. Story_ID: 614547 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that the African American community will come to embrace, not just their history but our collective history, in a more positive and stronger way, simply because the institutions that speak to our collective history, many times need a kind of support that they do not get. And I've had many African Americans to tell me that history makes them uncomfortable. They dislike history because it makes them dislike their past. Well, I can relate to that when I learned that my slave father [Sci's paternal great-grandfather, Briton Kenon] had been auctioned in the Atlanta [Georgia]--on the Atlanta auction block. I wasn't happy about that either but I think if the African American community faces the reality that we are great contributors to this culture, and our culture is--our particular subculture or black culture, is the epitome of the uniqueness of America. We are the ones who contributed the blues. We are the ones who come out with all of the creativity, and as soon as I think the African American community comes to defend this brilliance and to defend and protect this creativity that we share, I think the better we will all be. Because not only will we have unity but we'll have a different brand of respect, because other organizations will recognize the cohesiveness of the community and being concerned about this particular African American resource and would be very careful about giving the resources and the care that it needs. Story_ID: 614548 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Probably, no I don't think so. It's been such a struggle that every forward step could not be choreographed to a rhythm, every forward step many times meant stepping as best can and every step was not always with support. So, just being able to achieve it at this juncture was probably the icing on the cake because regardless, every effort turns into an adventure. Story_ID: 614549 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, to be very honest, I have not thought in terms of my legacy. I am focused so constantly on the legacy of Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and what he has left us over a hundred years ago that we fail to recognize today. So, my thoughts have not gone for myself so probably the best, the most available response I'd be able to give you is that my legacy would be my love and respect for Dunbar. Story_ID: 614550 Speaker 1: Now you've received numerous local awards, I know for your work with the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio] and people--you have that, as you said, that elocution training from school, in the black school that a lot of people today don't have. Do you have a favorite Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] poem and could you recite a couple passages for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Would you like a dialectical poem or a poem in standard English? Speaker 1: Whichever one you think is your favorite. Speaker 2: "We wear the mask that grins and lies, / It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes,-- / This debt we pay to human guile--." Ah, just had a block, very unusual. "We wear the mask that grins and lies, / It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes,-- / This debt we pay to human guile; / We smile but"-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, hold on, don't hit your mic-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --'cause it makes a noise. Speaker 2: Okay. Start over again? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes please. Speaker 2: "We wear the mask that grins and lies, / It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes,-- / This debt we pay to human guile; / We smile, but, O great Christ, our cries / To thee from tortured souls arise. / We sing, but oh the clay is vile / Beneath our feet, and long the mile; / But let the world dream otherwise, / We wear the mask!" 'The Mask' ['We Wear the Mask'] for Dunbar, was not written to any one group in society or any ethnic branch of society. He wrote it to all human beings because the mask affords us the privacy and the individual dignity that we deserve as living human beings and I'm very fond of that poem because I see it in the community, I see it at work, I see little people fall and you say, "Oh, get up, did you hurt yourself?" And the leg can be bleeding and they'll say, "No." And I realize that child is lying, that child is wearing a mask. Dunbar's poems are so sensitive that they penetrate the needs of the individual at a level that surpasses stages of growth. We see it in every stage of human development. We all wear a mask, and we have to wear a mask to protect our dignity. Story_ID: 614551 Speaker 1: Now you've talked about your family, but maybe we just consolidate it. You have two, two daughters, right? And-- Speaker 2: Yes, I have two daughters (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two, two grown daughters and your husband [Frank Sci] retired as a lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And one daughter's a doctor [LaTania Sci], right, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, internal medicine, physician of internal medicine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The other's a percussionist [LaFrae Sci] in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Percussionist? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So, does she play jazz or, or classical or-- Speaker 2: She special- she specializes in jazz. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Jazz percussion. Speaker 1: Okay, now have I--is there anything I have not asked you that you think we should raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well, you didn't ask me if I had a son. I have one son-- Speaker 1: All right, well-- Speaker 2: --and his name is Kenon Travis [Travis Sci], and he's Kenon because that's my maiden name and Travis because it is a family name, and I was so surprised to see that even Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] had a brother named Travis [William Murphy], with Travis as a middle name. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother [Thelma Moore Evans] get a chance to see you become the director of the Dunbar House [Paul Laurence Dunbar House, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes, but when the weather changed--see I started here in March, and by that June she had had some ministrokes, M-I-N-I, and medically she had started using a cane and she felt that perhaps this was not the time to travel and she would come late- she was so delighted and my Uncle Simeon [ph.] told me when I had started working here that he would rather work here at the Dunbar House than be president of a black university [HBCU] (laughter). And he had been asked to be president of one at the time and he had declined and he said, but you know, working at the Dunbar House would be such a joy and he said, "I envy you, LaVerne [HistoryMaker LaVerne Sci]," and then I thought about all the hardships here but then Uncle Simeon's viewpoint gave me enthusiasm in thinking about the job because I was excited to come. But back to my mother. We visited this place for many years when she'd come visit me here in Dayton [Ohio]. We would designate a day to get over to the Dunbar House. Well at first, it was finding the Dunbar House, because living over in the Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] community I had a very difficult time finding the street even. Speaker 1: And this being on the west side of Dayton, right? Speaker 2: Yes, and then downtown with all the one way streets. Most Air Force families tend to stay close to the base because-- Speaker 1: Which is really on the east side of town. Speaker 2: Which is on the east side of Dayton and all of your needs are met, you have no reason to come except to just expand your distance and after looking for the house all day and getting lost on the downtown streets, we finally happened to the house and we found it, my mother was just so overjoyed that when we got to the porch, she just stood there for a second, she couldn't bring herself to even knock on the door. And when we knocked on the door, the keeper came to the door and said, "No, you can't come in now, it's too close to closing and I'll be closing in a few minutes," and my mother said, "Oh, please, can I just come in for a second and stand in Dunbar's house?" She said, "No, ma'am, I just told you that you can't come in." So we were so disappointed we didn't get to even step inside, and so I wrote my mother when I started working here and I said, "Not only will you be able to come in but you can sit in a rocking chair down in the front room and you can contemplate and stay there as long as you want to." Well, it never happened. She had a stroke, and she never, ever was able to put one foot inside the Dunbar House. And so I still feel like in a sense that when I step inside the Dunbar House, as I did when I first came, I was busy sharing with her things that were there and sharing with her the things that I saw just as I did on my telephone calls from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and things that she could not share with me, I would write in long letters that she did for me likewise. So, many times when I'm taking in new experiences and new ideas, I find that I'm documenting them in my mind as though I'm sharing them with my mother. Story_ID: 614552 Speaker 1: Now the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as an individual who really did make an effort to cast my buckets down just where I was at the time and do what I could for the greater good of my community and my society. I would like to be remembered for being honest and sincere for my meager efforts which I hope in some way made a difference, because I feel that service is the debt we owe for the space that we utilize in this world...