 Story_ID: 228145 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Glory Van Scott. G-L-O-R-Y, capital V as in victor A-N, capital S as Sam C-O-T-T. Today is the 11th of February, 2001, New York City [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 228146 Speaker 1: Your name--what is the genesis of your name [HistoryMaker] Glory [Van Scott]? Speaker 2: I will tell you the genesis of my name Glory. When my mother [Dora DeMyers] was pregnant with me and she thought she was having me, she was in the hospital, and she was having these pains, and her best friend was a nurse and, and the best friend asked my mother you know, "What are you going to name the child if it's a girl?" and my mother said, "Gloria," and her best friend said, "no, why don't you name her Glory?" So my mother says well she'd ask my dad [Thomas Van Scott], and my dad said that was fine, voila, I was born, I was a girl, and that's how I got the name Glory. It was due to her best friend. And I hated it when I was a child because everybody used to say, "Glory, hallelujah!" Teachers would say, "Morning glory," you know, I mean it was, they'd sing 'Jacob's Ladder,' "Rise, shine, give God glory," and everybody would look at me and I'd go, "No, no, no." So, and I was maybe twelve years old by the time I really loved my name. By the time I was twelve, I appreciated and loved my name and I've only met maybe one other person with that name. Story_ID: 228147 Speaker 1: What of your background has caused--sort of motivated you to be attracted to the arts, and specifically dance? Speaker 2: Well, my brother [Jerry Scott] had been a child movie star, and I used to dance around the house, play the piano, jump around when people would come in, because he sang all the time and he wound up being a child star in, in MGM's [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios] 'Thrill of A Romance' with Esther Williams and Van Johnson, and he would perform all around the house, and so I would run around behind him jumping up and down and moving. So, I knew that I was attracted to all of that, and it was an automatic thing. There was no such thing as separating it, "Are you this--." I loved it from the beginning. Speaker 1: Now you were telling me earlier about what attracted you to dance, you know you were and so I wanted you to you know talk about that. Speaker 2: Well what had happened is that I was studying dance, I was studying at the cultural art center [Abraham Lincoln Center, Chicago, Illinois], studying music and art and acrobatics and drama and dance at a cultural art center and so my dance teacher took me and four other little girls to the Goodman Theatre in Chicago [Illinois] to see the Talley Beatty company. I had never seen dance like this before. Prior to that, I was seeing ballet, you know most things you saw '[The] Nutcracker' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] this, that, 'Les Sylphides' [Frederic Chopin]; so all of a sudden I'm taken to see the Talley Beatty company, and of course Talley Beatty was in [HistoryMaker Katherine] Dunham's first company. Talley Beatty danced that style of dance, and when I saw it I said, "When I grow up I wanted to dance just like that." It was incredible, and so that's then when I realized that, what the Dunham Technique and what that was about and then when I was finally in New York [New York] and going to school, I thought I was going to be this modern dancer, so off I went to Martha Graham School [of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York] and discovered I really didn't want to be a modern dance, you know, I didn't want to be a modern dancer, a grand modern dancer. So, somebody told me about Dunham's [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York]. I go over the Dunham's school, I walk in and of course I walked in with my little white gloves on fresh out of finishing school, everything just pressed just so, and I go up to the desk and the girl behind the desk her name was Pearl Reynolds, and she was one of the registrars plus she was a student there. So, she said, "May I help you?" I said, "I want to dance, and I've come to register for classes." So, she said, "Well have you had the Dunham Technique?" I said, "No, but I'm a dancer." She said, "Well, if you have not had the Dunham Technique you have to start from beginning, take the beginners class." And I was truly miffed, and she later told me she said I'm gonna either love this kid or hate her, there's not gonna be an in-between. So that night, I watched the Dunham class. I was in shock. I said, "My God, I don't know that technique, but I want it," you know, and so when I came back the next day, and there began the romance with the Dunham Technique and it was incredible. Speaker 1: Now when you first saw it in Chicago [Illinois], the Talley Beatty dances, what about that appealed to you? What was the thing that you found so fascinating? Speaker 2: The rhythms; the way in which they moved with the rhythms. The music, which would be Cuban and--or Haitian or whatever, the whole cosmopolitan--yet, the ethnicity of many cultures that drew me to what I was looking at on stage. It wasn't Eurocentric, and I knew that and I was absolutely delighted with what I was looking at, and that's what drew me. Story_ID: 228148 Speaker 1: And when you first start taking classes at the [Katherine] Dunham [School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York], you know, Dunham School, what did you find was different in the training from what you had received, in the Dunham Technique? Speaker 2: Well, what I'd received before was ballet in Chicago [Illinois] studying at a cultural art center [Abraham Lincoln Center, Chicago, Illinois] and modern dance, which is a Sybil Shearer modern dance, but here all of a sudden there was a whole different syllabus, a different way of moving, which was the Dunham Technique, different sets of steps and the way things were put together, and I found that [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham's technique made me stronger than the other techniques would make me, and so therefore it's like when you audition for a Broadway show if you're a Dunham dancer you'd get the job, 'cause they knew you were a Dunham dancer, they knew you were trained well and strong, and Ms. Dunham made strong dancers, and it's an honor to be a Dunham dancer. I love to call myself a Dunham dancer. Speaker 1: Now when you talk about the Dunham Technique making you strong what do you--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: What, what about, what about the exercises of the technique (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's the way in which her steps are put together, her technique is put together, the development of her technique--development of each set of steps that you do that produces this strength within in the dancer. It's the way when you come away from the bar that you get in the center of the floor that--without hanging onto the bar--that you learn to hold your balance and develop these muscles and make yourself strong. All of that is part of what happens with the Dunham Technique and going across the floor, in her progressions, you become very strong as a dancer, and there's a great excitement to it; great excitement. I remember Syvilla Fort was an early Dunham dancer who also ran the Dunham School. When the Dunham School closed, I went to Syvilla Fort school [Syvilla Fort Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York] to continue the Dunham Technique, and there were times when you literally thought the room changed colors and the classroom changed colors, because everybody was in sync with what they were doing. The drummers were drumming. The dancers were dancing and strongly technically trained and training for even more, and a lot of us were already doing Broadway shows and doing television, but we were in those classes, and it was incredible. Story_ID: 228149 Speaker 1: Now when you came to study that first time, did you have to unlearn some of the other technique or were things transferrable (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, because I'd had ballet, and I continued with ballet even when I came, I went to Ballet Arts [New York, New York], even when I came to New York [New York] and was doing Dunham Technique I still took ballet, and I had learned modern dance. It was a Sybil Shearer modern dance and I thought I was going to be this heavy duty modern dancer and I had prior to that been reading the Agnes de Mille's 'Dance to the Piper' book, and I thought, "Oh, I love that modern dance," and of course I did wind up also being a principal dancer at Agnes de Mille's company [Agnes de Mille American Heritage Dance Theatre], which was wonderful. So, I--if someone said to me, "What do you feel--is there anything else you want in terms of dance?" I have really fulfilled--in terms of the companies, the people, the technique--what I have wanted to fulfill. You couldn't ask for more. I was a principal dancer with the Katherine Dunham Company, a principal dancer with the Talley Beatty company, a principal dancer with Agnes, Agnes de Mille's company; you couldn't ask for better. Speaker 1: Now, what year did you start studying the Dunham Technique? What year was it do you know? Speaker 2: I started studying the Dunham Technique in 1950-something. I can't remember the dates. Speaker 1: Okay, and what--there were how, there was Martha Graham [School of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York], there was [Katherine] Dunham [School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York], who else? There was-- Speaker 2: Well, there are a lot of ballet schools-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [The] Ailey [School, New York, New York] wasn't yet Ailey at that time. Speaker 1: Well let me, well let me approach it this way, what, what do you think because you are a teacher as well you know and--but what do you think is the genesis of the Dunham Technique? What, what makes it singularly important as to-- Speaker 2: Because I think it permeates your entire life. I don't think that you can be a Dunham dancer and take on what she's given you, and if you truly understand what she has given you, without continuing to develop and knowing that you need to develop that you don't just stop--"All right, you've been in the Dunham Company, you stop doing things." The genesis of her and what she does in terms of her technique, the genesis in terms of her life, the mode, is one that says one continues developing as an individual, and that's the difference between--perhaps if you were in other companies I don't know that they're necessarily into your development as much as [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham is into your development. Even when you're not in the company, "What are you doing? What are doing with your life? Where have you taken what I've given you, and taken it on to and given it to someone else--and then some?" But that's what she fosters within you. You have the feeling to learn and develop and create. Story_ID: 228150 Speaker 1: So, when you start studying in the '50s [1950s], I mean in the 1950s, did you meet [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham immediately at that point? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I didn't, I didn't. I didn't meet her until much later when--I met her and she--in fact, this one time she came to the school, Syvilla Fort [Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York] school, and was looking to take dancers, and I had tonsil problems, so I didn't even go to audition. The next time Syvilla Fort says to me, "Ms. Dunham is coming through; I want you to go to the [Katherine Dunham] Company." And I said, "All right." So, I came over to the audition, and I was taken. Speaker 1: Now when you first met her what, what were your, what were your impressions of her? Speaker 2: My first impression with meeting Ms. Dunham was one where she was in the theater, and I believe they were at the 53rd or 54th street theater and I had gone from Syvilla Fort's class with some other kids to see the Dunham Company perform and I went back stage, I wanted to tell the dancers how fantastic they were, and everybody had managed to--lots of people, and I had wanted to say something to Ms. Dunham, but then I said, "Well, you know, it's so crowded, I won't bother, and somehow it seemed everybody had gone out of that hallway, and Ms. Dunham was standing there with the door cracked looking at me, and I turned and looked at her, and I told her how fantastic I thought she was in the company, and I left. That was my first meeting with her, and I don't know that she would remember this kid that did that, but that was, that was what happened. That was my first meeting. There was no one there, just the two of us. Speaker 1: And when, what year was that? You don't know? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Sixties [1960s], fifties [1950s]? Speaker 2: Fifty-something [1950s]. Story_ID: 228151 Speaker 1: You said you were in her troupe [Katherine Dunham Company], who was that, during what time--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: Okay and you travelled with her? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what version of the troop was that? Was it the--'cause there had been different incarnations of the troop. Speaker 2: What do you mean what version? Speaker 1: Well, no I didn't mean what version, I meant what, you know there was the original troupe. There were several different-- Speaker 2: Well, this was the big company, the big travelling company, and of course there were some members who were no longer there, because they'd gotten older and weren't dancing, but we still had some senior members in our company, which is blessing. [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham understood that you have older members to help the younger members receive and understand the flavor. She didn't--like some companies somebody gets older they kind of take 'em out of the company and put younger people in--you can be young and get a technique, but there's a whole flavor that's there when somebody who is seasoned will give you if they're dancing next to you, and you take that in. It makes you a far better performer. Speaker 1: But, you talk about the Dunham Technique in many ways it's almost if it's own culture. Speaker 2: I feel so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really feel so. Speaker 1: But, I'd like you to speak to that a little bit more. Speaker 2: It's its own culture in terms of whether you're dancing Cuban dance in the Dunham Company or you're dancing Haitian Dance or Brazilian dance. Whatever you are dancing, or African American dance from the South, you know what you're dancing, what it is, and you also, because of the way in which Ms. Dunham works, you can connect all those roots to each other. So, therefore, you stand and you say, "The world is my culture, not just one bit of it, but the world is my culture," because look at where we were dropped when--from slavery, all over the globe. So, you can stand with a great deal of pride and look in many different directions and enjoy that fact. Speaker 1: So, what were the things that you were taught, I mean, you're originally from Chicago [Illinois] even though you came to New York [New York] and you would consider yourself, you know, young and sort of cosmopolitan and sort of a hot shot. What did you learn about the world experience, you know, really from Katherine Dunham and the exposure (unclear)? Speaker 2: That the world was my culture, and had a specific culture, but the world--I could take on the world. I never felt--in places that we travelled, I would get into a country and soak up what they had, because it was always a learning experience, not to disturb what you had in somebody's country, but come in there and soak it up and see what the culture is and appreciate it for what it was, and you learned that from Ms. Dunham. Story_ID: 228152 Speaker 1: Let's look at the [Dunham] Technique itself. What is sort of central to it? Is it you know, is it the, you know, to the exercises and things like that, what are the central parts that are, you know, sort of critical? Or the exercise-- Speaker 2: Well, if you--any technique, any dance technique, even if you're looking at ballet, you have a set of plies; you have stretches. All dance has that, so, and all of that is central, no matter which technique you're talking about. All of that is central. You have your plies; you have your releves; you have your stretches. You have your jumps; you have your leaps; you have your turns. All of that's central, and that's central in any technique that you're using if a person is dance and is not doing what they at one point were calling minimal dance--which I to this day will not understand what minimal dance is. Stand there and don't move is minimal dance--and you're not dancing. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (laughter) let me go to--what, which of the--what is your favorite [HistoryMaker] Katherine [Dunham] dance? Speaker 2: I think for me, you mean Ms. Dunham dancing it or something that we danced? Speaker 1: I'm talking about that you've danced. Speaker 2: I think 'Afrique,' which was, we used to open with that, and that was so wonderful because I have such a feeling of when we learned that, and that's the one where they bring Ms. Dunham on the platform and bring her in. That whole ballet was always--I, when that, when the drummers would start dum, dum, dum dum, dum, that rhythm would start, it was like in the theater you would just pump up and get ready and then there was a point where Lucille Ellis, who's one of the senior members of the [Katherine] Dunham Company and we were like water berries we carried these little, little water pitchers and when she would call to us, to Barbara Wright and I, and it would be the three of us turning, that whole--and you'd look at her, and she'd give you this life back from her life, and you'd look at her and that connection, that's what was so fantastic about the Dunham Company as well. You would look at another dancer, you gave each other life. You gave it; they took it; you gave it and in reverse, and so the dancing had a life of its own. It just--it was incredible. I would love to hear those drummers go, "Doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, lei, lei, lei, lei, lei, lei, lei, doo, doo, doo, doo, Cio ko, ko [ph.]," everything, everything about it, the music, the drummers, Mr. [John] Pratt, the genius, his costumes, Dunham, the genius for the choreography, Mr. Pratt, the genius for the costumes. It was extraordinary, and you learned in that company. If I came out on the stage--and it could be twenty dancers out there--if you had the wrong earring on, I would notice it. Ms. Dunham was interested in dancers knowing what was around you. She wasn't interested in dancers with their brains in their feet. She wanted you to use your mind, so when you came out on stage, you knew everything, you could feel everything, and you learned. For example, I knew nothing about taking care of costumes until I got into that company. I had been kind of spoiled. I did Broadway shows, somebody took care of every costume. I didn't have to do anything. I was doing TV and Broadway shows, everything. Everything is taken care of you--for by you, but when you come into the Dunham Company, Ms. Dunham says, "Even if you're principal, you have this to do, you have that," you're assigned. Some people are assigned to make sure that when the show is over that night, shoes are--we're finishing at that place, shoes were collected. They knew how many pairs of shoes they had to collect, which ballet, where to pack them. And I was on costumes with Lucille Ellis--how many dresses? I'd stand and wait for you, "Okay, get this dress--it's packed, get it out, 'cause we're moving out of here the next day," so I learned about costumes. I would turn the costumes over and look at the incredible way in which Mr. Pratt had made these costumes and with a great deal of reverence and feeling about what these really represented and how they looked on stage. So, you began to get your--the real, besides dancing, the whole theater is what Ms. Dunham would give you, not just the dance, but a whole theater so that you became really a theater artist not just a dance artist, but a theater artist as well, whether you were singing, because Dunham dancers sang. They'd have to dance, of course, sing; you had to do it. Story_ID: 228153 Speaker 1: How large was the troupe when you were in it? You said it was the large (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was a big one. I think we probably had maybe forty people who would travel with us sometimes. You had all the dancers, and we had musicians. We had orchestra travelling with us. We had all kinds of--it was incredible. Speaker 1: Can you give some of your favorite memories of, of traveling with the [Katherine] Dunham [Company]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I think really my favorite is something that I did--well, it's a favorite memory. Two that stand out in my mind. One was, we were coming from Middle East and we came into Marseille [France] and we had to get to Paris [France], and there'd been a storm, and we were on one of [Aristotle] Onassis' ships, and there'd been a storm, so the pilot ship couldn't come in and get our ship and bring us into port in time for us to get off the ship and get on the train that was to take us from Marseille to Paris, so we were late and of course the train, the normal train that was going to Paris, one train had left, there was another train there, and it's getting ready to leave, so when we finally got off--and we were all seasick, because we'd been in a great big storm--they told us--our manager had a big discussion with the ticket taker or whatever the station master and insisted, "We have to get on that train," because what are you gonna do with all these people? They've got to get into Paris tonight and so they can sleep because we can't stand up in Marseille. There no hotels rooms here, what are we gonna do? So, they arranged that, and so he said to us, "All right," he said, "run over and go into that train over there." So, of course we all started running that direction to go into the train over there, and someone screamed, "It's not that train; it's the one over to the left." So you have all about forty people suddenly swerving and running to the left, and I remember thinking, my God it's like a herd of cattle, we're just running, running, running. We get on the train; we're hot; we're tired. So we get on this train, we sit down, and someone says, "Okay, don't worry," because we were hungry. When we're about ten minutes out with this train, it stops at a little weigh station, and you can get off and get hot chocolate, get a sandwich, whatever. So everybody is, "Oh yeah great, great, great." So we get out to that point, I pile off the train like everybody else go in there, and we're getting hot chocolate, of course everybody is trying to get it at once, all of a sudden the train started to pull off. People scream, "Oh, the train's leaving!" We turned around; I ran out there and to the right of me was pure darkness, to the left of me was pure darkness; there's nothing. Yura [ph.], which is one of the dancer/singers was on the train said, "Jump, sister, jump!" He sticks his hand out--I flipped a train. I had on slippers and everything else, and I could have gone under the train, could have been clickety, click, click goodnight, goodbye, but I flipped a train. I can't believe it, you know, to me that was movie time, but this was reality, and of course someone pulled the emergency cord, and they stopped the train, and so we had at that point an Australian manager was filling in for one of our other managers, and he was screaming, "Everybody get in those rooms, don't come out!" And he had to pay like a five hundred dollar fine and he was furious with us, but I mean, what, you couldn't leave [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham's company out there in the middle of nowhere. So, we piled in and so that's one of the ones. And the other was that, right before that one happened, is we came from the Middle East, is that when we got to Lebanon you had to declare a religion, and there was a big form you had to fill out. I refused to declare a religion. I drew a line through where it said religion. So, of course they looked at everybody's forms, and they see mine and the line drawn through, and they decided, "Well, she must be Jewish because she's not declaring a religion, and she drew a line through." So they gave it back to the manager and said, "She has to declare a religion or the company cannot come into Lebanon." So, we're in a holding pattern, and I'm sitting up there. I am furious, and I'm saying, "No, I don't have to declare a religion; that's none of their business. I don't want to declare a religion; I don't have to declare a religion." So, we're sitting and sitting and sitting, finally they said, "Well if you don't, the company is just going to sit here. There's nothing we can do." So, I thought about it, and I said, "Okay, all right, I'll put down Ethical Culture." Now, I did put down Ethical Culture. Ethical Culture is a humanist religion which was started by Felix Adler, who was a Jew. So there it is, I put Ethical Culture. They had no idea. So, okay, she put a religion down, and I went through, and so the company could go. But, that was my protest that I do not and should not have to tell you what religion I am; that's nobody's business. So, I remember that very well that I had, the company could not move until I decided to declare a religion. Story_ID: 228154 Speaker 1: Let's go back talking about [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham. Why do you think she is so important, in terms of--I want to first ask in terms of dance, then I want to ask, you know, other questions related to that, but why has she earned her place in the whole, you know, in the whole dance community, why? Speaker 2: Because she stepped out an unchartered course and forged ahead and made a course for us, which was not there. There would not have been an Alvin Ailey. There would not have been an Arthur Mitchell. There are so many companies that would not have been. The dancers, the black dancers, would never had done anything had it not been for Katherine Dunham stepping out and making a big company and making a statement about how beautifully we can dance and who we are, and we have a right to do this. If Katherine Dunham had not done that, this would not have happened, so there is no way to say, except to say that she's the pioneer that enabled the rest of us to ride on her sunbeams. Speaker 1: But, why do you think she was successful at that? Speaker 2: She was, because she was put here to do that. She came in this world with that to do that. I have a great belief in that. She came here to do that and to make that change, just as [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to do the change he came to do, she came to do the change she came to do. Just as Malcolm [X] came to do the change he came to do, she came to do the change the change she came to do, and that's who I think about it. Speaker 1: And why do you think she--I mean given the fact that she came to do what she did, why do you think she was successful? You know a lot of times people are not necessarily successful in their mission. Why do you think--what, what unique talents or combination of talents did she bring to the table? Speaker 2: First of all, she's a genius. Secondly, she's a humanist in terms of how she views people and what she thinks and how she plans, and she is a giver to help people. She does all of that. So it's a whole life force that she brings in terms of giving and helping that's--she does it through the art, but she does it in terms of, let's say, feeding people in Haiti when they didn't have food, or making available doctors for people who didn't have the finances to go to doctors. All the things that she does--she's a hands-on human being that's really a humanist and humanitarian is what she is. So, through the arts and through the way in which she is as a person, it's all congealed there together. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Glory [Van Scott], give me some examples of her genius? Speaker 2: Do you know anybody that would ever create the kind of ballets that she created and the way that she has? At the time that she created this ballets 1940, 1939, the kind of things that she took on--nobody else even thought--the scope of them, the music--she also writes music--the scope of those ballets that she did, the beauty of those ballets, the music that's there for those ballets, the technique that she evolved and developed for those ballets, nobody else did that with a big company, with the scope in which Ms. Dunham did it. Speaker 1: And where do you--because she was an anthropologist, you know, by training, where do you see that having, you know, played a role? Speaker 2: It played a great role, because she could turn and look at any culture and figure out what she needed to use from that culture with anything she wanted to do creatively. And because she's the anthropologist that she is, she's constantly curious about--I've never known her not to be curious about things. She will sit and give a lecture and even when she has her seminar in East St. Louis [Illinois] in St. Louis [Missouri], people are sitting there, these are educators sitting there listening to her, and she'll ask questions--she's read everything; keeps up with everything--and they're, she'll ask a question and they're going like this, "Uh, uh," trying to figure out what's the answer. She knows. Her mind is constantly searching and reaching, but always to help someone, the person that's even nearest to her, "Well, why don't you do this, or maybe you could do that," it's constant. I've never known her to hold back, but rather always trying to help someone. Story_ID: 228155 Speaker 1: What were the things that she [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] imparted to you--I mean besides, you know, caring for people--but what were the expectations as members of the [Katherine Dunham] Company? Speaker 2: I think one of the things is to really be sensitive to other people's culture. She also, in what she did, made you pay attention to begin to want to know other languages. Perhaps you didn't think about that before because she'd speak many languages. She'd stand there before the company and give notes. She's talking to somebody else in patois or French, then she's talking Spanish, then she's talking English, then she talking Portuguese, whatever, and, you begin to pay attention and say, "Wait a minute, yes, I should be doing that too, and I'll go and study, and I'll do this, and I'll do that." So, she inspired you. You know, you couldn't just stand there and do nothing, let's put it that way, and a lot of dancers lived abroad, because they felt more comfortable living abroad, and it was an easier life in many ways, didn't face many of the problems they faced coming back to America, so, and getting that whole international flavor. You can tell a Dunham dancer by the way they dress. They are very much aware of themselves. That is coming from the root. Ms. Dunham loves beautiful things. Her dancers are--her dancers pay attention, like beautiful things, and carry themselves in such a way. And you usually can tell a Dunham dancer by the way they walk, the ones who really were doing it, you know. Speaker 1: And what were some of the rules that she had for the company if you were part of that company? What were some of the rules that were great? Speaker 2: I think the--basically the good things that you turned out from your home with, is not to ever to embarrass the company, or embarrass yourself, or embarrass the company. To do the things that you are expected to do, not to do anything that would be illegal, but to honor yourself and in that honoring of yourself you're also honoring the company and honoring the work, so I think that's part of it. Story_ID: 228156 Speaker 1: You did this, this retrospective program, I would call it a retrospective I think this year right? I mean, last year sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, June. Speaker 1: Anyway why did you want to do this? What was your motivation behind doing this? Speaker 2: Well I, in 1979, I had produced the [A] Katherine Dunham Gala at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], and I put together three different generation of [Katherine] Dunham [Company] dancers to perform the Dunham works, and at the time, right before that happened, I had been invited out--I'd gone out to learn 'Floyd's Guitar Blues' for [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham, which is one of her pieces, and I was then with the Agnes de Mille [American Heritage Dance Theatre] dance company, and Agnes de Mille wanted that piece in her company. So when I was talking to Ms. Dunham, and Ms. Dunham and I were sitting down talking and I--Ms. Dunham said, "Oh, I'd love to see the Dunham dancers again," and I looked right at Ms. Dunham and said, "well, you will see them again," and she said, "I will?" I said, "Yes." I came back to New York [New York], I wrote to the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] and where they said, you know, you're supposed to put 'organization,' I wrote in big bold letters, "I am the organization," and I got a grant and got matching funds to produce the Dunham Gala at Carnegie Hall, which I did. It was very successfully done. Now, I considered, I had done that, now I wanted to pick up the young kids that danced the Dunham dances and that's why I decided to do that, and I wanted Ms. Dunham to see her children dancing in New York City in the theater in New York, and so that's why I did that. So, it's like completing a circle. Story_ID: 228157 Speaker 1: --And, I understood a lot of the headaches that she [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] probably had in the process of getting things up and on their feet. Very apparent how much you have to deal with when you're doing that, so I had greater appreciation for what it took for her to do what she was doing. Speaker 2: What do you consider one of her most successful, I mean, significant pieces? I know you've said that you personally like 'Afrique,' excuse me, you explained that, but what do you consider, you know, her, you know, some of the more significant? Speaker 1: They all are. I mean it's like, to me, to select anyone of them is like if you were a parent of six or seven kids and something saying which is your favorite child? It's very difficult. Certainly, sometimes you're dancing this, you love dancing that, but they're all so fantastic and they're all different, and they teach you so much. You learn so much while you're performing them. It's very difficult to try to take them apart. Well, sure I love doing 'Shango,' which is a ritual. As I said, I love 'Afrique.' I loved doing 'Choros,' which is Brazilian. I loved 'Samba,' which you know, I just love everything that--all of the work and the 'Americana Suite' which I love. You know you're doing [the] Charleston, you're doing all of those things. There is--I can't take it apart in that way because I do love her work, so again it's like a mother with a lot of children--you don't want to say this is--pull it apart, like, "This is my favorite, because--." I just feel for each and each one is different. Speaker 2: What piece did you like her dancing the most, then let's just ask that? Speaker 1: 'Barrelhouse Blues' ['Barrelhouse'], which she does that film magnificently, better than anybody, and I loved her in 'Afrique' when she'd come out in that big number, the opening number in 'Afrique,' loved her in that, loved that. Speaker 2: And was it, was it-- Speaker 1: And also 'Alegria,' which I loved too. So, there are--there's lots. Speaker 2: Was it the, the theatrical part of it or was it, I mean, was it the spirit part of it? Speaker 1: It's the spirit of it. It's the theatrical part of it. It's all together, so you're not separating one. You spiritually feel certain things about it and theatrically you're looking at a marvel there, so all of it you're enjoying it. It's like eating whip cream or ice cream and just enjoying it, without having to feel the calories of it or without having to feel it's too sweet, just really enjoying it. Story_ID: 228158 Speaker 1: Can you describe the essence of the person who is [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, you know, and, in either anecdotal terms, you know, or some experience terms or--I mean, I know she was this mother hen and I know, you know, that she, you know, exposed you and I know she taught human, you know, you to be human towards each other, but I'm just trying to what is the essence can you give me some just anecdotes about Katherine Dunham herself, or you know your exposure to her or some--you know? Speaker 2: I think the, the often times what people want from people to talk about in terms of great people is finding some kind of common root to look at and say this is this is why this person works or whatever and it's, its-- Speaker 1: But, that's not what I'm asking. I'm not trying to figure out how she works. I guess I want some anecdotes more about your experiences with her or you know, or just some remembrances of time spent or you know or--I mean you told me one time-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you saw her you know when you had that moment together. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I like, what I like is when, my favorite time is when I sit with her privately, and we just talk, and I call that Dunham 101, because you're learning a great deal. You're listening to her talk, and it doesn't matter what it is she's talking about, trust me, you're learning from whatever that is that's going on, even if you're watching a TV show together. By the time she analyses and says certain things about that, you've also found that you've come out learning some more, more than when you went in there. So, I think my favorite time is really to sit and talk with her privately. Speaker 1: So she really is a great teacher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, she's an enormous teacher. She's a master as a teacher, and it's constant you know. No matter what it is, it's constant. Whether you went to take her a flower, and she looked at it in a certain way or handled it a certain way or said something about the color of it, right away your mind's going, "Yes, that true, that relates to this, that relates." She relates things to so much. Speaker 1: And can you give some, can--you know, I know this Dunham 101, can you give just like a couple instances of you know of time spent or shared or? Speaker 2: Well, for me, they're really personal, and they're really private and, and, and I hold them close to the vest, because they are important to me in terms of my own life, and they are life forces that are used for me as fires for other things that I do. I can just say to you one day she said to me, "Now I know you don't have any time during your day, because you're busy, you're producing, you're writing, you're directing, all these things you're doing, but I want you to carve out four hours a day where you do nothing but sit down and read." And I looked at her, I said, "Four hours?" So you know, so I said, "Well, let me see, I can find an hour or two," or how I can do this. But she's saying that's what she wants you to do, so the reality is that it's a constant evolving. It's a constant growth pattern, which is very exciting. You know it's never stagnant. Story_ID: 228159 Speaker 1: How do you think she should be remembered? You know, there are people nowadays who would say, "Who is [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham?" and you know if--what would you tell those people who say that, that's what I'm--you know, if they say, "who is Katherine Dunham?" Speaker 2: I would look at them and probably say, "Well, who are you?" And they say, "Well, what do you mean who am I?" "You know your name?" "Yes." "You should know her name. You should know what she's done because you are standing on her shoulders, just as you speak to me and ask me, 'Who is Katherine Dunham?'" Speaker 1: And what efforts now are being made to preserve, you know, the Dunham Technique and the legacy, which is what you know that is Dunham? Speaker 2: Well, that's being structured and set up now so that you will-there will be a repository where you know where works are, papers, and all of that so that these things can all be pulled together, so that people really can go and research and know where they're gonna go, and how it's going to be handled, but that's in the process now. Speaker 1: Are there other things that you would like to say or that you feel I haven't touched upon? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a whole 'nother world, so I don't want (laughter) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: It probably deserves another interview, because there's so many more things, but what I'd like to say is that, and I keep saying this, that she's, to me, she's a comet that's come here, and you know to--to spark us, to get us going, to do what we need to do, and that's how I always think of her, as a comet. You can't catch it. You can't hold it, but nevertheless it's there, and it inspires you, and it's exciting, and it's different. Story_ID: 228160 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Dr. Glory Van Scott, and the Glory is not Gloria, it is Glory, like hallelujah. Speaker 1: Okay it's spelled? Speaker 2: G-L-O-R-Y and then capital V-A-N and there's a space and capital S-C-O-T-T. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind how you got the name Glory instead of Gloria? Speaker 2: Yeah, it really is. When my mother [Dora DeMyers] was pregnant and she had just started like premature labor or whatever, so she was in the hospital and one of her best friends who was a nurse was in the room talking to her, and she asked my mother, you know, "What are you gonna name it if it's a girl?" And my mother says, "Well, if it's a girl, I'll name her Gloria," and her best friend said, "No, don't name her Gloria; if it's a girl name her Glory." And so my mother said she'd ask my dad [Thomas Van Scott], and she asked my dad, and he said that was fine, and that's how I got the name Glory, and I like to say, "Glory, that's how I got that name--" Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I hated it when I was a kid, because nobody had the name Glory. They always had Gloria, dah, dah, dah, and for a time I told them to call me Gloria, because I thought it was just so austere that I was the only one running around with Glory, but then by the time I was twelve I enjoyed my name as Glory. Speaker 1: Okay, now is, is the last name Van Scott or is it two separate? Speaker 2: It is Van Scott, but it's two separate words. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you were to list it, it be listed under V, but it's spelled with a space in between. Speaker 1: Okay and do you have any nicknames or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sister Lynn [Colton (ph.)] sometimes calls me Gigi and, and some of my nieces and nephews will go, "Aunt Gigi," but beyond that no, I really don't. And, and Syvilla Fort, one of my dance teachers, used to refer to me as little Glory, you know things like that, but no, not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not quite a person that people would attach nicknames to, and I--with the exception of people very close to me in my family, I don't attach nicknames, and then of course as we grew up, my parents said, you know, "You have a name; we call you by your name, not by a nickname." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think that that's been the influencing thing for me. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 06/01/47 [June 1, 1947], Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor, a writer, a principal dancer, a composer, an actress, and as I said a professor; I'm those things. Speaker 1: An educator in arts. Speaker 2: And an educator in arts, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Thursday the, let's see, Thursday the 16th of September, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at [The] Riverside Church [New York, New York], which is like a cathedral, in tower ten, my favorite room. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the interesting thing about this is that I have Dr. Glory's Youth Theatre here in The Riverside Church, and you know this is an awesome incredible civil rights church, so it's rather fitting that I should be here having an interview. Story_ID: 228161 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a lightweight answer and the first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? I would say broccoli. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: The fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite, a vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, mine--and a lot of my friends have adopted it, I will often say when we're busy working or something, "Oh, let's go get some grub," and so they all now say, "oh, how about a bit of grub?" So I kind of like that. It's kind of catchy, and it's funny, and it's light, and it's kind of--has a feeling of camaraderie about it. Story_ID: 228162 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Dora DeMyers. Capital D-E, capital M-Y-E-R-S. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't have all that information in my head, at this point. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us-- Speaker 2: But she's from Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us a rough idea of when she was born maybe? Speaker 2: I'd have to look it up. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm not asking for a specific date--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Nineteen-fourteen [1914] or '15 [1915], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Sixteen [1916] or somewhere around there. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: No, '18 [1918] or '19 [1919], somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her place of birth? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: What was the place? Speaker 2: In Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's near Greenwood [Mississippi]; it's in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, you don't know the name of the town? Speaker 2: I'd have to look that up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but near Greenwood? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace it, and do you know anything about your ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's mother is, was a Choctaw Indian [Native American] lady, the favorite person in my life. Her name was Matilda Stackhouse [Brown], and she was an extraordinary person. My mother had a brain that--one of my friends said she should have been the president of the United States, that's how quick she could think, and her mind race, and she was a very beautiful woman, tall and elegant, and was in society in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather [Print Brown] on that side was dead before I was born, so I never met him, but my grandmother, my mother's mother, at one point came to live with us in Chicago, because I was a baby that was a little sickly, and then she came and that got fine, and so she was like--I bonded with her, my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did, did your grandmother tell you stories about Mississippi or your mother-- Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: --growing up in Mississippi? Speaker 2: --my, yes, my grandmother told me that at one point when she became a widow, she had one of these stoves, I guess the ones that you have to stoke the flames or something. Speaker 1: Wood stove. Speaker 2: Wood stove, and she had a new one, and so she was a designer, and she sewed for a living, and I guess the woman who was supposed to pay her had not paid her, so the man came and asked about the money for the new stove, payment for the new stove, and she said, "Well, I'll give that to you next week, because I have to pick up the money for my sewing," and so the man went away--and the man happen to be a white guy--so he went away and so then he sent two guys, two black guys in a truck to come and just told them to go and take the stove. So, they appeared at the door, and as I said my grandmother was this small Choctaw Indian woman, when they came to try to take the stove, my grandmother said, "I told you I would give that to you next week, I have to feed my babies," and she had a leveled shotgun at their heads. She had that shotgun ready like that, and they dropped what they, whatever they were gonna carry something in, and took off, and that was it. She had to go and take the money finally to the man because I guess so frightened them. But, she was a very strong lady and as the expression goes didn't take any tea for the fever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's one of the stories that I really, really enjoyed. Speaker 1: All right. Now did your mother grow up in Mississippi? Speaker 2: She grew up in Mississippi, but she had to come to Chicago, and the reason she had to come to Chicago is that my mother was a very beautiful woman and one time she was walking down the street and she had on all white--as I said my grandmother was a designer and seamstress, so she made my mother very beautiful clothes--my mother was all in white with a parasol, and she's walking down the street and there are some white guys who were digging a hole, you know, and they're working, and so they whistled at my mother, and she didn't pay them any attention, so then they threw a little dirt at her feet, and she turned around with her parasol started beating at them, and they kind of laughed, and my grandmother said, "That's it, my daughter, I have to go north," and so my grandmother pulled up stakes and brought her children to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, did she come from a large family? Speaker 2: My grandmother? Speaker 1: No, your mother? Speaker 2: My mother? She had three sisters and two brothers. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a teenager when she came to Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did she get a chance to go to school much down in the South? Speaker 2: Yes she did. My grandmother believed in education, and there's a thing in our family about education, so it was always foremost for our people. You know we were always taught about it and also made to understand you do that, if you do nothing else, you do that, because that's your key to success. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was something that was hammered. We hammered subsequently in our, the generations following, nieces, nephews, children, whatever. It's a thing that we do and it's important to us. Story_ID: 228163 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Dora DeMyers]--how did she like Chicago [Illinois] when she--? Speaker 2: She loved it because she was able to really have a different kind of life than one has in the South and totally enjoyed herself being in the social circle and enjoying herself. It was good. It was good for her. Speaker 1: Okay, what did she do for a living in Chicago? Speaker 2: She became a nurse, and then after a while she stopped being a nurse and was just home raising the family with my grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] there and people helping to take care of us, so that's what she did. And then, in social issues, my mother--it was from my mother that I learned a great deal about social issues. I remember one time going to the supermarket with her, and I said to her--and we'd read something about some children in a flood and needing food--and I said, "Mom," I said, "look at all this food; they're not going to use all this; why can't they, you know, at the end of the day, they've got this, they've got that; they can't--can they give it to children and people who need it?" And she said, "They're not going to do that, they're gonna throw it in the river," or do something, and that was when I began to understand, just because we have it doesn't mean we ship it and give it some one who's in need, and she used to talk to me about voting. You vote because if you do not, then you've given away what you should not give away, which is really in essentially yourself, and so it was constantly talking about who was running, who was not running, why you should vote for them, why you should not, and I began to understand, even way before I learned it in school, that one doesn't cross a picket line. One has to really think about what that is before you cross it, and I learned a lot in how to stand up--if fifty people are standing there, and they're saying, "No," and I'm standing here, and I'm saying, "Yes," because yes really is the right, proper thing I won't budge off that. I won't budge and compromise. For what? Because then I'm losing me if I do that, compromise when I know it's really wrong. So, those are the things that I learned. My mother would go out, out on a picket line and tell you this, tell you that, "This is what's going on--" "don't fall for--" "this is the situation--" and you'd listen to it. It was a long time before I would even consider ever giving anything to [American] Red Cross, because my mother said that they have floods I guess, which was probably before I was born, and that the Red Cross would first help the white people and after that then go to help people of color. And so when they would ask for people they wanted money for Red Cross kids would bring, I was, we were told no and the reasons why not, so those things--it stuck with me and about the injustice there. So, I began to really early on see where there could be an injustice and, early on, understand what you've gotta do to change it. It's no good to just say that it's that or see that's it that, but one has to move ahead and do something about it. So, when you're confronted with things, you teach others to understand what's going on. Story_ID: 228164 Speaker 1: So your mother [Dora DeMyers] was--was she associated with Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, she was. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now. Now how did your grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] like Chicago? Did she like it better than Mississippi? Speaker 2: Well, she liked it very much, because she was suddenly with her grandchildren, and that was fine for her, and she could sew and design clothes for people, which she did and was very successful with it. Speaker 1: Okay, well are there any other stories about your mother's side of the family that you remember that they tell? Speaker 2: Only, the only other side, on my mother's side is my mother was a cousin to Mamie [Till], you know, Till, and, and they were cousins and Emmett [Till] was my cousin who died of course by the hand of racists, and so there is that connection with that, and then there's a story 'cause I was going to write something about this, and I was talking to my sister [Lynn Colton (ph.)] and I was saying how said I felt, and my sister turned to me, and she said she didn't feel sad because it's the fault of the grownups, and I'm thinking she means the racists. She said no. The people in Chicago, the family in Chicago knew that Emmett knew nothing about the South really and that in a sense he went down as an innocent to the South when he really should have had somebody with him who would have protected him from even making that mistake. He wouldn't know. He could whistle to anybody he wanted to in Chicago; there would be not repercussions in that sense, so he would not know what the situation was, and so I had never--I was really so angry when she said this to me. I said, and I was talking to her on the phone, I said, "If I was there I'd try to box your ears when you say this," and so then when she explained what she felt and her--with her, it's always preparation, you don't have preparation. You must have preparation, wherever you go and whatever you do, and I thought about that, and I said, "She's right." You have an obligation--when people send their children abroad, if they're going abroad to do something. They have to know what the decorum is abroad. You can't come in and say, "I'm gonna act this way, because I want to," when you're in someone else's country. I can remember being in Greece where I was told, when I was with the Katherine Dunham Company, you wear skirts or dresses, but you don't wear pants. So, I can wear pants in America, but I certainly knew that's--those are the rules, and there are certain places where it's not something that's against your health or against in that sense, so where you are, "When in Rome," [Italy] as they say, "do as the Romans do." If they say, "These are our rules here," then follow them or leave their country or leave their state, or leave their city. Those are the rules. There's nothing unjust about it, you see, it just is not that kind of situation. It's a question of preparation and preparing and letting people know what they need to know in order to function wherever they go. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--now Emmett Till was your cousin. Did you have much contact with him or can you tell us anything about Emmett? Speaker 2: No, I didn't have much contact in terms of that, but what it is, is that through my parents you know and through my mom talking about it and what it was and what, the horror of it is, is what you see. You see it through those eyes and-- Speaker 1: Did--I mean, did you ever meet him, you know come in contact with him? Speaker 2: I think I was very little or something like that, but I didn't, I don't remember it, because my mother and she and his mother were cousins and so that's where the connection was, but nevertheless I can still remember the pall and the horror and the feeling of some heaviness in my house, you know, when that occurred, I mean really-- Speaker 1: Yeah the effect on everybody. Speaker 2: --the pall and heaviness, the heaviness and, and even today, I have a thing in me that pulls back at it, because you can do one of two things: you can have such rage and such anger that it will consume you and when you get that rage and that anger and it consumes, you will be ineffective to do what you need to do to make sure things like that don't occur again. So, I've, I've learned in terms of that, and one of the reasons I learned about the business of anger and the--being able to keep us a level playing field on that when there's anger is one time my sister and I were having this little heated discussion, and she's two years older than me, and we're having this heated discussion and she and I was like "Ne-ne-ne," and she's going, "yes, un-huh, yes," and I'm screaming and carrying on, and all of a sudden I became aware, "wait a minute, something is happening here that's different," and I realized she was absolutely the epitome of calm, and she was the one who was in control and that I through the anger was out of control, and so now because of that and I thought, and she was like fourteen when I was ranting and raving and so she knew already--she's very brilliant; she's a brilliant woman. She knew already what to do in order to maintain the control and that you have clear vision if you, if you don't allow the anger to consume you, then you can act and act appropriately, whereas the other way you're just acting on stone just feeling, and it's not the thing that's in your best interest. Story_ID: 228165 Speaker 1: What's your sister's name, and do you have any other siblings, or it's just you and your sister? Speaker 2: My sister is Lynn, Lynn Colton [ph.], and she's in Chicago [Illinois] and she teaches and works at a school in Chicago, which she loves, and she's fine, and she's my, I guess, my favorite sibling; she'd be the one because she was always touting--anything I'd do, she'd show up for it and, "Oh yeah, you're gonna do this," and I remember when I first was putting on my first pair of pointe shoes, toe shoes, she would hold my hand so I could [pas de] bourree [couru] backwards and do those things, yet she was--she's an artist. She's a graphic artist. She draws and designs, and she's great with that, which is a different area from me. I have no gift in that area, but she does, so it's, you know, it's one of those things where I really have the greatest admiration for her, her mind and her ability, her talent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Our talents are in different areas, but I think hers is graphic art and she draws and designs and does all that and is marvelous, and I have none of that, but she doesn't have any of the performing arts in her either. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now who are the other brothers and sisters and, and can, can you place yourself in order, you know with the other--? Speaker 2: Well, I had two older brothers, but they're--they both subsequently died of cancer which is--and they smoked, and it's like, I want to say to anyone who is looking at this: don't smoke. But, my oldest brother Jerry [Scott] had been a child star. He had--he was in a movie called 'Thrill of the Romance' [sic. 'Thrill of A Romance'] with Esther Williams and Van Johnson and he plays Lyonel, Lyonel the young bellhop, and he was a protegee of Lauritz Melchior who was a tenor, and my brother was a tenor, and he has a solo to sing. He sings 'Please Don't Say No' and 'Because' in the film and had a great career, went to Hollywood, then came back and didn't like it. He didn't like being in Hollywood and didn't want to do that anymore, but he was enormously gifted. He would write music. He was the first one that made me understand what the Muslims were doing. You know he would write articles and read them to me and made me to understand what they were about, because I didn't know, but he was always ahead of everything. And he's the one that made me understand a lot of things about dying. When he was very, very sick with cancer, as cold and strange as that sounds, he'd say to my mom [Dora DeMyers], "Oh you know, it doesn't matter when I die, or what you do with my body, da, da, da, you could just toss me here because I won't be there," he said. But, there was no fear attached to it, and his whole thing, and he said to the doctor, "You can use my body for science, because if you can save one person," these are his words, "if you can save one person from whatever you do to find out from me, since I'm not going to make it, then I consider I been helpful along the line here." So, that's a champion. That's a champion who understands himself, understands his place in the world, understands what he can leave when he can't stay here any longer physically, understands in some way in which he can be beneficial to another human being and I have a great deal of admiration for that. Speaker 1: What was his name, name again? Speaker 2: Jerry. Speaker 1: Jerry, okay. Jerry Van Scott? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and you had another brother-- Speaker 2: And my other brother he was--he went into insurance, but he--I always feel sorry for him, because he could dance very well, but my parents weren't seeing that for him, for dancing, for a boy. He had a hard time being recognized, because my oldest brother was so powerful in what he did, but my, the younger one, Joseph [Scott], he also wrote beautifully. He was a beautiful writer, and when I consider me as a writer and I think about--I can remember him writing me a letter one time and saying that he was in Chicago [Illinois] and he said, he said something, he said, "You know, I have my," he said, "I can see you." He said, "I have my individual, private TV screen in my head; I'm looking at you and you're going to class and I can see that and I feel this--." Just that--he was--I think I got a lot of that sensitivity in my writing from him, because he wrote like that. I have beautiful letters that he used to write to me, and saying also when I was a little kid what he felt and just a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, any other bro--so, so you had two brothers and an older sister? Speaker 2: And a younger sister, and that younger sister was into nursing. Story_ID: 228166 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Thomas and it's Van Scott. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: About the same as my mother's [Dora DeMyers]. I've never looked at their real dates of births or paid that much attention to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he also comes out of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Near where my mom was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can tell you that his father also had a huge farm, and his father--Seminole Indian [Native American], father he had--had a huge farm, and there were like seven brothers, and I do know that the story that used to amuse me and I thought, "What? Well, what did they do?" They were all over six feet, and they said that no white people came near that farm, because my father all these sons and--my father had a lot of brothers, I'm sorry, had all these brothers who were all these big men, and nobody ever bothered them. They never came near them, and I always pondered that, and we always wanted to go down to where that was, but we couldn't go down there to see all that, what they had, because my grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] on my mother's side did not want us to go to the South, so while my cousins went down and went to that part of the South and when hunting and did all of those things, we were never allowed to because my grandmother said, "No, they don't know the South, I don't want them to go there," and again I never went to the South until I was grown up. Speaker 1: Now how old were you when, when your cousin Emmett Till was killed in the South? Speaker 2: Probably like eight or something like that yeah. Speaker 1: Do you think that really affected your grandmother's perception? Speaker 2: She felt that beforehand, because we never went even as an infant; we just never went. My grandmother apparently had said from the beginning she, after she left the South with my mother knowing what could happen, from then I understand that she said I don't want my grandchildren to ever go to the South because they don't know anything about the South. They've been brought up in the North and there could be a problem. Then, of course, years later these, these things happened with Emmett, so we never, never went ever and yet our cousins would come back and talk about, because as I said my father had like seven brothers or something and they were all big guys and they had their children, but their children would go, and they would go on the farms and they would go riding and they would go hunting and do all the things that we were not allowed to do because my grandmother didn't want us to go there, and that was my mother's mother, so there was that control. Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace it? Speaker 2: I can think in terms of my uncles and the grandparents there, mainly in terms of them, it is the land, that they owned a lot of land that, that my father, that they had, they had that, and they were hunters, and they rode horses and they did, they were mainly people from the land and did lots of hunting and thing like that, I remember, but of course we never went to where they were because my grandmother wouldn't allow us to go there and so that was what kept us out of that aspect of it. Story_ID: 228167 Speaker 1: You said your [paternal] grandfather was a Seminole [Native American], I mean, does--are there any stories associated with that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, the stories in terms of that, my [paternal] grandmother would come, my grandfather on that side and my grandmother would come to Chicago [Illinois], and my grandmother would sit, and she would really sit there in all Seminole dress and sit in a big chair--and I have pictures of that--sit in a big chair and tell us stories, you know, but my mother [Dora DeMyers] didn't want her telling us all of these stories, so there was a problem there. She didn't want, I don't know she just didn't want us learning the folklore, but she preferred that we just were in schools, and we're learning everything basic and dah, dah, dah, dah in that way, but I don't and to this day I can't figure out why she didn't want us to learn that folklore, and I was intrinsically interested. I wanted to know, but she wasn't. When my grandmother, that grandmother, would start to tell us all these stories, my mother would say, "Well, I don't want my children to know, they don't need to know all that myth, they don't need to--" whatever, although she was more interested in our learning what we learned in school, but she wasn't interested-- Speaker 1: What kind of stories, can, do you remember of the stories that she (unclear)? Speaker 2: There would be stories of family members riding a horse, and there would be encounters with--certainly with people who were white and the situations, how they handled things, what they did, being together--because it was a very close-knit family, very close, all of those things with a closeness. And of course, I would sit there and want to hear everything, but then my mother would come in and somehow interrupted when they come to visit us, so it was always interrupted and I wasn't old enough to just say, "Listen, I want to hear that, you know, please may I hear that." I wasn't old enough to voice that. Was I older, I would have said, "You know, I really want to hear this," or I would have gone to visit them to hear it. That is the other part of that, so you are--you're restricted according to age, at times, as to what you can do and what you cannot do. You know, had I been a teenager at that point, I would have said, "I wanna go there, that's where I want to spend my vacation," and then maybe would have been allowed to do that. You can't do that the other way. You're too young and so you can't fight that. Although I do, when I talk to young children, tell them to voice what you feel, even if it may not work out in your benefit, but at least voice it. Story_ID: 228168 Speaker 1: And again my family had always been the type that would say, "We may not like what you are saying, but we give you the right to say that," so that we would sit at dining room table and discuss everything. We'd eat dinner together and politics invariably came up. Politics came up so much that I remember once sitting there and of course everybody in my household was a Democrat, and I sat at the dining room table at the age of twelve and announced I was gonna become a Republican, and they looked at me like, "What are you talking about?" I said, "Well, I need to break up this--we need a little mix in here. Everybody sitting here, they're all Democrats." Then, I began to learn what the Democrats really were versus really what the Republicans were, and of course I said, "Well, no, I guess I'll grow up Democrat," but I specifically remember that, feeling like--and there was that little rebel in me of wanting to see something different or change something and obviously what I changed was the--was not having the understanding of what something was and got the understanding of what something was, so (unclear) I understood then why my family was Democrat and why I'm Democrat, you know, and if somebody says, "What are your politics?" and I say, "I'm a liberal Democrat." That's how I would refer to myself, and then they'll say, "Are you a pacifist?" and I'll say, "I'm a humanist. I'm an Ethical Culture person. I believe in humanism." I said, "I'm a pacifist to a point," and then they say, "well, what do you mean, 'to a point?'" I said, "As long as you do not touch me, I'm absolutely a pacifist, but the moment you touch me, I become your worst nightmare, because I become a warrior," and that's how I feel about it, which is why I wouldn't freedom ride because I'm not the person who's gonna turn the other check. There's nothing programmed in me to make me turn the other cheek. While I have great admiration for [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.--did shows so we could make money to send them--I knew I was not the person to get on one of those buses or go to one of those counters, because I would fight, and I will show you an incident of just what happened-- Story_ID: 228169 Speaker 1: Well, I was with a company; we were performing in Gaithersburg, Maryland, and on our way we had had day off, two days off, so I was in a car with, there were three--six of us, and three were white and three were African American, and we had come up to New York [New York] to have a couple of days off, and we were on our way going back. This is in the '60s [1960s]. So we're sitting in the car and going up, on our way going back and one of the--the gentleman who was driving the car was an older, much older gentleman who was from the South, and so I said, "Oh, let's stop for something to eat," you know me I'm a northern kid, and he's saying, "well no, I don't know--" you know, we're some place in between somewhere in Maryland, he wasn't sure if we'd have a problem or whatever, and I said, "well, I'm gonna go out and get--stop," I saw a restaurant, I said, "let's go." So, the three white kids jumped out, and they were gonna run into the restaurant and one--the other black kid was in there, he said, "would you get me something?" He says to me, would I get him something. I looked at him, and I said, "No, if you want something, you will come out of here, like I'm doing, and you will get it in that restaurant." I went into that restaurant, and I said--and the other guy was saying, "Well, they may not serve you." I went into that restaurant with a vengeance. I almost tore the door off the hinges as I opened it and went in there and sat down at the counter and said, "I would like to have a grilled cheese." He said, "Yes, okay, lady," but you see I went in, and so I know that's not how you go in if you're going in for [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. You go in, and you're resolute, but you can't go in--I'm ready to punch a couple of faces. So, you know, I was like, urgh, like, nobody is gonna tell me I can't have this, this here--. So, I'm not the type that you send to do that, because--and I know if hell had frozen over I was going into that restaurant, and if that was the end of me, at that time, it was gonna be the end of me, because I was going to get served or they were gonna--you were gonna have some boogying going on in there, and it wasn't called dance boogie. Speaker 2: Now how old were you when that happened? Speaker 1: Oh my God, I was like maybe twenty or nineteen years, I don't know, anyway, whatever, I was young, but I was like in a rage that someone would keep me out of that restaurant. I'm going in there. And the very fact that the other two guys, the older guy who had lots of experience from the South, that he was worried about it, and then--but the younger black guy, I was--he was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so I couldn't even understand why he wouldn't go in--as I'm from Chicago [Illinois]--why he wouldn't want to go running in there. But, he was worried--I think he felt the anxiety that the older guy felt. I didn't feel any of that. All I felt was I'm going through that door, and they'll serve me or we will be--have some boogying going on here. Not that I wanted to, but the anger that I had at that point, again, anger taking over, which is not the optimum thing to do. However, that is how I felt when I went, which is again telling me I wasn't the type to go freedom riding. Speaker 2: Okay, this would have been like what you think about 1966, '67 [1967]? Speaker 1: It was--I'd have to look it up as to which show it was and what time, but it was not the right thing for me to do in terms of--it was the right thing for me to get out and go in there, but it was not the right thing to go in there with the kind of anger in which I went in there, as I opened the door, as I said I almost pulled it off the hinges, because I was that angry. And of course they served me without any problem. But, again this is where anger takes over and anger is not your best friend in a situation like this-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and so I will always remember this, always. Story_ID: 228170 Speaker 1: Let me go back to your father [Thomas Van Scott], and did your father talk about growing up in Mississippi and what it was like? Speaker 2: No, not that much. Not that much. Mostly the talking about Mississippi really came from my mother's [Dora DeMyers] side about what it was like, because the growing up and a lot of those things that were being done in Mississippi by my father, by his brothers, they were in this huge place, and they were being you know men-men on their land and all that stuff, which is something that's not even--I'm not even privy to in terms of as a woman, not that interested in, in the same way, because as I said, he had one sister and all those brothers, so they did their hunting and their fishing and their this and their that, you know, and they were very busy being at that kind of time, the kind of strong men that enjoyed the camaraderie of other guys and stuff like that, the men--the men things, I call it the men things that men like to do, which are not the things that I would like to do. So, if somebody started to talk about that I wouldn't necessarily pay attention to it, because it didn't hold that same kind of interest for me, whereas my brothers [Jerry Scott, Joseph Van Scott (ph.)] were fascinated by it, because my cousins were going down there to the South and doing all of that stuff and yet they couldn't, and you know it spawned even--I have a cousin who was in a rodeo, and he rides those horses and does the roping and does all that stuff, because he had all that stuff when he was going down there as a child on the huge land the space that we had. He got all that. So, my brothers would like at that with like envy, like, "Oh boy, look at that," but 'cause they couldn't have that part, you know, but my male cousins would come back and talk about it. They did this and did that, but we weren't privy to it because as I said my grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] forbade us to go and my mother didn't, you know, force that. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father have the same kind of commitment to education that your mother and your grandmother had? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. My father had been a doctor in Indiana, and he had--general practitioner. He was the kind of person that helped anybody that needed help. He didn't make any heavy duty money from it, because of his commitment to people who needed things. And of course in Indiana there were a lot of poor people in certain areas that didn't have things, so his whole business was, "So you don't have ten dollars, so you're paying the two [dollars]," or whatever, but just that--but, I come from people who if you need something--my grandmother used to make quilts. If somebody didn't have a quilt, she would make it and give it to the person as a gift. And at a certain time, our clothes that we were outgrowing would be put in--and I learned you never have anything that has a tear in it, everything has to be clean and neat and in great condition, and it would give them away to people who needed it, and we were told if you ever see anybody with a sweater of yours on and if you mention it, you're going to get, you know, a terrible time when you come home. So, I grew up knowing, you could see it, but you never say anything about it, and it spawned in us that kind of giving, that kind of way in which my family was with that that I--my youngest sister one time took up a family, took care of a family that had been burned out for a year. She took care of them. They have three children, and she brought their clothes for school. She bought food. She did that. She used all of her money to do that to help. She was working, but she used her money to do that. She said that was her commitment. My sister Lynn [Colton (ph.)], there are kids that graduate from the school [in Chicago, Illinois] where she teaches and those kids don't have things, and she will know that they are graduating, she'll go out and buy all the stuff they need in order to start high school. And so I come from people who do things like that, that they consider that the community giving is more important, you know like I don't need to have ten coats. Seven of those coats could be somebody--people who need them--that you share. And so I come from people who are very much into sharing and helping and that's important to me, and I do it in my life now the same way. Story_ID: 228171 Speaker 1: You said your father [Thomas Van Scott] was involved in medicine? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Your father was a doctor? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and he practiced in Indiana. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so was he separated from your mother [Dora DeMyers]? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So, he was a doctor before he met your mother? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: They met--she did her little amount of nursing (unclear) (laughter), her little amount of nursing. We always laugh about that, because I really never could consider my mother being a nurse. She liked people to take care of her more, but she did some nursing for a short time, and I think probably after I was born, she didn't do any more of that, and that's kind of how their story met. And he was kind of a country boy compared to her, you know. She was sophisticated. She was into the kind of society that wasn't necessarily into. She was to Marva [Trotter] Louis and Joe Louis. She was into that society. They went places. They went to Palm Springs [California] for the spas, all of that stuff. My mother did that. She was president of a lot of the social clubs in Chicago [Illinois]. From the time I was about twelve years old, eleven or twelve, I used to always have to go to all the balls at the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] in Chicago, the Bachelors and Benedicts [Ball], the Green Donkeys [Social Club], all of those huge social clubs. My mom was president of various clubs, and we, my sister [Lynn Colton (ph.)] and I always had to have our gowns, and there were times when there were the white balls, the different balls that we had to go to, and I used to invent stomachaches sometimes, because I didn't want to go, but I, that's what I grew up in that kind of societal structure, which my mother wanted us in, and it worked very well. Speaker 1: Okay, did your father talk about going to medical school and the struggles of going to school (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had--he was very fortunate that some people helped him really with money to help him to get through it, because this is a great thing. And a general practitioner, which they used to be called at that point, now I think they probably call them internists, whatever, but that's what he did and it was hard, it was very difficult. Speaker 1: Where did he go, did he go to? Speaker 2: Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was hard. Speaker 1: Did he operate--well he was, you said he was a practitioner. Speaker 2: He didn't operate. He took out some tonsils but, thing like that, appendix. Speaker 1: He practiced in Indiana first and moved to Chicago. Was he associated with Provident [Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] when he, when he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was associated with Provident, and then he moved to Indiana, so. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Because of color have to go to certain hospitals and that was about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so in Indiana, near Chicago, East Chicago [Indiana], or Gary [Indiana] or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's near Gary, right near Gary. It's easy to get there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, you can drive there. Speaker 1: Hammond [Indiana] or East Chicago or, or? Speaker 2: No, right there at Gary, but kind of the outskirts there, but not in Hammond. Story_ID: 228172 Speaker 1: What's your first childhood memory or do you have a first childhood memory which you can remember? Speaker 2: First childhood memory. Yeah. The one that I remember so well is my mom [Dora DeMyers] had this thing about taking photos of us, and so I was a year, and I can still, a year or maybe a year and half or two, going on two, something I was really little, and I--my mom had me in this Petit Ton high chair--not high chair, a chair, high back chair with all this marvelous and, and mahogany arms and stuff like that sitting out on the front of the lawn of our house with a photographer taking a picture and me squinting and they kept trying to get me to laugh. I would not laugh. To this day I can remember it. The sun was beating me in the head. I hate the sun beating on me like that. They're taking the picture; I'm hating it, and the more they tried to get me to smile, the more I frowned. I still--I must have been about two--I still remember this. And finally they gave up, because they got a picture of me frowning, and I don't know where that picture is, but I used to hate that picture 'cause I could still remember it. That's my first memory of something I didn't like, you know. Story_ID: 228173 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: First we were like 40th Street and between [South] Cottage [Grove Avenue] and, between Cottage and [South] Langley [Avenue] and then we went to 85th [Street], moved down to 85th and [South] Blackstone [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were over in that neighborhood where the Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois], they considered that as Oakwood [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh, I went to Abraham Lincoln Center. I was one of the products of Abraham Lincoln Center. I--you know, that was the love of my life, that cultural art center, because I took dance and drama and music and art, still can't draw, but I took all of those things there. That was the beginning of it, because I was like, and I went to the camp which is of course Abraham Lincoln Center camp, which is in Milton Junction, Wisconsin [Milton, Wisconsin], and was at Clear Lake, and that's Frank Lloyd Wright's architecture, that camp. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And it's extraordinary. Speaker 1: Yeah the building is now the Northeastern Illinois Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Well in the city, in New York--in Chicago, it is, it's a college; they use it now-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I can remember going into there and there was a woman named Mrs. Willis [ph.], and she was the librarian, and the library was so wonderful. I loved books. And I would turn and go in the library, and she did story hour, and I remember sitting there looking at her and thinking she was kind of a portly woman, beautiful voice, and she'd talk and read these stories, and I remember sitting there saying you know when I grow up I can do that took. I can read stories like that dramatically, da, da, da, da, and so that's where I got so much of my training. Speaker 1: Yeah that's-- Speaker 2: And Edna Summerville-Oats was my main dance teacher and Beatrice Betts [ph.] and John Greene, who was a concert singer who taught music and that's where I met Paul Robeson, in our music class. Mr. Greene was a friend of Paul Robeson's, and he told us he was coming to see us and to this day I remember when he walked in we all stood up and curtsied, and the boys bowed, and the girls curtsied. He sang for us, and I'm looking at him thinking, that's the tallest man I ever saw in my life. He was gorgeous, and he sang for us and I--to this day I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay, now old were you when you met Paul Robeson do you know? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, I was real little. I must have been about eight, seven or eight, something like that. I was little. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that's something that--did any other celebrities visit the center when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Well, there was, the folk singer that I really like a great deal was Charity Bailey, and it was my first introduction to folk singing and folk music, and she sang a song in French, and I was absolutely captivated by it. And then subsequently, many moons later, I meet her here in New York City [New York, New York] and she--I meet her here in New York City, and I told her as a grown-up, I said, "You know, when I was a little kid, you came to Abraham Lincoln Center and you sang this song," and I started humming it--(music)-I didn't remember all of the lyrics or anything, 'cause it was in French and I remember how captivated I was. She said, "You remember that?" I said, "Yes, that's how it stuck with me," that's how wonderful she was and how it stuck, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that I think my first inkling of understanding that I really liked folk music. Story_ID: 228174 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I liked to smell chicken gumbo, 'cause my mom [Dora DeMyers] used to make that, and she made it really good. Sights, beach balls. My dad [Thomas Van Scott] would take us out on the beach with beach balls that he'd blow up, and we play on the beach with those beach balls, hit them back and forth and he would always--we'd have two huge beach balls and all--we'd go and he said, "We're going out! Picnic!" I was always a failure on the picnic, because I loved--all the food that we prepared for the picnic smelled great. We'd get out to the picnic grove, and as soon as I got there I wanted to eat the food and then come home, 'cause I never wanted to sit around on that grass with the ants. I just wanted to eat the food at the picnic and come home. So, preparing picnics, I'd say getting ready for school, which I've always loved, picking the new book bag, choosing the books. We always read a lot in my family, so choosing books and that was important to me. Choosing those school clothes; it always held a fascination for me and the music. My mother loved classical music, so that's how I got into classical music, and I love to this day. I can write a paper listening to classical music, but I can't use any other kind of music that can be on when I'm writing 'cause then I can't concentrate, but I can concentrate and write anything if classical music is on. It's just in the background; playing it doesn't disturb me, so those sounds and the sounds of children playing or playing sports for teams all over the city and loving it. Those sounds of--and achieving, you know, and, and looking at other children achieve that always as a kid I liked that. I liked friends who were also achieving. Story_ID: 228175 Speaker 1: What school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to Oakland [North Kenwood Oakland University of Chicago Charter School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay Oakland. In fact, I think they call that area Oakland at one point or Kenwood Oakland area; yeah Oakland School. I take it you liked school a lot? Speaker 2: I never--every school I've been in, I never wanted to graduate. You know I didn't wanna graduate out of elementary school. I didn't wanna graduate out of high school. I didn't want to get--when I was getting my bachelor's degrees, excuse me, I didn't want to graduate, 'cause I was gonna lose my friends. You know, always it was because I was gonna lose a particular group of friends and then when I, but by the time, by the time I got into the master's [degree] program, because then it's not, you're not there all the time the way you are when you're in a bachelor's degree and, and I went to college in Vermont. And going to college in Vermont was great because I come from a big city, so then I get to Vermont, small, quaint Vermont, and the quietude there was very good for me. And there's something that happened with that, 'cause I was in New York City [New York, New York] living in New York, and I went to school--it was time for my residency up at Goddard College [Plainfield, Vermont], which is northern Vermont, and when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated, all we heard in New York--we would hear fire engines, fire engines constantly, the noise and police sirens, and I don't live in Harlem [New York, New York], but nevertheless over the whole city you'd hear all this, and I was very tense and of course I'm upset, like any person of color was, but the thing that happened is that I didn't know--I would answer my phone, telephone like, "What? What is it?" and I said, "why am I answering the phone like that?" I don't answer a phone like that, but when I went up to school, I was sitting in a meadow, I was sitting there, and I was thinking. All of a sudden, it came to me: I have friends that are black, white, every color, everything, and you know it's like my friendships and my life is like a UN [United Nations], and I'm thinking, "I know what it is: every time I hear those fire engines, I think about somebody being killed because of who they are," and I said, "if I'm walking down the street with a friend of mine that's white and if someone comes up to me and wants to do battle because I'm with a white friend," or whatever, I realized then that I knew that I would fight to the end. If I couldn't talk them out of whatever, and we were engaged in battle, I would fight for my friend's life as I would fight for mine. I would not back down from that if they couldn't be talked out of something. And once I faced that, because I realized it was a fear of having some kind of confrontation in this way, and once I realized what that fear was and I recognized that I would fight to the death for whatever was going on, it went off my shoulder. I stopped worrying about it. I stopped being, you know, tense about it, and when I came back to the city when I heard the fire engines and the police sirens or whatever, I know longer was bothered by it in the same way, and I realized it was me knowing, because of the kind of lifestyle that I have, the kind of life that I have that, it's very likely I can be walking down the street with somebody with polka dot skin, who knows? But I'm saying that I knew that I would--then, that was what I was worried about because of what was going on in the city. So, it was a perfect place for me to sit in a meadow and discover it and feel what it was. Story_ID: 228176 Speaker 1: And then the other thing about that whole business with the '60s [1960s], with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], is that I'll tell you how the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] came to be. Speaker 2: We probably--well, well go ahead. Speaker 1: When Martin Luther King was killed, I was supposed to have dinner with George Balanchine and so was Arthur Mitchell 'cause we were friends--you know, George, you know, George Balanchine, the choreographer? So I didn't feel like I wanted to go and have dinner and Arthur was saying the same thing we're talking on the phone. So, then we said, "Well, why don't we just go anyway?" so I said, "Okay." So, I met at Arthur's house, and when I arrived at Arthur Mitchell's house he said, "[HistoryMaker] Glory [Van Scott] I have to leave [New York] City Ballet; I just can't keep doing what I'm doing," and you know, "with this happening. I want to start a black ballet. I wanna start a black ballet company." I said, "Well, then you have to do it." He said, "When Balanchine comes over, I'm going to have to tell him I'm leaving City Ballet." I said, "What you've gotta do, you've gotta do." So, when Balanchine came over he told him, and George Balanchine said, "I will help you in every way that I can," and that's how the Dance Theatre of Harlem came to be, out of that conversation when we all went out to dinner the three of us. Story_ID: 228177 Speaker 1: When you were in grade school [North Kenwood Oakland University of Chicago Charter School, Chicago, Illinois], what were your favorite subjects and favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Always, in school, my favorite things, and it didn't matter whether it was reading, writing, poetry--loved it, drama, if they had drama. Reading, writing poetry, drama. Those were things that, and history, captured me. Teachers--I always had a favorite teacher, and I suppose that Ms. Barry [ph.] was a favorite teacher in eighth grade that I really did care about, and she was special, because she recognized stuff I liked and feed me more and more and more and things of this nature, and one will, you, a student will right away discover what teacher's attracted to them to help them to move ahead, because you know and you know they can see your quick mind, and they come right like this as I do with students who are like that as well, one that's more forceful, and they're out there, and they're quicker. You go to give them even more, because you know they need more at that point, so that and I've always had a teacher in the school that's been my favorite. In Chicago [Illinois] was Ms. Barry [ph.] and also I would say Ms. Doogan [ph.]. And there was one teacher; she was a black teacher; she was incredible, Mrs. Jackson [ph.] because they would look at you with no nonsense, tell you what everything is, and you got the message. Speaker 1: So, how long were you at Oakland School? Speaker 2: I was there, excuse me, I guess four years whenever I went there, four years and then I went out, and then I went to Dunbar [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and then from there to Ethical Culture [Fieldston School] in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Dunbar High School? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went from there to Ethical, to Encamp, I went from there to the Encampment for Citizenship [New York, New York] which was a great honor. Speaker 1: Now what, what, so you didn't graduate from Dunbar? Speaker 2: I left, I left Dunbar and then went to Ethical Culture to finish up. Speaker 1: In New York? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so let's see well how did that happen? How did you, you know--well tell us about Dunbar first, you know, what, what Dunbar was like? Speaker 2: Incredible, incredible, extraordinary school that had, allowed me--I was starring in all the plays, doing all that stuff. I wound up getting something as a freshman that only a sophomore would have, because I auditioned for it and that was 'A Painting For The Duchess' [sic. 'My Last Duchess,' Robert Browning], a play, a drama, but it was an extraordinary school for me as an artistic child, and fortunately teachers recognized that, so I could do so much as a result. So, again in school for me the literature, the poetry, the writing, the reading, all of that, and history. History has always played a great part to me, to have a good history teacher. Speaker 1: Now, were they teaching African American history in those days at all in the schools? Speaker 2: I was learning it without that. I didn't depend on the school to carry it, because one of the reasons I didn't was because, within my family, we were told about that. We went to libraries and researched from that, so that things would, things happened when my sister [Lynn Colton (ph.)] was in school and a teacher said something about George Washington and didn't mention about some black children. My sister says, "What are you talking about? He had that slave and you had--" this and then, and the teacher got furious and sent for my mom [Dora DeMyers]. My mom came and said, "Well, that's the truth. My children say what they've researched, and they're saying it, so if you can't handle it as a teacher that's your problem." So, we were always very in your face in terms of something, not disrespectful, but in your face with what is the truth of something. If I felt that something was wrong, I'd tell the teacher. Story_ID: 228178 Speaker 1: And I can remember when I stopped going to Sunday school. I was going to this Sunday school, and I was eight going on nine and the Sunday school teacher was saying, "We have to fear God." And I raised my hand, and she says, "Yes, [HistoryMaker] Glory [van Scott]?" I says, "I don't understand why we have to fear God." I said, "I love God," and I said, "and I love my mother [Dora DeMyers] and father [Thomas Van Scott] and I don't fear them, and I love God, so why should I fear God?" She went, "Next," to the next kid. She couldn't answer it, and I said to my mom, "I don't wanna go to that stupid Sunday school anymore; she can't give me an answer." And she should have said, "I don't know, let me think about it," or something of that nature, which would have appeased me and then the next time we'd talk about, but she just cut me off, because she didn't have an answer for that, because she really believed in fearing God and the child--here I am an eight-year-old kid, I don't believe in that, because--and I've given the reasons why. It's like I'm saying something and not giving you a reason, so there are points where I as a student would absolutely push away from the adults if I found something was stupid, and I wouldn't say that to the teacher, but my mind would say, "That's stupid, that's no answer." And I said, and so she never answered me, and I said to my mother, "She's stupid, I don't wanna go back there anymore." Speaker 2: Now, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 1: We were allowed to go to whatever church you wanted to attend. My folks said we could make a decision as to what we really wanted to belong to, and but we could visit anybody's church, and we did. We'd go from church to church to see what your church is like if you said to me, "Oh, oh let's see what's it's like." In my family, there are Catholics; there are Buddhists; there's everything, but nobody has ever criticized what your church or whatever your affiliation is. They will ask questions. At a point when I became Buddhist, my sister [Lynn Colton (ph.)] said, oh what's it about, tell us about it? Or people ask questions, but no one ever criticized whatever you decided to choose. Understand that you've gotta make your own way. Nobody can pray you into it. If you believe in that, you gotta get yourself into this. You gotta get yourself involved. And however you do it--and I have a great acceptance of people's religion, as long as it isn't hurting anyone, and I'm not a proselytizer, because I don't believe in doing that, but I do believe that I can acknowledge whatever you--what you feel that helps you and however you think about, whatever helps you, as long as it's healthy, that's fine. As long as it's not trying to denigrate or destroy someone else, okay. So, we were allowed that. So, we would go and see what people were doing in, in churches that were every denomination pretty much and see what they were like. I even went to Spanish churches where they were talking--everything was in Spanish, and they're singing and playing music, and everything's in Spanish and feeling joyous in that situation. So, I never ever felt like, "Oh, what is this?" never. I would just be curious about what you do and how you do it. Speaker 2: Okay, but your parents didn't belong to a specific church? Speaker 1: My dad did not. My mother did. My mother belonged to Olivet Baptist Church in Chicago [Illinois], which is the high Baptist church, and very like this. You have your special area where you sit, and you wouldn't dare sit other than where your family has been sitting. So, my grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] would sit there, my mom would sit there, and it's a special area, and you know those churches like that--you don't go sitting somewhere, you are in this space, and they're known for that. It's very elegant. People dress to go to that church and all that stuff, so it-- Speaker 2: Now Olivet was pastored by Reverend Joseph [H.] Jackson, right? Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackson-- Story_ID: 228179 Speaker 1: Before we ended the last reel we were talking about Reverend Joseph [H.] Jackson who was at, who was significant because he was the most powerful black Baptist minister in the country, being the head of the National Baptist Convention, which was the largest black organization in the world at that time and may still be today, you know, and what was your (laughter), what is your impression of him? Because he was involved in some controversy with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]? Speaker 2: Well, I was not involved in that subject, 'cause I wasn't--my mom [Dora DeMyers], it was my mom's minster and my grandmother's [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] minister, not my dad's [Thomas Van Scott]. But, he--when my grandmother was ill, he came over to see my grandmother to my sister's [Lynn Colton (ph.)] house. My grandmother was at my sister's house at that point, and so he said something about, "Well, you know, I'm gonna pray this and pray that," and my sister just turned to him and said, "you don't pray for me, I pray for myself," because she didn't--she never liked him, you know. So, but, my mom did like him and my grandmother, and I never really knew him except to just meet him or something, but I didn't really know him. But again, with religion, we had an openness in my family, which was very good, and I found very healthy. Story_ID: 228180 Speaker 1: Are there any teachers at Dunbar [High School, Chicago, Illinois] that you remember or, that were helpful? Speaker 2: Well, well, Ms. Klun [ph.] who was very good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Mrs. Tabern [ph.]. Those are my--they were my favorites. Speaker 1: Okay, now all the time through grade school and high school were you taking dance lessons and drama lessons? Speaker 2: I was studying. I was studying dance and drama and creative writing and gymnastics at Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois], all the way through. Speaker 1: Now who was you dance teacher? Speaker 2: Edna Summerville-Oats and Beatrice Betts [ph.]. I was absolutely studying there and loving every bit of it. Music, dance, creative writing, drama, which I love. I had drama with Ms. Lucas [ph.], ballet with Beatrice Betts, and modern and jazz with Edna Summerville-Oats. It was awesome and then John Greene music and music appreciation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just, just awesome. It was the most--I can't imagine not having been part of that center. Speaker 1: Okay, were, did, did you have any classes with Sammy Dyer or, or? Speaker 2: No, they weren't teaching at that center. They taught somewhere else-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and I was, also I wasn't interested in tap and things of that sort. I was really interested only in the modern and the ballet and which worked great for me for what I wanted and then when I, when I, you know, when I'm taking classes in New York [New York] I went--of course first I thought I wanted to be this heavy modern dancer, and I went to the Martha Graham School [of Contemporary Dance, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now, now wait let's not get you to New York yet. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 1: We're gonna try to get you through this other school from Dunbar. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: How it happen that you went to school in New York? Now this, what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: I, I went from there to the Ethical Culture [Fieldston] School [New York, New York] and which is also part of the Encampment for Citizenship [New York, New York], which is up in Fieldston [New York, New York]. They have to have a lower school [Ethical Culture Fieldston Lower School, New York, New York] downtown, and they had Fieldston, which is in Riverdale [New York, New York], and I got scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay, now is this something that your parents [Dora DeMyers and Thomas Van Scott] thought that you should do? Speaker 2: I asked. I said, "This is what I want to do, this is what I like," and I was at that point getting my own little philosophy together as to what I liked and what I didn't like and becoming very open and receptive to different things that were not necessarily part of my culture, and in-- Speaker 1: But, how did you find out about the Ethical Culture School? Speaker 2: Through, through Abraham Lincoln Center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Through my teachers there, who were very much into all of these things. See that was the other wonderful thing: having teachers like John Greene. They were really--they weren't just Chicago, they were--they knew things that were happening other places, and--so I was privy to people who knew of other places to go to school, other philosophies, other experiences that they felt would be very good for me, and it is a humanist organization, Ethical Culture, and believes that man, that you are here to do something in this world and achieve and that to give to others; that's an important part of it. So, and I at that point was thinking I might become psychologist and work with children. I was thinking maybe I might do that. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute-- Speaker 2: Even though I had the arts going, I was thinking, excuse me, because of the humanist part of me, wanting to always be helpful. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wanna rewind a little bit back-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --to the Ethical Culture School. Now who, who founded the school? Do, do you know anything about--can you tell us what it is? Speaker 2: Felix Adler, Felix Adler (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Felix-- Speaker 2: So that whole movement, they have a [Ethical] Society [of Boston; Boston Ethical Community] in Boston [Massachusetts]. They have, excuse me, have a society in Boston. They have a [New York] Society [for Ethical Culture] in New York [New York], [Ethical Society of Philadelphia] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], all around the country. Speaker 1: Okay, so how old were you when you was-- Speaker 2: Teen, teenager. Speaker 1: Okay, yes, I know--but do you know (laughter). Speaker 2: I don't--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Were you a junior or senior or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just about-- Speaker 1: --what were you? Speaker 2: --just about senior, about junior going into senior-- Speaker 1: Okay, senior in high school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 228181 Speaker 1: Had you ever been in New York [New York] before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the thing is that I had been a little kid who was travelling all the time. I went--every time summer came, I never wanted to just sit. I went to Michigan. I went to Wisconsin. I was always going somewhere. I had the wanderlust as a little kid. Like if a teacher would invite me to come to their home somewhere. "Okay, mom [Dora DeMyers], I wanna go there." "All right," and off I'd go for the summer or some part of the summer. Speaker 1: But were you excited about going to New York City? Speaker 2: But, I knew other kids who'd been and had that experience, so it was easy. One of the kids I admired the most from [Abraham] Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois], who also went to Lincoln Center she was like four years older than I was, four or five years, and I admired her as a dancer, and I used to watch her the way she danced. And she said, "[HistoryMaker] Glory [Van Scott], when you get up there do this and this." I said, "Okay," you know, I'd follow after her. So, she had gone and had this experience, and so I knew that it was a great experience, and I knew from there to the Encampment for Citizenship [New York, New York] where you're gonna be with kids from everywhere in the world, that this is what I wanted because first of all the Abraham Lincoln Center Camp had faculty from everywhere in the world and had kids from different places and so I knew what that experience was and wanted a broader spectrum of that experience. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Encampment for Citizenship was a part of-- Speaker 2: Comes after Ethical Culture [Fieldston School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --the Ethical Culture School and that's, is that something that happens in the summer or? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were there one year, you said? Speaker 2: I never came back. Speaker 1: Okay, no, at the Ethical Culture School-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, for one year, right. Not that you (laughter)--I mean you didn't stay in the school? Speaker 2: No, I--from the moment I saw New York, except that I was confused by the subways, I thought the subways were probably something left over from the war, 'cause they looked, I didn't recognize it and didn't understand them, 'cause I thought it looked like a dirty hole you went into instead of realizing once you got down there it was quite nice. And Chicago's were very clean and very orderly. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you graduated from Ethical Culture High School, and was that 1965? Speaker 2: I don't know, I have to go look up the years, because I don't even count when I did what. I don't, you know, I just have--as you see my resume, there's this, this, this, and this and I guess that may be around there. Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have to be. Well, I guess if you graduated at eighteen that'd be '65 [1965], yeah. So, okay, so where there any special teachers there that you remember that and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that, that had to be quite an experience. Speaker 2: Yeah, Francis Levenson, Bernard Roshovsky [ph.]. Speaker 1: What did they do? Speaker 2: Actually, law and internal affairs and sociology, that, I was fascinated by that, and unions. I learned a great deal about unions from them, and that--I got very interested in that. Speaker 1: Now would that school be considered at the time a socialist-oriented school or? Speaker 2: No, humanist, not socialist, but humanist. Speaker 1: Okay. The union activity and that sort of that things, and you know how the United States was in those days and how-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. No it was socialist, it was a humanist school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear) yeah. Speaker 2: --because it's a religious school in terms of humanism, and it's listed as that. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna get-- Speaker 2: A humanist one, which means that whatever you believe, it's okay for you to believe it. Speaker 1: Okay, but you know in those days it wouldn't be okay to list yourself as a socialist, you'd probably catch a lot of-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, but it also wasn't a socialist school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was a humanist-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: --and it's listed as a religious humanist. Speaker 1: Okay, so okay. Speaker 2: It definitely wasn't a socialist school. Speaker 1: So, it's associated with formal humanism in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's actually what it is. Speaker 1: --theological sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly what it is, so. Speaker 1: Yeah okay, all right, okay. So you never came back to Chicago after you went to the Ethical Culture High School? Speaker 2: No, actually after the Encampment, Encampment that made say, "Hello!" and it was at the Encampment that Cicely Tyson came up, and she saw me up there, and she said, "Oh, you know, you've gotta stay." I said, "I'm gonna stay in New York." She said, "Well, you should go and see Vinnette [Justine] Carroll and study drama with her," and I said I didn't know Vinnette Carroll and so she made the introduction, and I called Vinnette, and I went, and I started having classes, private drama classes, with Vinnette Carroll who is the most extraordinary teacher and director and mentor in the world. She was just incredible. James Earl Jones, lots of people studied under her and worked under her and were directed under her. She was a catalyst for many. Speaker 1: Now, Cicely Tyson, at the time she wasn't like as big then as she is now, you know as an actor 'cause she was-- Speaker 2: No, she got bigger as she-- Speaker 1: She, she was with the Negro Ensemble Company at that point I guess, and Vinnette Carroll she's, yeah you're right, she's very well known as a teacher for many. Story_ID: 228182 Speaker 1: What was your relationship with Ms. [Vinnette Justine] Carroll? Speaker 2: She's great, wonderful teacher in terms of teaching the technique and also and really was the genius in terms of how to make productions, which had to do with our culture, from black culture, make them live in a way with, with the gospel in them, with the, the parables in them, with everything. She was extraordinary. So many shows she did and she directed and her concepts for these shows were--they were extraordinary. So, I worked with her. She was my director for 'Prodigal Son.' She was my director for about five or five other different shows I did with her, and it was extraordinary. And I got great reviews as a result of her directing me in the right way. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were in New York [New York] studying with her were you, was it like a full-time-- Speaker 2: Well, I was studying with her, but I'd go out and audition for shows 'cause I could dance-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so I was doing Broadway shows, television, everything. I was doing lots of shows because I could, I was--the thing is that if you are a dancer and if you're also an actress and you also can sing you can wind up getting leading roles. If you can only do one thing, then you got a little limitation going there, so I didn't have that as a problem because I literally could do all of those things. Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna get into I guess ask you about the--I know you've done all these things, but it's, you know it's never really easy for people necessarily to live in New York and take classes, you know, did you have to work at other occupations to fund your studies or? Speaker 2: Very, very rarely. Very rarely. I had--my mom [Dora DeMyers] said you gotta learn shorthand, learn something so you can earn a little living or something, so I worked a little bit at the American Committee, American Jewish Committee as a legal secretary for a short time and that was it, but I was, but I also was modeling because I, for Wilhelmina [Models], one of the first black models to hit the runway and did that. I could do that. I'm 5'7", so the shortest height is 5'7" for high fashion, so I did some of that to make money. And I was lucky because I--if I wasn't doing a dance company I would be starring in some show. I'd do the Broadway show here, I'd do this, so I was really, really busy and that made all the difference in the world. Speaker 1: Okay, so you living and working in New York, now-- Speaker 2: Living and working and going to school, you know, finishing up off college, and I took the kind of program that would enable me to be off campus and back on campus that kind of way in which one does it. Speaker 1: So were you going to Goddard [College, Plainfield, Vermont] at the same time? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: Goddard. Speaker 1: --now when, when did you start Goddard? Was it right after (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right after, I was going there--yeah, I was going there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And what it allowed me to do is, and one of the most incredible things is, when I was touring as principal dancer with 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] and would do my homework in the dressing room, and in between acts I was constantly, and what I did when I had papers due--I had a technique. I would come back from the theater, go to my room. I had a half hour after the theater was over to just relax, and I'd go to my room, hotel room, I'd put a sign on the door, "Do not disturb." When I went into the room, I had yogurt, I had tea, and some juice, I put it aside and a piece of fruit, and I'd go to bed, in the morning I would get up about nine o'clock and I would have that as breakfast, do all of that, and stay in my room writing and doing my homework until three p.m. at which point I would emerge and then from three until you know seven when I had to be at the theater, I had time to shop or be with the friends or do whatever, but I kept that as a routine. I had it as a routine when I was in Israel. I had it as a routine when I was touring in America, whatever, but it was the discipline that made the difference-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so that I had these things to do and I let nothing get in the way of it. Story_ID: 228183 Speaker 1: When was your first big role, you know, when did you get your first big role, you know, when did you get your first big role (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My big-- Speaker 1: --'cause something like being a principal dancer in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], I mean, we can't just shoot through that, we've gotta go back to it, I mean, and was there something before that or? Speaker 2: Yeah I mean I,-- Speaker 1: How-- Speaker 2: --I, my--the role that was my first big, big role I would say would be--well I was singing, dancing, and would be, well know I was, I had also done Agnes de Mille like--see I had been in dance companies, Agnes de Mille's company [Agnes de Mille Heritage Dance Theatre], [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's [Katherine Dunham] Company. I had auditioned for these companies (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but we're talking about right after high school. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: Right after high school. Speaker 2: --I had, okay my first biggest role was really the 'Prodigal Son' where I played the Jezebel. That was one where it was a singing, dancing, acting role; a starring role. Speaker 1: Okay now that was, that was with-- Speaker 2: With Vinnette [Justine] Carroll's direction-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Langston Hughes' piece. Speaker 1: And that was performed? Speaker 2: Performed in New York [New York] and also Europe. It toured all over Europe and France (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay, but where did they perform in New York? Speaker 2: In the Greenwich Mews Theater [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now all this stuff is important now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you may not think it is, but this is history we're talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're trying to talk about where these things took place-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what, who was involved that sort of thing, okay, so all right then, you were who many years out of high school when did that or were you just out? Speaker 2: I was soon, I did that soon--I was not, I was one of these people that got jobs easily and was right for a lot of things at that time which were correct, and I got jobs and I got--you know, I would go off with Agnes de Mille and her dance company and be a principal dancer, a Dunham's Company principal dancer--I just had things handed to me. I remember at one time when I really went home, and I was doing a show down at Vinnette Carroll's Urban Art Corps and it was called 'Step Lively Boy,' it's an antiwar piece, and I was playing this lady of the evening too, and I remember Dunham was calling me to come and do something she wanted me to do, Vinnette wanted me to stay and tour to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with this show, 'Step Lively Boy,' that was I doing, and I had signed a contract to go on tour with Agnes de Mille's Company as a principal dancer, and I can remember going home saying, "I wish everybody would leave me alone." And a lot of people said we wish they had that kind of problem. I was like, "Oh, oh everybody's calling for me," because that how I thought about it at that point because you had really make decisions, and fortunately I made the right decisions when I was doing things. I mean, I don't ever regret any decisions I made about doing one show or the other or whatever, I just don't. I can remember one of the shows I wanted to be in very badly was [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr.'s 'Kicks & Co.' That was being done, but I had auditioned--Agnes de Mille had come to see me do 'Porgy and Bess,' the principal dancer of Porgy and Bess at [New York] City Center [New York, New York], and she came backstage, and they said she wanted to meet me, so she met me, and she said she was interested in my being her principal dancer for 'Kwamina,' and I said, "Oh okay--" and I got--I had that and I did that, so I was aligned already with 'Kwamina,' with--it was a Broadway show, became a Broadway show. All of these things were there for me. I walked into them because people saw me, saw my work, and then asked me to--most of them, I didn't even have to audition for. I walked into them, they saw me performing somewhere else, and asked me to be the principal dancer of this or do this or do that, so I got a lot of jobs like that. Like if I was gonna work with Talley Beatty who was doing a show he knew my work, because I was also at one point with this company and he knew what I did. So, I was--I got lots of jobs like that. All these things were overlapping because of who I was in terms of being with this company doing that here, people saw me, they knew, and they knew my work, the caliber of my work. So, I worked a lot, I really did in a lot of shows, and it was good. And then at one point after doing all of these shows and I did Broadway shows and TV, all of this stuff, I decided I wanted to do something different, wanted more, and the more manifested itself in I wanted to start a children's theater, and the more manifested itself in I want to produce. Story_ID: 228184 Speaker 1: I wanna go back again to these companies, and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, can you tell us about her and when you, when you started dancing with her and--? Speaker 2: Dunham, the [Katherine] Dunham Company was in the '60s [1960s], and it was one of these things that I shudder if I would consider, and I was principal dancer in her company, I shudder to think what and who I would have been had I not been in that Dunham Company, had I not been a part of all of that had I not learned from Ms. Dunham you know and--and she's so extraordinary, she's a genius--and had I not been a part of what that was, the history that traveled around. You're traveling around with history every day, and when you're with her, it's history every day. If you talk with her, I consider it Dunham, when I go and see her now, each time I talk to her, it's like, I call it Dunham 101 today, like you're getting a course. You're learning something. There is never a time when you sit and talk with her. There's never a time in the company whether you watch her perform or see what she does that I didn't get a lesson, and so she once referred to me in Boston [Massachusetts] as I was her clone, because I was doing all these things, and I thought, "Oh my God," you know, all the problems that go with it and I said I don't want problems to go with all of that. But, it was an honored way of, of saying that she felt I was doing good things, which I appreciated. Speaker 1: Now were you aware of who she was when you were a little girl when you were wa-- you know when, I mean in 'Stormy Weather' Katherine Dunham's Company performed? Speaker 2: No, I became aware of her when I was small my teacher from Lincoln Center, Abraham Lincoln Center [Chicago, Illinois] took me to a concert, and the concert was at the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and it was Talley, Talley Beatty had been in her company, by then he had his own company, and they were performing, and I sat there--prior to that I thought I was going to be this great modern dancer. As I'm sitting and Talley Beatty comes out with his company and dances, and I said, "That's how I want to dance." That's when I saw what it was I wanted to do and, and so then I knew, and so when I went to the Dunham School [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York] and saw that, it was like, "Awesome, I finally found what it was I was looking for," and then later as I go to the company I, you know, it was the experience of a life--I would, that is, if you ask people one experience besides the experience of--if I were to pick one experience in my own creative life that I feel that I could not have done without and that I feel directed me in so many ways it would be being a principal dancer in the Katherine Dunham Company. If I had not had that experience, I know I would not have done all these myriad of things that I've done. It's not possible; it just would not be possible, and fear that I get if I think in terms of if I had not done that--it's terrifying, one of the most terrifying thoughts in the world. What would my life had been like? Who would I have been? Speaker 1: How did you get in the Katherine Dunham dance company? You were acting-- Speaker 2: It's interesting-- Speaker 1: --first right? You were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I was a dancer already, I mean, I was dancing. Speaker 1: I know, but you weren't in that company at first, right? You, the first thing you did was get with Vinnette Carroll, right? Speaker 2: But I was dancing in that, too. Speaker 1: Yes, but I'm-- Speaker 2: See I was-- Speaker 1: --just, yeah, I know you're a dancer, but how did you get in the--I mean how, was there an audition or--? Speaker 2: No, I, I--Syvilla Fort had her school [Syvilla Fort Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York] and I went, I was studying there, and I got a call that they were having auditions for the Dunham Company, and they felt I should be with the Dunham Company. I said all right d, d, d, d, d, and I went and auditioned and then of course Ms. Dunham wanted me and that was it, it was--and there were three of us that were friends already, Pearl Reynolds, Barbara Wright-Craig, and I were very close, so it was like, "Okay," I said, "if you go I'll go," "If you go, you go," and we went, and it was extraordinary. I mean, it was--the learning, if I think about the learning of that. If I think about the observation you had in respect for the older members of a company that taught you so much and that you learned so much about performing and about traveling and being in the world that they taught you, which was great, and then to watch Ms. Dunham who really held that company in her hand. She's the one that carried it. When she had no money, she used her own jewels or whatever she had to make sure that company survived. She wasn't getting any money from the government. She never did get government money in order to run her company, so she's the kind of person that would do--she was, when she decided to do 'Southland,' the ballet about the lynching; she knew about, you know, the whole thing with Emmett Till, and she decided she was going to show this kind of thing, that black guys can lynched and this can happen if they pay attention to white girls, if this goes on, and--and so when she put that ballet, 'Southland,' on, the government wouldn't give her any money. "We won't give you any money because you--we don't want you to show what happens in America," and of course she had with what she'd done, and her--she let you know that you're, the world belongs to you. When you work with Dunham, you discover the world belongs to you. It isn't one little piece; it isn't that fact that I'm from Chicago [Illinois]. It isn't the fact of here, but the whole world, and that's how I view it. If I had wanted to go to a place like France, France when I'm there, that's mine while I'm there. If I go to Italy or wherever you go, you begin to appreciate other people's culture, but at the same time you can see how you fit into where you are and appreciate that and enjoy it, and it's part of that. Ms. Dunham would stand there and speak to you in Italian, to this one in Spanish, that one in, in French--so you found yourself doing this and say, "Wait a minute, she's speaking and understanding all those languages," so right away you got busy to get together languages and you began as the first time perhaps you're getting commands in all kinds of languages, and you begin to get it together. So, it's a whole world that if you had your antenna out, she gave you a whole world, and so whatever I took afterwards, whatever show, whatever, I was so right on because of the training from her company. You had class too. You didn't just tour and do shows, you had a class every day, you know, and then rehearsal, so you were busy all the time, so when you had your free time you're running around looking at countries and seeing people and learning things; it is an extraordinary experience. Story_ID: 228185 Speaker 1: Now what about Agnes de Mille? Now you--now when did you start dancing with Agnes de Mille? Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s] with her too. Speaker 1: Now this is before Katherine Dunham [Company] or after Katherine Dunham? Speaker 2: After, after. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: After, and I became her principal dancer and that's because she, she saw me in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] and when she saw me in 'Porgy and Bess' she wanted me as her principal dancer in a Broadway show, and then after that do her company, which was called [Agnes de Mille] American Heritage Dance Theater, and I became a principal dancer in her company. And then she created a ballet that's an historical ballet, called 'The Four Mary's,' and that's an antebellum ballet. And the original Four Mary's, [HistoryMaker] Carmen de Lavallade, Judith Jamison, Cleo Quitman, and me. We're the original Four Mary's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that, that's a beautiful ballet. You should find that tape at Lincoln Center [New York Public] Library [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it would have to be (laughter). Speaker 2: And we were the originals, and that was with--we also did that from, with American Ballet Theater, we were doing that ballet of hers, and it was extraordinary. I loved working with her, and she really knew how well to use me as a dancer, you know, and so it was, that was a wonderful relationship for me too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as a mentor and as a fellow artist and to spend time talking with her, and I've been so privileged because I spent a lot of time with [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham, a lot of time with Agnes de Mille talking, Vinnette [Justine] Carroll and, being on that inner circle, it enabled you to grow and develop and if you're not el stupido you pay attention and you learn and realize that you're learning from elders and learning from people who have been there and acknowledge that and consider yourself very thankful and I do. As an artist, I am one of the luckiest artists, with the people I've worked with. I was with Talley Beatty's company as a principal dancer, so and when I grew up, and I said I wanted and I didn't know that when I was in New York [New York] I'd suddenly be in his company and things of that sort, and I said, "My goodness," so I have been a very, very, very fortunate person. Speaker 1: Now was that, were you with Talley Beatty also in the '60s [1960s] or did you get involved with his group in the '60s [1960s] too? Okay, how did-- Speaker 2: And then, of course another thing is to work with a company like Walter Nicks company [El Ballet Negro de Walter Nicks]. Walter Nicks taught us Brazilian dancing, and so that was an extraordinary thing, because he paired me with a Brazilian partner, so that by the time I was doing all the sambas and doing frevo, doing all these incredible Brazilian dances, I worked with the best for that, so that by the time I'm going with the Dunham Company and the ballet master says, "Why, well how come you know frevo, or you know this?" I said, I learned it from the Nicks company. So, you see that these people--and Walter Nicks had been in Dunham Company years before. So you're learning things from people that are--history, around me. It was--it's extraordinary, absolutely extraordinary, and the wonderful part is that I knew it and acknowledged it and just took it in, because it was there. Story_ID: 228186 Speaker 1: Okay now before we started the interview we were just talking informally and I mentioned some of the Chicago [Illinois] dancers that have been part of Katherine Dunham [Company], Tommy Gomez, Lucille Ellis, and Wilbur Bradley, did, do you have--did you know them before you went to New York at all or? Speaker 2: No. They were--I never--in fact Tommy, Tommy was not in the company when I went, and Lucille Ellis was one of the older people still in the company, and I just thought she was just fantastic. But, a lot of them had, were no longer in the company. It had, the older ones they had, Lucille Ellis and Vanoye Aikens and Lenwood Morris was a ballet master of those older ones. The rest were a minute group, we were all coming in as kids, and we were different, but the ones who had been there you recognized what they knew, you learned from it, and they taught you, and you know and you were luck, lucky to be receptive. Story_ID: 228187 Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of dance or performance? Speaker 2: A philosophy of dance. I don't have a philosophy of dance, I have more of just, as an artist, you just meld into what you do as an artist. You meld into what you do as the artist, and respond to other artists, and if you're doing that and people can feel something from you then that's--you've done what you're supposed to do. But, I also am very much socially conscious so that I don't do drivel. You know whatever piece I'm doing has got to mean something. Speaker 1: Okay, so it can't be--it's gotta have-- Speaker 2: I need a message, because you know even when I work with my kids and write productions, they have all have messages, so the kids can learn from them. Story_ID: 228188 Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself as being part of the Black Arts Movement in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Part of the Black Arts Movement? I'm an artist. I have a skin of this color. I am part of a movement in terms of wanting to--and we've done our civil rights battles in productions, too. I mean, I stopped a whole production once in St. Louis [Missouri] Muny Opera [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis]. Speaker 1: So tell us about it. Tell us what happened. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: This is a Paul Mooney Opera [sic.]-- Speaker 2: St. Louis-- Speaker 1: --in St. Louis Muny Opera. Speaker 2: --Muny Opera. I had this manager who sent me a script, and I was on the way--I used to sing foll--foreign folk songs and go upstate [in New York] to do that in the (unclear) schools and things like that, and I was on my way to go up there and this manager that I had said, "Oh, here's this script and they'd like you to come to St. Louis, you know you'll play this ingenue role and go to--when you come back, you'll be in New York for a couple of days and then you'll go to St. Louis and do this role," and gave me the script. I said, "All right," and I get on the bus, and I go to do my singing act, and I decide, why don't I read the script while I'm sitting on the bus doing nothing? I read the bus--I almost came--right on the bus, I almost came up out of the bus, I was in such a rage, because it had things like this it said, they had an interlocutor in there, and it said, "Mr. Interlocutor, Mr. Interlocutor, what is blacker than night?" And the interlocutor says, "An Ethiopian in a coal bin." That started. Then they had a thing where this guy, the black guy is supposed to, his name was Lemon, and I'm supposed to be his girlfriend and then I have--he's supposed to be--he says to Mr. Interlocutor, "He can run around the racetrack and run fast as the horses," and the guy says, "oh, get out there and run." I mean it just went from insult, to insult, to insult. Speaker 1: This is a minstrel show. Speaker 2: It wasn't supposed to be, but this was a script that they were going to do this show at St. Louis Muny Opera. And I took a look at this I could hardly contain myself. I could hardly stay on the bus, I was in such a rage. So, I called that manager from, when I got upstate, and I said, "I'm--I can't do this," and I'm bringing this back to you," and I said, "and I'm going to file charges in terms of what this script is," and she said, "Well, what? You don't want to do it--?" and she happen to be of the Jewish faith, and I said to her--she said, "Well, couldn't you do it?" I said, "Would you want to play [Adolf] Eichmann's mistress?" She said, "Well, no." I said, "I cannot play this part; it's the same thing to me." I came back into the city [New York, New York]. I have a godmother who was head of the National Committee Against Discrimination In Housing [NCDH]. I went over there; she read it; we typed up everything. We sent the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] information. We sent Urban League information about what it was, and the things that were so absolutely just repulsive in the script, and I went to take the script back to an agent, and he said, he told me, "Oh, there's another actress who will do if you don't do it." I said, "Then that will be on her conscience. I can't answer for her; I can only answer for me." And so, wound up stopping the show before they could get it going. They were trying to get into rehearsals and so then they said, they had to turn the whole thing. They had changed the whole thing, so it took them two more weeks before they could begin rehearsals, because I put an injunction on that--could not have it go. And so then finally my union said you have to come down and talk to us because this guy is filing some charges. I said, "Fine, I'll come; I don't need to bring a lawyer. I know what's right, in terms of what this is." So, I go with this meeting, and so the man is there and, "Well, did you have another job, which is why you let this one go?" I said, "No." I said, "I would have gone around in the bakery and sold cookies, but I would never have taken this job." I did not have another job, nor one in future thinking of anything else, but I knew that I could not take this. And so then they said, "Well, why didn't you," he says, "why didn't you speak to your union about it?" I said, "Because in the first place my union is not a civil rights organization." I literally took this to an organization that handles my civil rights and my civil liberties. And by the time I finished with what I did, I won the case, that was that, and so they said, "Well, next time when you tell us, I won't mention the union, you tell us that." I said, "Hmm," and that's--you know, so we--I've done that kind of thing-- Story_ID: 228189 Speaker 1: So my fighting is in a different way than jumping on the bus or whatever. We did it once with a show that was supposed to be, I won't say the big station, but there were like a whole batch of us, Arthur Mitchell, me; a lot of us who were supposed to be going this show, and we hadn't seen the script, and we kept saying, "We wanna see the script." So, then when we're sitting, we said, they said, "Well, we're gonna have a reading of the script for the people that are principals," and we were the dancers. So they started to read, and then there's a song that, you know--what--"Run sinner run, where you're gonna run to?" you know that song ['Sinnerman']. They're saying--may I say what I want to say? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They're lyrics were, "Run nigger run, where you're gonna run to?" We said, "I beg your pardon?" This is a big major channel. We said, "No, no, no. This cannot be." They said, "Well, we--." I said, "No, no, no." So, we all pulled over, and we told them we're not doing it. And it's like two days before they shoot, and they had to, they went out to lunch, and they came back, and they had to completely change that script. So, the thing is that you have the power to make change if you are--you know you, you'll come together to do it, and we had. We had as dancers. We said, "No, this doesn't go, and we don't any other dancers you're gonna get at this point who are principal dancers like us who's gonna do this," and we're striking unless you remove all of that. So and that, those are the kind of ways in which you do things. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At least they worked best for me. Speaker 2: Now what was the organization that your godmother was-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: What was the organization, the civil rights organization that your godmother was associated with? Speaker 1: Oh, she was the, she was the eirector of the National Committee Against Discrimination In Housing [NCDH], which would send people out; they'd send somebody white out and they would say--to get an apartment and they'd say, "Oh yeah, we have it" and then they'd leave and here comes somebody black and there's another apartment available. "Oh no, we don't have any," so they, so they would catch them in that way, you know send somebody, a black person, they say no and then they send somebody white and they'd get the apartment, that kind of thing, so-- Speaker 2: I know they have an office in Chicago [Illinois] even now. It still exists and-- Speaker 1: Doing that. Speaker 2: Who is your godmother? Can you tell us? Speaker 1: Frances Levenson. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and she was director then, so the, the secretary went together and got all that stuff typed, sent to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], sent to Urban League. That stuff was, you know, typed up, everything, and she's a lawyer, so she knew, and I just knew that this had to be stopped, and it was stopped until they changed it around, and then they said, "Well," even said, "well, why didn't the other people feel that when they read that?" I said, "It's not customary to give people who are singing in the chorus a script, so therefore they did not know what was in that script." So, they said, "Oh," which I knew, of course, you know, only principals had gotten it. So, this is--these are the ways in which I do my fighting. I do my fighting if I walk into a situation, and it's not right, and I don't care for it. If it--what color the kids are--black, white, polka dot or whatever--if there's some injustice being done in there, I'm going to go right into the battle. That's the battle I do. That's the fray I go into is to make things correct. Speaker 2: You seem to be part of--and it's probably not that odd that black artists are as, 'cause I know there's, you know people like Paul Robeson and even Leigh Whipper and other people, that have refused to do roles because of the content and walked off. Speaker 1: Well like there was, there was a film, I was doing 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] the Broadway show of 'The Great White Hope.' Was seen by a producer there and a writer, and they thought I was perfect for this movie with--I won't say--with another big white Hollywood star, and they wanted me to come in and get the script and read it. I came in, I got the script, I went home, I read it, and I brought it back and I--before I brought it back, I called and told them that I wasn't going to be able to do the film. I didn't agree with how the part was, but I was bringing by their script. I go back to take it to that agency, and so then the man who was the writer decided he wanted to question why I didn't want to do his script. And he came out to ask me, confront me. And I said, "Well, since you asked, I will tell you." I said, "It's a very interesting thing: here I am," I said, "this other person is playing a doctor, this one's playing this playing and my character is--however, why is it that my character is the one that the guy who is the lead is gonna put his cigarette out on her body?" I said, "Why?" He said--I said, "No." I could never ever have allowed anything like that. And I said--pushed this script back and left. You know, so yes, I've turned down things. I will turn them down, because my soul couldn't rest if I allowed that to happen because some child would see me doing that. I promised myself when I was in New York [New York] one of the things I would never ever do anything that would make my parents [Dora DeMyers and Thomas Van Scott] or my relatives, other relatives of my or friends cry because of what I did and that I will be true to who we're supposed to be, and way before I even discovered I was an artist, I was this human being that was being given certain values, and I kept that, that I would never ever do anything that my teachers would be ashamed of, my parents, my siblings, my friends, and so--and I've kept that because that's very important to me. Honor is everything to be kept, to understand that you as a person--that you don't lose you as a person. I'm a person before you discover that that's an artist there. Story_ID: 228190 Speaker 1: What were some of the shows that you toured? You mentioned being a principal dancer in a version of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] was-- Speaker 2: In 'Porgy and Bess' yes. Speaker 1: Okay, was this the, I mean the-okay, so this, this wasn't a special version of it, this was a touring company? Speaker 2: It was a touring company. It was here in New York [New York] and then it also toured and then went to Israel as well and toured in America as well as opened in--it was in New York playing at [New York] City Center [New York, New York] here, then it went on tour--let's see did we do the tour first? It was in New York, then it went to Israel, then it toured in America. Speaker 1: Okay, was this prior to the movie 'Porgy [and Bess]' or after? Speaker 2: It was way after. Speaker 1: Okay way after, okay, all right. What other shows have you been involved? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the Rolls Royce Lady in the movie of 'The Wiz,' the red Roll-Royce and that was, that was fascinating to do that, because that story that I like about that is one when I first--it was [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson's choreography, and I was told that I would come out of this red Rolls-Royce, and I would have a cheetah on a lead--leash. Now, I'm not into cats in that sense, but I was--I got a big book that told about wild cats, you know big cats. And I would read about it, and say, "Okay, a cheetah runs seventy-five miles an hour; it does this--okay, I got that straight." So, I'm prepared for, whenever I'm gonna come out of this Rolls-Royce, I'll be led by this cheetah. So, then they decided, no, they felt the cheetah was too mercurial, that they were gonna then give me an ocelot. So I go, "An ocelot?" So, I go home, and I open the book and read about the ocelot--how much does it weight? What can it do--? So then, they decided that the ocelot had a mercurial personality, and maybe I shouldn't come out of the car with the ocelot. Now they go to a puma. Now a puma is bigger than all--a puma is as big as a lion. A puma is huge, and they decided a puma would be the thing. And so finally I said to the director in rehearsal, I said, "I will tell you one thing, when I get ready to come out of this car, I don't care where the camera is, because if that animal goes to the left, I'm going where he goes. I'm not pulling on something that weighs more than I do and that's a wild animal, so I'll tell you that right now. So, I won't care--I'm not pulling him back to go where the camera is." And so then they decided well maybe the shouldn't give me that animal then, and so they decided to give it to a male model, and the night of the filming, we're at World Trade Center [New York, New York], right out there; we're filming; it was cold and the wind was blowing back and forth, and this puma was lying out like this. He was sleeping. He was good, you know, all warm and toasty, and so his manager, or handler had to get him out of the cage. He went, "Raaa," I said, "oh yeah right, that's they want me to handle? You gotta be kidding." So they get him out and he's annoyed, you know, it's four o'clock in the morning. And so they give him to the model, male model, and the male model takes the lead, sits there for a minute like, "Huuu!" so they said, "Cut, that's it," because that didn't--"Put that thing back in there." The male model was right too, that thing was ferocious. So, that was the end of that with that cat, but I--really, every day I went home, I had to think about the cat and research it and think about, "If this cat does that, what am I gonna do?" 'cause I certainly didn't want to be mauled. Story_ID: 228191 Speaker 1: So, there are a lot of things to consider in show business from civil rights to personal safety? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Now have-- Speaker 2: --a lot of that. Speaker 1: Have you ever been hurt? I mean, as a dancer, a lot of shows, have you ever been hurt or had to do anything dangerous in a show? Speaker 2: Well, not in that way. I mean, there been things where they fly you and do things of that sort, but where I think the thing that is of note is your privacy that you guard so seriously and there's a reason for that. I can remember doing shows and people coming to me saying, "Oh, I see you're not in the book." Well they're looking me up, I didn't even know these people and you don't, you know, that's why you're unlisted. There's a reason for that because of your own safety. And I can remember when we did my musical 'Miss Truth' [Louis Johnson and Glory Van Scott] at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York]. A man came to see the theater a lot and that's the one where I star as her and play Sojourner [Truth], and he came to the theater quite a lot, because he told my stage manager that he had a picture to give to me, and so I said to the stage manager, "Okay, he can bring it back, I'm being interviewed in my dressing room, so he can bring the picture back and give it, present it to me, and that would be nice, and I'll thank him." So he--and it was between shows on a Saturday, so he came back, and he brought this picture, and the picture was beautiful. He had, obviously and clearly it was not one of the ones that had been in the newspaper, so he had been coming to see the show a lot in order the draw this picture, but it was in oil and he--this big, and so he gave it to me, and then he had a little box that had a little dead bee in it, which I don't know what the significance was, and he had a piece of peppermint in there and two circular earrings. So, he took one of the circular earrings, and I'm looking at him like what is it. So, then he said to me, oh, he felt that you know this is something that--we would do wonderful things together, and I'm thinking, "This man doesn't even know me; what is this?" So, finally he talked a little bit, and I finally thanked him for the picture, and I said, "I really have to deal with the reporters here, so would you kindly excuse me?" So, he left, now that's on a Saturday. We're off on Monday. Tuesday when I came in to the theater there was like a twenty-page handwritten boat-sized 8 x 10 letter of his professing his love for me, how we could marry, and we could do such great things together and then--the thing that put the fear of God in me--he said he'd been incarcerated, and he thought I was his salvation in some way, and I thought, "Oh my God--what do we have here?" So, I told the stage manager, I gave him back--first of all I threw that other stuff away--but I gave him back the picture--gave the picture back to the stage manager, and I said, "If he comes in the stage door, give him this picture. I mean, I don't want it, and I don't--" you know, this is, so they never ever let me--then about, that was on a Tuesday, and so he did see the guy, and he gave him back all of the material. On that Sunday, we got a bomb threat in the theater, and we knew that it was he, that whole thing, and so I was never ever allowed to go by myself home after that. If I happen to be by myself, most times I'm with somebody, but if I happen to be alone, "No, no, no," because of that. So, there are all kinds of things that you have to deal with, you're that public person. You don't know the people that know you. They sit out there in the dark, and they know you. They may follow you. And I have people that have seen me in many, many things, which I'm very pleased about, but you don't really know them, and they know you, 'cause you're the one person they focus on, and they may see that you're in this show or that show they come, and they focus, and we love having an audience, but it's just that personal thing, that's why you have to keep a distance because you don't know, you know, with whom you're dealing. Story_ID: 228192 Speaker 1: When you do a show like the Sojourner Truth show ['Miss Truth,' Louis Johnson and Glory Van Scott]--now is this a one-woman show? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a what, it's--okay, so it's more-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have, it's a musical. I wrote it as a musical. And I play her and I have mu-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I have--I wrote the script, lyrics, and music, and I have singers and dancers as well, and [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson directed it and choreographed it. Speaker 1: Now did you have to do a lot of research to put this (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did research her, and it's interesting, I researched her, and it was like she was sitting on my shoulder all the time, and when I finally made the decision to really write this whole thing for her, then the whole weight came off my shoulder. She was, you know--and then I've been asked sometimes I remember coming back from Washington [D.C.] I was doing it at [The John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], and I came back to New York [New York] and I remember being asked--I got a call from--what do you call it--the soldiers, it's--West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], I'm sorry, West Point, and it was like a sergeant calling me and asking me would I come and maybe do something for them or whatever, do a Harriet Tubman or do this, and I said, "I don't do Harriet Tubman," and so, then the general called and asked me. I said, "I don't do Harriet Tubman, and I have a friend who does do Harriet Tubman, and I'll give you her number, and you could call her and ask her. I do Sojourner, and I admire Harriet Tubman, but she doesn't ride me like Sojourner does." Sojourner rides me, and I think we're doing Sojourner, my musical on Sojourner Truth at the National Black Theatere Festival next year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's called 'Miss Truth,' but--you know you know what things fit you and what don't. Speaker 1: Okay, any other experiences from the theater or dances you wanna share with us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There are twenty million experiences, oh (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Probably; probably, yeah-- Story_ID: 228193 Speaker 1: Well, the children's theater. Now you started that in the '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, it was Dr. Glory's Children's Theatre and it was at the New York Society of Ethical Culture [sic. New York Society for Ethical Culture, New York, New York], and I ran that for years and years and years, and then people kept complaining that, "You're not doing anything for the grownups. You're not writing for grownup anymore, come and do that--." So then I went, and I stopped the children's theater, and then I only just two years ago started Dr. Glory's Youth Theatre here at The Riverside Church [New York, New York]. I started Dr. Glory's Youth Theater here, and I'm enjoying it and the kids are wonderful. Speaker 1: And how long have you been a member of Riverside? Speaker 2: I'm not a member of Riverside. I am a member of the New York Society of Ethical Culture, but I--in here it is so like--it's very close to the way in which I think and feel, and I love this church. I love the space. I love the people, and I certainly love their reverend, and everything. It's an extraordinary place, you know, and I'm just very blessed to be here, to be in this space, and it's extraordinary. Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what's the children's theater working on now, in terms of? Speaker 2: Well, last night, I made a decision as to what new production I was gonna write for Christmas. So, this new production is called the magical, the magical, what did I call it, the magical, oh 'The Magical Christmas Museum.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--'The Magic of the Christmas Museum,' yeah, and this will, it will really involve kids coming into a museum that's really--has artifacts and historical characters and all kinds of situations that they come in. This is a Christmas museum and they--if they pick up the bells, the bells are gonna invoke various things, and they'll interact and dance and sing and act with all of this, and the historical characters will come alive and what they do with that. All of that will be very important. They'll be singing and dancing and acting and interacting. So, in the course, they'll learn history. They will learn foreign songs, which I work a lot foreign music; I like to do that--and dance, dances that are not necessarily indigenous to America. As one Christmas show I did last year it had all kinds of--it had Spanish dance, everything in it. So, they get good broad--I believe in introducing them to lots: their own culture, the cultures around them, and I think it makes them a better person, because they live better among other people. Story_ID: 228194 Speaker 1: Something I neglected to ask you when we were talking about Sojourner [Truth], the 'Miss Truth' play, is that, what is it about Sojourner Truth or what particular thing about, you know, her drew you to her story? Speaker 2: Because she has the strength and the fire that my grandmother [Matilda Stackhouse Brown] had, and I think that's what, I mean when she would stand there, that she could stand when they said that she must--she was, you know, about six feet tall, so she must be a man, and so they, the racists said, "Well, go tell her that she's a man, and she won't come out here and talk before people," at one of the speaking engagements that she had. They wanted to get rid of her, so they figured to say, "She's a man," or, "She would dare bare her breasts out here because she doesn't have any; it's a man," and therefore she won't come out and, and preach, as she could, against slavery, and so she pulled herself together and came out there, and that's the famous speech she has, 'Ain't I A Woman,' what's she done, but I wrote, written another speech that I do for that. And she could bare her breasts. She could stand there, and they could not silence her. And then you know just--so it's that power that she knew that she had. It's that spirit that she knew that she had, and, "Yes, you might shoot me while I'm here," but it's like it's that thing that I feel like, you know, my God if I'm doing something in civil rights, I'm doing something I believe in, and if I get killed in the process--and what I came to understand in terms of the '60s [1960s]: I won't be the first person or the last to die for what he or she believes, so therefore removes that fear. It just takes it away, and you're right, you're going, you're right in what you're saying and right in what you believe, and you can stand there and do that. Yes, you may kill my body, you will never ever kill my mind. Somebody will have still left some of those thoughts about how we really can live as brothers in this society. Somebody will continue it; somebody will. You will hear it; it's there. Story_ID: 228195 Speaker 1: Now you've written how many plays now? Do you know? Speaker 2: Oh, a lot, I mean, I've written so many. I've written a lot for children, adults, lots. I must have a trunk of twenty something, or more, that I've written. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they've been performed different places, which is--which I enjoy. Speaker 1: Now your most recent work-- Speaker 2: The most recent I just did was called 'Final Ladder' [Glory Van Scott], and it was a tribute to the firemen from 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and I just--after 9/11, 'cause I was here, and I just had to write something, I looked at those firemen. I went off to California, and I was sitting in a Starbucks, which is where a lot of writers are, and I was sitting there writing. I didn't know them, they didn't know me. I knew I could sit there all day and write, and I did, and I wrote this piece called 'Final Ladder,' and so I then read it at an Episcopal church. I was doing a black history show and it was just me, solo, and the night before I decided, I think I'll read 'Final Ladder' also for them, which I did, and the result is, they had nine firemen from that parish that had perished. So, they had a shrine up, and they said, "Would you do this for our memorial?" because they had done a memorial the year before, and would I? I said, "I would be honored." So, then, I decided not just my reading, but I wanted to make it a full performance piece, so Joan Peters choreographed it, and there are six guys who dance the firemen on a six foot ladder, and it's awesome and a hose dance and ladder dance, and then I have--I do the script of it. I have three classically-trained singers who sing, and this really was very moving. The firemen and everybody stood at the end, they just stood and they just were-- My designer, [A.] Christina Gianinni, she had run out; she couldn't, she said she couldn't deal anymore with it at the end of how it was, but it was one of those things, and then the firemen, they each wanted a copy of it, and I had to autograph their names on the piece of the script that I have that I had written, so that was very gratifying, very gratifying. And they stayed with us and took pictures with us, and it was just very gratifying to be able to do something for them, and sometimes we'll say well you know firemen they have their prejudices, they have this, I said, "Who doesn't?" That's number one, and the second thing about that, I will tell you this, they are the only ones, they're not looking at your color when they come to get you out of that fire. They're not looking at your bank account. They're not looking at what profession you have. They're not looking at whether you are known as this or that or you're a known person, you're this or that. They come to get you because they come to get you, and the moment they go up in there to get you, they have put their own life on the line. Nobody has a job like that, and I said it's only akin to what a mother does. A mother will get her kid. They have to hold mothers back, usually, when something is going on, but that's the only job where you do that. You literally are putting it on the line. Going in there knowing you might not come back, on your own volition. It's not like you were drafted into the [U.S.] Army; you gotta go shoot somebody, shoot--it's none of those things. It's not like what police officer can say, "Well, they're shooting, quiet down--" They can go around there and take care of business, and also a policeman has a weapon. The only weapon that the fireman has is the spirit of wanting to really save you and by using whatever tools he has in order to get you out of that situation. So, it doesn't matter that most of them happen to be--there's a Vulcan Society, which is a black, you know, society for firemen, and certainly they know that there are problems they have as--firemen has had, and I saw some talking about it on TV the other day, and I understand that, but I go--right back to the bottom line, but, these people, they come in and they save you. And if you've ever been in a fire, and I was in one, you know how quickly a fire moves, somebody comes in to get you--look at that. It's extraordinary. Story_ID: 228196 Speaker 1: --And that brings you back to a story, when I was little, with my little sister, my mom [Dora DeMyers] was making some egg salad, and so she had the stove on, and so she asked me to go back and check and see that the eggs were done so I could turn it off. And my little sister had gone back there, and she had a piece of paper, and what she was doing was taking the piece of paper sticking it under the flame, and she'd been doing shadows, and I shared her bedroom with her and they had spreads that had all these, you know that hang down like that, twin beds, and she dropped a penny, so she's looking under the bed with that, and it caught fire, so she said to me, "Come here." So, I go with her, and she doesn't want me to tell mommy, 'cause my mother was home, so I closed the door. I'm like eight, so she's like four or somewhere in there. I close the door and I'm thinking I can blow it out. It now begins to leap from one bed to the other, and it is then that my oldest sister [Lynn Colton (ph.)] saw it, because we had these incredible oak doors that opened from one to the other like that, and she saw flickers and said mom what's that. My mother came back there, I had the door closed, and I was blowing on it, not--just 'cause I didn't want my little sister to get a spanking. And so, you know, how much does an eight year old understand, totally, really, and that thing was leaping, and that's when I realized what fire does, and I've had the healthiest respect ever since then. My mother came in, some neighbors came in, and they put it out, but it was a--you know, I know--I can feel what they [fire fighters] must go into and what they put themselves on line for. Story_ID: 228197 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about, first, about your educational attainments. Now you went to, you, you finished Goddard College [Plainfield, Vermont] right and-- Speaker 2: I finished Goddard, I got a bachelor's [degree], and then I rolled myself right into a master's [degree], and then I was going to take some time off, and my dad [Thomas Van Scott] said, "What are you taking time off for?" 'cause I said I was going to work on a Ph.D. He said, "Take time off to do what?" He said, "You take a little summer, and then you go right on back into--roll yourself right back into it." I said, "Yeah, that makes sense," and that's exactly what I did. And I took my bachelor's in liberal arts. I took my master's in theater arts, and my Ph.D. in the philosophy of education and theater arts. And when I was working on my Ph.D., I was going to three different areas and working with different kids from different social economic groups. I wrote, directed, and choreographed musicals for them, and I studied them and stayed within their culture where I was and studied them and then proved that you can take kids and make them--not make them, but introduce them--so that they want to learn, and you can do lots of wonderful, creative things with them. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so-- Speaker 2: And to me education is everything. I mean, I encourage--when I have kids, and they're very gifted, I talk to them, and I say, "You must get a degree, even though you're this artist, because if you ever want to teach in a university, at least you will be able to it, be able to support yourself." For an example, I teach now, teach now at Fordham University [New York, New York], but I teach a literature course called Theatre as Social Change, and it's very important to me. I love it, and and I'm working with the students. For an example, two semesters ago, I had a student who was from Syria, and she came to me and she said, "[HistoryMaker] Dr. [Glory] Van Scott, I'm going to be away for two weeks." I said, "Where are you going?" She said, "I'm going to Lebanon to document what's happening with the kids there who are Palestinians who are in a camp there." And I said, "Okay." So, she went away for the two weeks. When she came back, I said, "Now you must use half of my class to tell us what your experiences were," 'cause I've been in Lebanon, "half of my class," and so she said, I was the only professor that when she was going, said, "where are you going and what are you doing?" and the only one when she came back that said, "tell us about it and share it and--" and which I think that that's sad, because it seems to me that the professors should be interested in what--beyond what that kid is doing because it relates to what they're studying from you as well. And this kid had lots of information to give us, and it was just very moving, and the students asked her lots of questions, and we learned a lot, because we're dealing with sociology, psychology, everything in that course that I'm teaching, and they have to really discuss all of this stuff. I discuss war. I'd give them literature that they have to read which has to do with war. We discuss it. We read it; they are assigned parts. They have to discuss it, and we have very heavy discussions about everything. Story_ID: 228198 Speaker 1: What are your favorite plays or playwrights that have to--that address social change through the theater? Speaker 2: I would say, or if we're to deal with who's my favorite, would be--I think Lorraine Hansberry. I mean, because as a woman, looking at another woman's writing and what she would put out there, you have to play attention to because it's not drivel and it had meaning. If you're looking at something like 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] and looking at Walter [Lee Younger] and the character, the strength and that mother's [Lena Younger] strength to back her son up and say, "Yes, he can take care of this," and give him this hit to go ahead and become fully a strong man. Those things are important to me, because they are saying, this is how you must, when you're bring up children, let them see, let them at some point give them a reign so they can run with what they get and know that they can stand mightily on their two feet. So, I'm interested in people who write about social issues. Drivel doesn't interest me. When I write, everything I write for children, there are morals and ethics involved in it, you know, always, and most times I am viewing history within what I'm doing as well. I fold history into what I'm doing. I just automatically do, because I love history, and I'm constantly doing it, because I want them to learn. I don't want them just to get out there just singing and dancing. It doesn't mean anything. You've gotta move ahead educationally in the process of the arts for me, and that's how I do it with children and young people, because I think it's important for them, and therefore they all of a sudden get interested in reading something they would not have before and then you've made headway. I took my nephew to see P. Daddy [Sean "P. Diddy" Combs] do 'Raisin,' and the kid is, he's thirteen years old. He was so excited, and after he saw it, he asked me to buy him the book. He wouldn't have asked that before. Now he's in--this summer he's done nothing but read, read, read, read. You know, that's something else for a boy of thirteen. He's reading like Faust, as we call it now, loving it, realizing, and that's because there was that exchange. Story_ID: 228199 Speaker 1: Speaking of history, you've been immortalized in bronze by [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, and can you tell us how this sculpture ['Glory'] of hers took place, and how you became the subject of? Speaker 2: Well, the--[HistoryMaker] Curtis King of the National, it's called-- Speaker 1: The Junior--what do they call it? Speaker 2: --Curtis King, Jr., yeah. Speaker 1: Junior, yeah. Speaker 2: Junior. Speaker 1: No, Junior Academy. Speaker 2: Academy. Speaker 1: Black Academy. Speaker 2: Arts and Letters. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Junior [Black] Academy of Arts and Letters [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters] in Dallas [Texas] had invited me and about nine other black women, all prominent in their fields, to come to Dallas to receive a key to the city. And Elizabeth Catlett was one at the time I was invited, and so I was there, and there was a big reception in a room, and she was leaning up against the wall studying my head and neck, but I didn't know it. I knew of her, and I knew of her work and admired it, and I was in the middle of the room talking to someone, so then she comes over, and she says, "Young lady, my name is Elizabeth Catlett; I would love to sculpt your head and neck." And I went like, "--Yeah okay." If I could have taken it off then, I would have handed it to her. And so she at that point still only lived in Cuernavaca [Mexico], and so I had to--so she made the announcement to the people that I was coming there, and she was going to sculpt my head and neck. Now I must admit I thought it was going to be like a little [Edgar] Degas head or something, but it's life-size, and she said initially she thought of maybe doing it in marble, but then I'm glad she didn't, because by doing it in bronze, she could have many editions of it, because it's in museums all over the place, in you know many places, and she just did some more casting, because she sells them very, very well, and I'm very happy about that. And I--when I first walked into her studio in Mexico to see it, I was so shy with it. I put my fingers in my mouth, and I backed up looking at it, because she captured, she captured the feeling in the eyes, and even the critics say that, you know, that whole life that's there, and she is extraordinary. She's an incredible sculpture and painter, printmaker. She's extraordinary. And so I'm deeply honored that she chose me. And I once asked her, I said, you know, "Why did you chose me? There's so many other people--" and she said, "As modern as you are, and as sophisticated as you are," she said, "there is something so ancient about you and the spirit that's there," and I said, "Oh, okay." Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have to pose for it, or? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to go over Mexico, and the interesting that is that she would be working on the clay in her studio, and I'd go across the patio, and her husband [Charles Wilbert White] was drawing me. So, he was drawing my head and neck, so I had a picture of that, that he drew, and then she was doing that, so I was--kind of heady thing going--you now, when somebody really wants to do that. And more fascinating is the fact that for ten years there was a sculptor, very fine sculptor, a guy who wanted to sculpt me, and I was embarrassed, because every time he'd see me at the art show, at an art show, and I love art, he would say to me, "Now, when are you going let me sculpt your head and neck? I'll give you the first casting--." I kept saying "Yeah, yeah, yeah," like that. So, finally I was so embarrassed after about ten years of being chased when I'd be in art shows, I said, "Okay," to him. Now, I go home, and we set the date for a Saturday morning at ten o'clock. About eight o'clock in the morning my phone rang. He was calling to say that he had a water main break in his studio, and it was cold, so could I give him another date, and I said, "Oh yeah, I'll call you back; I'll give you another date." I didn't call him back. Within two months, I was then gone to National--to the Curtis King, and where Elizabeth Catlett saw me and wanted to sculpt it, so I can only ascertain that the gods have decreed that I was to only be sculpted by her, that this bronze should be by her and not by anybody else, and that this guy was not supposed to do it, but Elizabeth Catlett was supposed to do it. And I'm sure his would have been fine, but I had no idea why I kept running and wouldn't allow him to do it. However, I just kind of spiritually feel that she was the one who was supposed to do it. That's the thing I feel. Story_ID: 228200 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that parents will get involved with their children to the point where they will turn off the television. They will set there with them, and they will read, read, read. And a mother might discover her child can't read, at which point then they will do something about it. They should be reading, instead of looking at what I call the corrupt-ivision set. That they would have--we used to read all the time in my house, you know, constantly reading and read to--we read to each other and that's what families need to do. And that will give them an awful lot of information so your child will know a great deal by reading. I feel that I want more parental involvement, and that's whether the kid has one parent or two parents. There--that needs to be, maybe the mother needs to call an aunt to come and help her in that, okay we're gonna have reading, we're gonna to do this, we're gonna do that, we're gonna travel here, we're gonna see this and see that. Come out of your neighborhood; go places; see things. If you don't know what they are, ask questions. I have said to students that I've had, "If there's something you don't know, go to the librarian. That's what they're there for. They can show you a whole another world. They can help you with what you don't know. They can give you the books, which are the tools for you to study and learn things that you feel you want to know." So, I would, if I had the kind of druthers, I'd want involvements with the libraries with these kids that would be unyielding. On Saturdays, that's where they'd be, and they be learning and talking over it and not only just the studying of it, but the, also, the talking about it, the really dissecting it, to say what this means to you and connecting this to other things. So, when they have the tools of education, even if you're confronting a racist, you then know what things to do, and that you don't act blindly, that you know what you have, what redress or recourse you have as, as a citizen of this country, a citizen of this world. But, if you don't have any of those tools, you don't understand, you haven't read it, you don't know it, and I've had the experience when I taught at Bucknell University [Lewisburg, Pennsylvania] I had some students who were black students and I--most of the students were white, and I'd ask questions, and then the black students never put their hands up, and I kept saying, I finally pulled them aside I said, "What is this?" There are forty theater majors, maybe four of them were black or whatever, I said, "What is this? You don't answer when I--" they said they never had those things. I said, "You never had those things? All right, Bucknell has a tremendous library; this is what you've got to do," and I started mapping it out for them. "Go learn this." It made a difference in their lives, and that's what people have to do. You have to--don't just sit there and not notice that these students haven't answered you. You have an obligation as a teacher to find out why they have not answered you, and once you find out why they haven't answered you, you then set to straighten that out, to correct it, and that's what I say with people, "Don't just pass by young people. They won't say something, sometimes, 'cause they don't want to know, and they don't want to be embarrassed. But, you as the mature adult should not feel any embarrassment but should feel an obligation and a duty to help that kid get ahead." Story_ID: 228201 Speaker 1: When you look back on your life and all the things that you've done--you've received numerous awards and honors, and--is there any major thing that you would change? Speaker 2: Well, last year I got the National Black Theatere Festival Living Legend Award and that was just marvelous for me, because what happened with that is that I had to write this speech, acceptance speech, and I called it 'A Piece of a Fabric,' and I asked them, I said, "Well, how long is the speech supposed to be?" It's supposed to be like two minutes or something, but when I timed mine it was like five minutes. I said, "They won't care if I do it," you know, a five minute speech. So, then I had asked one of the powers that be, they said, "Uh-uh, you get the gong, if you--you cannot go beyond that." I said, "Oh okay." So, I get there, and I think they're joshing. So, when we're there, I'm up there at the top, and fortunately because of V, my name, I'm up here and not right down--so when they called a couple of people, and they stood up, and they were going over, and then you heard this music come up, I said, "My God, they're serious as a case of German measles I'd better get--" and I'm up there going like this, editing like fast, and some of my friends were sitting there and saying, "What's [HistoryMaker] Glory [Van Scott] doing?" "She's editing." And so by the time I got ready to stand up there [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll was introducing people and [HistoryMaker] Curtis [King], not Curtis--Larry Leon Hamlin, who is the founder and artist director of National Black Theatre Festival, he said he was going to introduce me. So, he introduced me and he said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I want to introduce you--I want to introduce this next recipient of the National Black Theatre Festival Living Legend Award, and she," he said, "years ago, I went to her home, and she so graciously received me and spent three hours talking to me telling about all the things I need to do in order to start a black theater," and he said, "and the outcropping of the National Black Theatre Festival was because of those three hours I spent with her, and ladies and gentlemen that lady is Dr. Glory Van Scott." Well, the place went up. So now I'm coming with my speech, and I'm thinking, oh my goodness, if I get up there, and this speech is over, and they gong me, we're gonna be in trouble. But, I got up there, and I did my speech; you could hear a pin drop, and everybody wanted a copy of it, which was pleasing for me and it became--I even got a job to do this, to be the--what do you call it--the guest for woman's day at the big civil right--Emmanuel Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], big civil rights church down there, you know, as a result of that speech. So, I'm saying that if you have done a lot of things, and if you hope you've done something to move people and help them along, then that's what you're supposed to be doing with your art. You're supposed to teach people, have them feel something for it, and you just continue to do what you do. Story_ID: 228202 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done at this point, when you're still working on things, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is that there are no stop gaps or holds on what you can accomplish if you make a decision that you can do it, and you don't allow anyone to tell you, "You cannot do something," because then what you're doing if you don't do it is that you are allowing them to take your power away from you, and you give that to no one. If you said to me, "Oh," and that's happened with me, somebody said, "Oh you can't do so and so." I said, "Um-hm," I walk away, when they look around it's totally done and up on its feet. And so what I, what my legacy should be is that, "Don't accept no; when it something that's right for you to do, do it." You want to study there, if you want to study abroad, go and study abroad, do the things you need to do. You get one life, that we know about, when you come through here, and don't accept no for an answer, when it's something that realistic and something that you really want to do. Educate yourself, move ahead, do the things you need to do, enjoy it, and there is, there is, there are no perimeters, that means there's no end to it if you continue to do what you do. I don't feel that I have to pick an age at which I don't do this or that because the kind of work that I do you can do it 'til you're ninety. [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Katherine] Dunham is ninety-five years old. She's going to be ninety-six next year, and she's still teaching and doing the things she does. So, when you look at that, who are you not to do the things that you do? She's extraordinary. Story_ID: 228203 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Dora DeMyers and Thomas Van Scott] get a chance to see you become successful? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, which was lovely, and the fact is they even saw 'Miss Truth' [Louis Johnson and Glory Van Scott] at [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and you know, yes. So that, and that's a good thing to see what I was accomplishing and when I graduated and all of the different things, and so that was very pleasant for me. Speaker 1: Now you don't have any children right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have nieces and nephews and godchildren. Story_ID: 228204 Speaker 1: You mentioned you were a Buddhist, and I think you may be the first Buddhist we've interviewed, I mean, the first one that said they were a Buddhist. How did you become a Buddhist? Speaker 2: A friend of mine was one, and I listened to them chanting, and I looked at the philosophy. The philosophy was very akin to ethical culture, so it's kind of easy to ease into, and it was nice, and it was good, and you're chanting for world peace, and you're chanting for people to have good lives. It's all chanting for you to have if you're using--if you're doing any of the chanting--for people to have good lives. It's all positive. It's not negative stuff. So, it was easy for me as a humanist to say, "Yes, I wish that for you, so I'll chant that you should have a good life," or my spirit, to make sure that my spirit does the right things in the world. So, I don't practice it so much now as--but my philosophy is pretty much akin to it, and I'm a humanist so that's--those are two that are kind of welded together for me. But, at the same time, I have a healthy respect for the church [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] that my mom [Dora DeMyers] went to; healthy respect for wherever you go, and I will go, if you were to say to me, "Oh come to my church." I'd go, and I would enjoy it. I would enjoy the singing, would enjoy looking at whatever you have, so I have no--and one of the things that was said to me at one point, "Oh, well, you shouldn't have a Bible in your house." I said, "No, no, no sweetheart. When I became a Buddhist, I don't give up my Bible. I have my Bible. It was given to me by somebody very special from Barbados. It will always be at the foot at my bed." So, I don't whole-stock that you have to discard other parts of you if you take something else on in that way. I just think that you can be many things melded together that work for you, and you use those things that work for you. It's like I don't think somebody can pray you into heaven, if you believe in heaven, I think you gotta work yourself into whatever by your deeds and what you do in life and how you are as a human being. Story_ID: 228205 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I'd like to be remembered as my name, first name. Story_ID: 228206 Speaker 1: That's the bronze called 'Glory,' which [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett did in nineteen, I believe it's '81 [1981], and she--I asked her what was she going to name it, and she said, "'Glory,' of course." So, and it's life size, and it's in a lot of museums all over the place. Speaker 2: And that's a picture in 1979 when I produced the [A] Katherine Dunham Gala, and there book party, a book, not a book party, but there's a party for me given by my godparents and there is Talley Beatty on the left and me in the center, and [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson on the right. Speaker 1: He was the choreographer for 'The Wiz.' Speaker 2: Louis Johnson is the choreographer for 'The Wiz' and 'La Giaconda' [Amilcare Ponchielli] and 'Aida' [Guiseppe Verdi] at The Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York], plus he had a dance company [dance department, Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York], an extraordinary choreographer as well, and of course Talley Beatty you know has choreographed all the major companies, and had his own company as well and was like the genius of genius of choreographers. Speaker 1: And that's me with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham in nineteen, I believe it's 1980 where she was training me for 'Dance in America.' They were doing her ballet, 'Rites de Passage,' and so I was going to dance her role as the queen in this ballet, and this is where she's training me and teaching me what to do, and I'm sitting on the stool, and she's demonstrating. And that was quite a wonderful thing, because she chose me to dance her role, and no one had ever danced that role of the queen before. Speaker 2: That is me in the costume, having learned the role and on the set, and we were in Nashville [Tennessee] filming that and that's Vanoye Aikens behind, and then there's me dancing. Speaker 1: I was in Kup's Column [Irv Kipcinet], and I was starring in a show, and he put me. I was starring in a show, and that was in the column. It's a pin-up column. Speaker 2: Kup's column in the [Chicago] Sun-Times. Speaker 1: Yeah, pin-up column, and it was also in the Daily News [sic. The Chicago Daily Times]. They transferred in New York. Speaker 2: That's me as Sojourner Truth at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and my piece that I wrote in which I play her, 'Miss Truth.' Speaker 1: That is when I'm touring with Agnes de Mille as her principal dancer, and we were on tour, and we took a picture--photo together. She was also one of my mentors. She is a very noted choreographer of 'Rodeo' and lots of Broadway shows. Speaker 2: She's related to Cecil [B.] DeMille too, isn't she--? Speaker 1: Yes, that's her uncle. Speaker 2: That's from my first Dr. Glory's Children's [Theatre; Dr. Glory's Youth Theatre]-- Speaker 1: Wait a second. We're gonna do this one first. Speaker 2: Now, that's me in the Sea of Galilee, and I'm in Israel, and there is a little boy who swam and popped up when a friend took the picture. I'm in a bikini that I got in Copenhagen [Denmark], and there I am. I didn't know he was behind there, and so people were filming it, and then they were laughing, but I didn't know he was behind there. When I got the picture, I had to laugh, he looked so cute. Speaker 1: That's me with my first Dr. Glory's Children's Theatre at the Ethical Culture Society, New York Society of Ethical Culture [sic. New York Society for Ethical Culture, New York, New York], and these are some of the children that I began with. Speaker 2: Pete Seeger; that's Pete Seeger with me. He did a benefit for us at Ethical Culture for my children's theater, and so this is right after the benefit, he took a photo with me. Speaker 1: That's me with the Agnes de Mille company [Agnes de Mille American Heritage Dance Theatre] in 'The March of Time' where we did a parade. We went across stage and so that's that costume for that, which I loved that costume. Speaker 2: It is--it's beautiful. Speaker 1: That's me; with Look magazine, did a whole issue: career girls and afro fashions, and that gown that I have on is one by Katja of Sweden who, when I was in Sweden, gave me that gown and gave me lots of shoes and things to bring back to America, because I also model, to bring back to America so they could see what she did, and so when Look magazine wanted to do career girls and afro fashions it seemed absolutely the correct gown to wear. Speaker 2: And that's me in Paris [France] as Jezebel in Langston Hughes' 'The Prodigal Son.' Speaker 1: That is a dance called danza, a Moorish dance, which is a fusion of Moorish and Spanish, and it is choreography by Syvilla Fort. Syvilla Fort was also a Katherine Dunham dancer years before I was and also had a school from which I studied. When the [Katherine] Dunham School [of Dance and Theater, New York, New York] closed, I then went to Syvilla Fort [Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York] school, and so that's a number that Joan Peters recreated for Syvilla Fort's choreography, and that's called danza...