 Story_ID: 482531 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden at the home of our HistoryMaker at 1018 Cherry Point Way, Jacksonville, Florida. The videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns and the date is October 19th, 2006. Madam HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me? Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Rowena, R-O-W-E-N-A, Rhodes, R-H-O-D-E-S, Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T [HistoryMaker Rowena Stewart]. Speaker 1: I asked the question but I probably should ask it again. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have speed. Speaker 1: Okay. Would you please give me your date of birth and the place you were born, your location of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, my date of birth is March 6, 1932, and I was born in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: And Madam HistoryMaker, how do you describe or label your occupation, your profession, what you're presently doing, what you've done over a lifetime? How would you characterize your work, briefly? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think I'm a culturalist. I'm--if, if you had asked me this sometime early in life, I probably would have said, social work or I would have said historian. But I really am a culturalist. And I'm a culturalist that is primarily concerned with people of African descent. Speaker 1: And you've manifested your work and value as a culturalist in what venue? Speaker 2: In museums. Particularly in African American museums but I have worked in the larger museum world too. And when I say the larger world, I mean the non-African American museum world. I can work in any museum setting. I'm particularly known for interpreting African American culture in a traditional exhibit or a traditional setting. Speaker 1: What are some of the museums that you have created and growed, and administered over the years? Very briefly, just give us a-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I was the founder of the Rhode Island Black Heritage Society [Providence, Rhode Island], which was a black historical society, and we weren't really a museum, we were a historical society concerned about putting or documenting African Americans' contribution in the New England area, particularly, Rhode Island in the context of, of the New England history scene. And, as a result of that, you know, you, you do all this research and then the next task is how do you get people to understand that it ties into the whole thing. So that's when the museums come into play, then you realize you're doing exhibitions that help people to understand that. So I did--Rhode Island was my first, and I was there eleven years. And then I left there and went to the African American Museum in Philadelphia [Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was just a joy and the world that was the late Charles Wesley's [Charles H. Wesley] museum. And to go there and be a part of that growth and that whole process, and to learn, because that's where I learned to do urban culture 'cause Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had it like nobody else had. And, then I left there and went to Detroit [Michigan] and from Detroit I--in Detroit I worked at the Motown Museum [Detroit, Michigan], which was my first experience in a family museum which was the really important--a traditional black families interpreting their story, which was a very important story 'cause it changed the whole focus of a whole city's music. And then I left there and finally went into Kansas City [Missouri] to do the Kansas City jazz museum and to do for the first time, or experiment with the process of putting two museums under one roof both the Kansas City--the American Jazz Museum [Kansas City, Missouri] and the, the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum [Kansas City, Missouri]. Speaker 1: And your most recent endeavor here back in your home city, very briefly, you--? Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm very involved now with the Ritz Lavilla's [Ritz Theatre and Museum, Jacksonville, Florida] project called Crossing Color Lines [Crossing the Color Lines Lecture Series], which is a really--it's the story of Jacksonville and the African American community. But I have been very, very involved with the America Beach project [American Beach Museum, Fernandina Beach, Florida] too. And the American Beach [Florida] was, was an important piece for us because it's, it's a beach--it's an ocean beach owned by black people and served a segregated population before they could attend the traditional beaches in, in--with the kind of freedom that they enjoyed. And it was owned by black people, created for black people to provide recreational services. Story_ID: 482532 Speaker 1: Before we journey through the museums that you have influenced and, and administered over the years and developed, we're going to, to look at your family background, your childhood background and the things that led you into being a culturalist. But before we do that even, we want to ask you a few People magazine type questions to kind of warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: ---and also perhaps to give the viewers of your interview another slant on your personality. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so I wanna ask you, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Seafood and preferably shrimp. You know, we have the best shrimp in the world in Florida. And so, I mean, if you haven't had a Florida shrimp, you haven't really taste a really great shrimp. And I like shrimp dishes, any kind. So I do shrimps and gumbos all the time. Speaker 1: When I went to dinner two nights ago in Tallahassee [Florida], they had a shrimp special, all you can eat. Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. Speaker 1: And I must have eaten a dozen and a half, and I thought I was through and he said, "Do you want some more?" I said, "Oh, dear." He says, "You can have all you want." So I had another plate of shrimp. What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think I like the fall. And I think I like the fall because it's, it's the season change and it's kind of a, a beginning of the cleansing from what has occurred all year. I like, I like the fall. When I lived in New England, I would take off the entire month of September 'cause I needed that--it was a freshness. And in Florida it's the same thing, I get--I don't get the leaves changing but I get that freshness which is really important to me. Speaker 1: You have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color may be red. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I can--I enjoy most places that I go, because wherever I go I always look for African American sites so it doesn't matter where I go. If, if I went to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], I'd be finding--where, where are the African American people, where did they live. So, I'm, I'm looking for history always. I don't have a particular preference. Speaker 1: Last warm-up question. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying, something philosophical that you like to use from time to time with friends, relatives? Speaker 2: Now, that one I'd have to think about. That one I'd have to think about. Speaker 1: Okay. It'll come out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: --in our thinking, in our discussion. Story_ID: 482533 Speaker 1: As I said earlier, we want to understand how you got to be the person that you are today and the career path that you chose for yourself. And so, we want to go back to the beginning of your life. And we're gonna start with your mother. Would you give me your mother's full name, the year she was born, and where she was born? Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's full name was Essie Brozle [Essie Brozle Gilmore] and she was born in a little place called New Berlin, Florida [New Berlin, Jacksonville, Florida]. She, she was born there and was one of nine children of Katie Christopher [Katie Christopher Brozle], and Albert Brozle. Katie had married Albert Brozle who was a woodrider. And in case people don't know what a woodrider is, these are the guys that used to go through the woods and they would cut down the trees, you know, Florida was a great lumber place for a long time at the turn of the century. And they would go through the--and they would tap for turpentine and sometime they would just cut the logs and leave them for them to be hauled. And she married him, he had come from North Carolina. He was a Tar Heel Indian [Native American]. Speaker 1: Your mother grew up where, where did she grow up in New Berlin? Speaker 2: She grew up in New Berlin, her family had come from Little Talbot Island [Florida]. We're descendants of Spicer Christopher. I need to mention that because there're only two families that are--that we know of, that were here before--when the Spanish were here and our family goes back to that. So they are--they're the A.L. Lewis [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] family are the descendants of the Kingsley Plantation [Kingsley Plantation, Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve, Jacksonville, Florida]. And our planta- the people we came from which was Spicer Christopher. And so that when they were freed, they stayed--they moved to another island, very close by. And they all lived on that island. Speaker 1: What stories and anecdotes did your mother share with you about here growing up years, her childhood? Do you recall anything special that she use to enjoy telling you about? Speaker 2: I think the story that, that my mother enjoyed telling me most of all is the fact that, that we had proud roots. She talked about that. She didn't call it roots then, but she said that our ancestors--she knew that her ancestors were descendants of slaves and that they had come from a place that was in the slave community called yellow town. That would signify to me that they were somehow mixed with the master's family. But whenever you got down, she would say, "Now, just a minute, not just a minute," you know, "you come from proud roots so you can, you can lick this." And she was very strong about that. So that's, that's one of the things and then she didn't accept defeat in any manner. She did not accept it, she always thought you could do better. Speaker 1: (CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: I'm not gonna go--shut me off for a minute. Speaker 1: My, my mother's name is Essie Brozle, she was the daughter of Katie Christopher Brozle who had married Albert Brozle. Albert Brozle was a woodrider who had come to Florida and had come along with the notorious Hysler brothers really. And the Hysler brothers were known for, for moonshine, logging, and that kind of thing. And he was a woodrider. His job was to ride the wood--ride the--those carts that they carried the wood on with the mules carrying them and they would cut down and then they would tap trees for turpentine and that kind of thing. And he married my grandmother who was Katie Christopher then, and they moved to New Berlin. Story_ID: 482534 Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] in terms of her personality? What was she like as a person? Speaker 2: Oh, she was so beautiful. She really was quite beautiful and she was a--I, I say she was unique but maybe she wasn't in the world that she lived in because all women in her world knew how to shrimp and fish, and she could cast a net, a shrimp net and would go shrimping in the boat in the day or in the night. I mean, she always had a shrimp partner or fishing partner. The good thing about this, the people where my family grew up on this island [Little Talbot Island, Florida], we were all--nobody worked for anybody. They worked for themselves. They lived off the water and they knew how to, to manage to have a really, fairly independent living for many, many years up until the late '50s [1950s] they were able to live off both this land and also the water. See, the area that they lived on was like the beach. It was sandy, you couldn't grow very many crops but we lived like at the wetlands, you know, my grandfather [Albert Brozle] had land that was in the wetlands where you'd see the marsh, and so he could plant some things like sweet potatoes and cabbage, and stuff like that to supplement the family. My grandfather also operated the only store that was on this island at the time, which meant that they had people coming back and forth for a long time. And he had a big family so it made, it made a difference for them. Speaker 1: Did your mother have an occupation? Speaker 2: She was a beautician. She didn- she wasn't always a beautician. She--my mother left the island and I often tell this story to my children, she wanted to be a beautician, she lived on premises making two dollars a week. She left me with my grandmother [Katie Christopher Brozle] and she came to Jacksonville [Florida], and she paid--saved up enough money so she could go to beauty school and became a beautician. And she earned a decent living, I mean, a well-rounded life we had as a beautician. She lived in Jacksonville, she bought a home in Jacksonville, she educated me, and she just always thought she could do better all her life. And she went home every week of her life. She--home for her, and New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida] was about twenty miles away, so she went home every week. Story_ID: 482535 Speaker 1: Tell me about her mother, your maternal grandmother, what was her name, where was she born and when? Speaker 2: Katie Christopher [Katie Christopher Brozle] was born on Little Talbot Island [Florida]. The plantation they had come on--came off of was on Little Talbot Island. And she and her family lived in a section that, which was called yellow town, now, that implies many things. But they were all very, very fair, very fair. Most of them had hair that looked very white. You could tell that they were a mixed breed. And the Christophers had a long line of having been in the area for as--for at least as early as the American Revolution, but they had lived on the island. So my grand, my grandparents took the name of the Christophers, or my grandparents' family, took the name of the Christophers and they all lived on that island. And, she didn't do anything accept run the store. She was a master housewife, her husband would go away on--as a woodrider and he would stay for a week at a time. Speaker 1: And his name was? Speaker 2: Albert Brozle. And he would come back, and when he would come back he would supply her with money to operate the store which took care of most of the people's needs on the island. Story_ID: 482536 Speaker 1: Give me your father's name and when he was born and where he was born (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's--my father's name is Oliver Adolphus [ph.] Rhodes [Oliver Rhodes]. And my father was born at--and this is interesting I think--where the original Gator Bowl stadium [Fairfield Stadium, Jacksonville, Florida] was. And I also was born at that same residence. My father was born in Jacksonville [Florida]. His family--his mother, Irene Porter [ph.] Brill [Irene Brill], was my grandmother. And the Porters had been marooners, they lived with the Indians [Native Americans] in and out for a number of years, and they had several in East Jacksonville [Jacksonville, Florida]. At this particular time, East Jacksonville was kind of the upscale, growing, middle-class neighborhood for black people. And my grandmother and them lived there. They owned a little land there, and her family lived there. My grandfather, which was her father [sic.] who was also Oliver, I mean, her husband whose name was Oliver Rhodes lost his life in 1925 in the storm that came to West Palm Beach. He was working down there, and he was all--so, suddenly she was a widow. My grandmother then became the public school teacher for New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida]. Jack- Florida decided--legislators decided all these little island outside of Jacksonville had to have a public school. So, my grandmother with her son, rowed across the St. Johns River to, to New Berlin and, not only built the schools, but she operated the schools, the churches and on the weekends, she would row back to Jacksonville. But she was their teacher. She taught my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] and everybody on the island. And, actually, she taught my mother music and that's how my mother got involved with my father. Speaker 1: And that involvement? How did they get involved? You say that's how she got-- Speaker 2: That's how they became girlfriend, boyfriend and eventually married. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, oh, okay. Story_ID: 482537 Speaker 1: You had a stepfather, right? Gilmore (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a stepfather, yeah. Speaker 1: Who was? Speaker 2: Alvin Gilmore. And he was from Pensacola [Florida], he was a man that had a--had been raised by a judge. And he was kind of a chef, he could do almost anything. He was an amazing man, and he was very kind to me. Actually, he taught me how to cook and to do a lot of things. And, he met my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore], and he married my mother. And this is after my mother and father [Oliver Rhodes] separated and then was divorced. He married my mother and father--and he worked at a couple of jobs. His first job was at the building of the naval base, where he served as a chef and then A. Philip Randolph was really recruiting for people to come into the railroad. And so he got a job down at the Union Terminal [Jacksonville, Florida] here. And so he became first a Pullman porter then he became a redcap. Story_ID: 482538 Speaker 1: Going back to your father [Oliver Rhodes], your biological father, how do you remember him as a person, personality (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a fisherman. He had a big boat and he would go out. I remember going out on the boat with him and getting sick as I could be. But he was a fisherman, and he fished like everybody else did. Now, my grandmother [Irene Brill] did not like that. I need to tell you that, that was--my grandmother was an Eastside, middle-class black who said--she had sent her son to Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida] and she wanted him to teach. And my father wanted to be a fisherman. And she never did accept the fact that he was a fisherman even though he had a big boat. Speaker 1: His personality, what was he like, was he--? Speaker 2: He was joyful, he was joy--he was very joyful, loved to dance. I can remember that about him, told hefty jokes and had the heartiest laugh. Oh, he would laugh--his laugh looked like it would just shake your body. But, he, he was a wonderful personality. Story_ID: 482539 Speaker 1: Let's move to Rowena [HistoryMaker Rowena Stewart]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up? How far back can you remember when you were little (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I go back to, I go back to New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida]. New Berlin is really where my roots are and I remember going--spending every holiday of my life up until the time I went to college. Every holiday I spent there, every weekend I went home. That was something Mama [Essie Brozle Gilmore] said you had to do. You had to stay connected with your family. And so I have very strong remembrance of, of those times. I remember playing, I remember eat--I remember the Depression [Great Depression], which a lot of kids can't remember because, 'cause we were only like six or seven years old when the Depression was in high stakes. But I remember my father [Oliver Rhodes] and them taking fish that, that they had caught and not been able to sell it for not even two cents a pound. And I remember when they would come back, it would be a big gathering. All the people would gather, because now we had to salt this fish down because this is fish. We never went hungry during the Depression because we had all this fish. You could catch fish you just couldn't sell it. So, if you had it to give away, then you were all right. Story_ID: 482540 Speaker 1: What about pre-skinder- pre-kindergarten years, can you go back that far and what were your memories even around the kindergarten or pre-kindergarten years. Speaker 2: I don't remember pre-kindergarten because my [paternal] grandmother [Irene Brill] was the teacher. She took me to school with her. Now remember I told you my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] moved from--she went from the island to a premises job and I stayed with my grandmother so I went to school with her every day. So I guess you would call it pre-school now, but it wasn't pre-school for me. I was just in school. I remember school and I remember music, seems like I took music forever. Story_ID: 482541 Speaker 1: Think about your early neighborhoods where you first lived as a child, New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida] and Jacksonville [Florida]. Describe those neighborhoods for me. Where did you live and what was your home like? Speaker 2: Well--I had to do that, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: That's all right. Speaker 2: My, my home in New Berlin let me describe. I have to describe two homes; my mother's home--my mother's mother's [Katie Christopher Brozle] home and my grandmother's [Irene Brill] home on my father's [Oliver Rhodes] side. Remember I said my grandfather [Albert Brozle] was a carpenter, he built every house that was on that island [Little Talbot Island, Florida]. So I remember the around the porch that went around the house and it was--we had a pear orchard that extended from the St. Johns River back to the door. I guess it must have been something like about fifteen acres. And it was very cool and very refreshing. I go there now because the cruise port in Jacksonville [Florida] is now on that land where, where I was as a child. And we played, we had lots of trees, and life for us revolved around school and, and the church. Everything took place there. My grandmother planned the activities at the school that involved the community at night and then she also planned all kinds of activities at the church. Now, my mother's mother, on the other hand, lived not on the water but on the road, see, and you had one, one road that--one that says--the road that came in to the island and my grandmother lived on that road, and of course she had the store. Her house was a traditional southern house; the high porch and she had, she had orange trees in her yard. I remember that. The back was low but the front was very high, and as I look back at it now, it probably was protection from the storms because the animals sometime went up underneath the house to live, you know, and, and they was sometime--and I don't ever remember us being flooded or anything like that so it might have been that kind of protection that they had. She had huge poinsettia bushes. I remember that because at Christmas you would see the ships passing by. We could see because my grandmother's house looked out over the wetlands but the--you know, it's the wetlands is land, the wetlands and the river on the ocean. And so we could see the ships passing and we use to lay there around Christmas night waiting for time for Santa Claus to come of course imagining that's he's coming on this ship that's passing by (laughter) because that was your only transportation. We didn't have bridges like they have now, everything was by rowboat. But I remember that. So the house was, the house was furnished well. Both of the houses was furnished well. Actually, the chairs in my living room here comes from my grandmother and my mother's [Essie Brozle Gilmore] house. So the house was furnished very well. They believed in really fine stuff, but all of it was reserved they had for special times like tea time and when you had visitors, and that kind of thing. They were all very proper on my grandmother or my paternal side. On the other side, on my maternal side, it was a fun-loving family. I mean they just--my mother really learned to play music so she could play music to entertain my grandfather's friends when they came in so that was the way that life was. But it was very exciting. When we came to Jacksonville, we lived in a shotgun, lived in a shotgun on Union Street, 730 Union Street. I never will forget it, and we lived there for about three years and my mother saved enough money to get the down payment to buy a house. And she bought a house. And we moved then to 9th Street which was kind of the upscale-- Story_ID: 482542 Speaker 1: You were two or three years on Union Street and then you moved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're two or three years on Union Street and then my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] moved to what is called now--well, what was then called the Durkeeville section [Jacksonville, Florida] and it was on West 9th Street. Speaker 1: Jerkeyville? Speaker 2: Durkeeville. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: D-U-R-K-E-E-V-I-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Durkeeville section. Now, Durkeeville was the site of the first really up-scale housing project unit, and it has been restored and still exists. But it was also a section where middle-class blacks could buy homes. And so they bought these spacious, palatial homes. You know, teachers and doctors, and business people so you had a whole section of the community that had these beautiful homes that you--and it was very near the ballpark. You know, we had the--what is now called J.P. Smalls ballpark [Durkee Field; J.P. Small Memorial Park Stadium, Jacksonville, Florida], but it was the ballpark where all of our life took place. You know, all of our football games, and Jacksonville [Florida] is a great sports city. You know, we have place--I would imagine we rival most people in the country in terms of pro ballplayers. And Jacksonville--the families and music, the band, the bands from the schools where the kids went to football practice meant that the football field was packed on a Friday night. And so families, I mean, everybody came. And so, Durkeeville, the lights literally would shine on our porch at night when they had a game. And my mother could say to me, "Okay, you can go to the football game. When the lights go out at the park, you need to be on your doorstep." That's just how close we were to it. But it was, it was a really great area. It was a nice upscale--lots of black businesses in that area. Story_ID: 482543 Speaker 1: When did you start your formal going to school? How old were you, where did you, what school did you attend? Speaker 2: I was--I think I was about five years old when I started school and I started with my [paternal] grandmother [Irene Brill] at first. And then I went to the A.L. Lewis School [Jacksonville, Florida], which was one of the early elementary schools. A.L. Lewis [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] was such a hero to all of us. He was the owner of the Afro-American Insurance Company [Afro-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida]. But, now, he was just a builder, he was a builder and very respected in his community. He is perhaps one of the few black millionaires in the early '40s [1940s]. So the school was named after him, so we went to this school. And the school was very close to the Union Street address. When we moved to Durkeeville [Jacksonville, Florida] then, of course, this all changed for me. I then was sent to another school and that school was Isaiah Blocker [Isaiah Blocker Junior High School, Jacksonville, Florida]. And then I was at Isaiah Blocker for two years and then my grandmother, who had finished this black prep school, Boylan Haven [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida], insisted that I had to go to this prep school which I dearly hated. Speaker 1: What was the name of it again? Speaker 2: Boylan Haven, B-O-Y-L-A-N, Haven, H-A-V-E-N. It was run by the Methodist church, it was a school for girls, very well-known; they taught finishing skills. You know, you had to take music, you had to know all the social graces. Very typical of the traditional black college line, and my grandmother just insisted. Well, I was there for a year and I really didn't like it, and my grades fell so my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] insisted that I come out. Speaker 1: How old were you at this point? How long were you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was in junior high school. I was seventh grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you are in elementary grades. Speaker 2: And so then I went to, to school. And I eventually left there and went to Stanton [Stanton Senior High School; Stanton College Preparatory School, Jacksonville, Florida]. Stanton was the life of all of us. Story_ID: 482544 Speaker 1: Going back to the early elementary grades, how do you remember those years? Were there any particular teachers that influenced you or still stand out in your mind? Speaker 2: Not in elementary school, the one person who stood out in my mind in elementary school was--and this was--I didn't mention this school, I went to EWC [Edward Waters College, Jacksonville, Florida]. It had a elementary school at one point. And I went to that school and Mrs. Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] came. I never forgot that. That was the most memorable thing in my mind to this day, seeing her. She was a petite little woman. You know, we see and think of her as robust. She was a petite and gorgeous woman, just gorgeous. And what was good about Mrs. Bethune, you know, the time I grew up it was a color and class war that existed in the black community. And in Mrs. Bethune's world--when she came to the school she picked the ugliest kid and she walked over to that kid, wrapped her arms around and said, "My beautiful black child." And she would make you feel like you were a ton of people, you know, she was always so inspiring, just so inspiring. And I never forgot that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she--did she speak before the student body or come to classrooms, or--? Speaker 2: She would speak before the student body but she would literally be outside with us. She would walk outside and walk among us. But she would speak before the body, she would always speak before the body. But she was so well-respected and loved. My father told me, my stepfather [Alvin Gilmore], that when she came in he would always get her bags and because they would come into Jacksonville [Florida] and then they would drive on to Daytona [Daytona Beach, Florida]. And he would say, there was such a grace around her when she came in. She was just such a powerful woman. If she was in the room, you knew she was in the room. She was a gorgeous, gorgeous woman. And I don't know how we get these interpretations of her being so robust and that, because she was such a petite little dainty lady. She really was. Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to talk with her or interact with her at all? Speaker 2: No more than say hi to her, yeah, no more than say that but not--I wish I had, I wish I had. Story_ID: 482545 Speaker 1: Before we get into the high school years [at Stanton Senior High School; Stanton College Preparatory School, Jacksonville, Florida], did you like school, elementary and the early years of the private school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida]? Were you a good student? Speaker 2: I wasn't good at all in private school, I really wasn't good. In elementary school I did like it. I did like it a lot. Our schools were always terribly overcrowded, never enough, never had good books. And they were in the worst condition. But my [paternal] grandmother [Irene Brill] supplemented so much material even though--'cause I didn't live with my grandmother all that time, I lived with my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] when my mother got it settled. But I'd go to my grandmother two or three times a week sometime and I would spend the night. My grandmother always supplemented our reading material with other things. Speaker 1: What kind of things did she give you to read? Do you remember? Speaker 2: She would give us, she would give us lots of fairytales and she would give us--she had encyclopedias. She always wanted you to read encyclopedias. She always felt--and my grandmother had been a Garvey-ite so she knew about Marcus Garvey, so she wanted you to read those kind of thing. Here's what my grandmother used to do that really I just to this day, I think was so remarkable. She was so far ahead of her times. They would have pretty bad articles in the Time-Union [Florida Times-Union] about black people, pretty bad, I mean, they would really be bad articles. And every time the discussion would come up, when my grandmother got home, she'd pull out the trunk and she would pull you something to show you that this is not true 'cause, see, this person has done this great thing. And as she was constantly doing that, she had her own way of backing up the story. She would simply say, I remember somebody had a discussion on Negro cloth and they were talking about this hard cloth, and somebody said it wasn't that bad and all of that. And my grandmother went--and I was a little girl. My grandmother went to the trunk and pulled out this piece of fabric that felt like bark. And she said, "Now here is Negro cloth, feel it. Tell me this was tender that didn't exist." And she could do that, she could pull out fabric, she could pull out things that she had collected over the years to make you feel stronger in yourself, because and I, as I talked about class and color because in the world that I was in my grandmother was very, very dark. And my mother's family was very, very light. And she use to say to me, "It doesn't matter about the beauty. It is about what you have in your head." She was de- "They can't take that out of your head. You must remember, you will have something in your head." And she was always this trunk just kind of told, told you, "What time is it?" I mean, she would say to you, "This is what it's all about. Don't believe that, look at this. Here is, here is somebody." She would pull out things like famous singers. People that I hadn't even heard of, you know. She'd say, "Look at this, look at this music." And she'd pull out the Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] book. She would--she could do all kinds of things like that to make you--strengthen you in your culture. Speaker 1: Gee, that really tells us a lot about where you went with that, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't recognize it at the time, that it was so profound. And, you know, I, I didn't really realize that until I got to Rhode Island. Speaker 1: But given your future work, that stayed with you given what you've done professionally. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, Yes. The music--she use to say to me about music all the time. I use to hate to take this piano lesson, and I never did learn to play the piano well. Never did. And she was struggling so, I use to feel so sorry for her, for struggling trying to get me to learn how to really love this music. And she use to say to me, "There will come a time in your life when you will be glad you heard that sound, just remember what I said. It doesn't matter to me that you're tired, it will come a time in your life you'll be glad you heard that sound." And it has come to pass. Story_ID: 482546 Speaker 1: High school, what high school did you go to and--? Speaker 2: The great Stanton [Stanton Senior High School; Stanton College Preparatory School, Jacksonville, Florida]. James Weldon Johnson's school. We were all in six sessions when I say that, that doesn't sound possible. We had six sessions. It was the only high school for all of Jacksonville [Florida], which was, at that time, almost a million people. Six sessions a day we were on. Speaker 1: Which one did you go to when you first started? Speaker 2: I went to the second session. I got out at--I think I got out at two o'clock. Speaker 1: What time did you start (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there were, there were kids who were coming out at four o'clock, and you went to school. Speaker 1: What time did you start? Speaker 2: We started in the morning about 8:30. And, we went to school and the sessions ran so, so--they were so well-coordinated and if, if a teacher identified that you had a particular interest they just kind of zeroed in on it, you know. I mean there--I guess there were some of us that were specialized. In my class, and I tell this story all the time, in my class there were 210 of us; 196 of us put our feet in a college door. That's remarkable for this particular time in life. This is 1949. This is remarkable, this is remarkable. And those who didn't go to college got a trade or something. But you knew that if you didn't do it, you were gonna end up in this other city, which was the white city and you were gonna be in the kitchen or you were gonna be pushing the broom. So you had to--so many of us went to school, we often time couldn't get jobs when we came back home. And so that we would stay--I knew plenty of lawyers that pushed brooms for a long time. So, I mean, but we went to college 'cause college was our ticket out of this. Speaker 1: As you moved through Stanton, did you have any inkling or notions about what you wanted to do professionally in your life, what you wanted to be as we say? Speaker 2: I knew I loved history. I knew I loved history. I loved my principal, Mr. Anderson [F.J. Anderson]. I loved Mr. Anderson. He, he was--he just to me seemed like the typical--he was very old but he had such a staunch character. And you knew he cared for you. But I also had a teacher who loved history. Speaker 1: And who was that? Speaker 2: That was Miss Thelma Harris. Speaker 1: Miss Thelma Harris. Speaker 2: Thelma Harris. And when I turn you--when you turn that corner to go to Miss Harris' house, you were in for your history that day. This was about Jacksonville [Florida] and she would say, no child will leave my class without knowing who James Weldon Johnson is. No child will leave my class without telling me something about what happened in your community today that's positive. And she'd just on and on. I had couple of good teachers, she and Amy Currie, Amy Currie was our English teacher. But they were, they were the ones that were most memorable. Miss Harris, I often think about her as I did this work because Miss Harris just, just plugged history away. She never let you give up on it. I mean, she made you read about black people. She made you read about them. Story_ID: 482547 Speaker 1: In addition to your studies, your history, your English, mathematics, what other school activities were you involved in? Speaker 2: Not very much. You know, I, I wasn't involved with anything else. I tell you what, when I got through with school, I was required to come home in the afternoons. I could attend sports events, but my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] had a beauty shop and I ran the house while she ran the beauty shop. And my mother's beauty shop was attached to the house, which mean that, if you were in her house at dinnertime, I had cooked enough dinner so you could eat with, you know, you could sit down and eat with everybody else. I mean, I, I just had to run that piece. I didn't do very much other than that. I was in church. I did a lot of church stuff but I was required to do church stuff. Speaker 1: What'd you do there? Speaker 2: I was, I was on the usher board. At one point, I was in the choir but I never could sing very well, so that didn't work out very well. My grandmother thought I had a beautiful voice. I didn't (laughter) but she, she was determined. But I was, I was in--I would go to, to the church activities. Then on Sundays, we, you know, we often went in Jacksonville [Florida] because the churches were so responsive for recreational and cultural activities. We moved from church to church. The youth of Jacksonville would convene at another church and every church, every church would have some kind of program for youth, so you would move from place to place for that. Story_ID: 482548 Speaker 1: You didn't have any siblings. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But tell me then about your friendships and some of the men and boys and girls that you especially--who were your playmates? Who were the people that you kind of grew up with? Speaker 2: I had a couple of cousins that I'm still very close to. My mother's sisters' children are Ernestine Brozle [ph.], Sylvia [ph.] and Jackie [ph.], we were very close. We were always very close. And then, I grew up on--because most of my life was spent at my [paternal] grandmother's [Irene Brill] and my mother's [Essie Brozle Gilmore] I had Eastside [Jacksonville, Florida] friends. So I had the Kennelly [ph.] brothers, I mean, they were always our friends. We grew up, we went to the same church together, we, we were in social events together. We were always together. But had lots of friends. I, I--my church was also Johnnetta Betsch [Johnnetta B. Cole], MaVynee's [HistoryMaker MaVynee "Beach Lady" Betsch] church. We all were in the same church, course they were rich kids and we were poor kids. So the rich kids didn't play with the poor kids. Speaker 1: The name of your church? I don't think we put that on the record. Speaker 2: My name of my church was Mount Olive A.M.E. Church [Jacksonville, Florida]. Speaker 1: Is it still there today? Speaker 2: It still stands. It was built by a black man as a matter of fact, R.L. Brown [Richard Lewis Brown]. He is also the person who built the two--two of the historic buildings on Edward Waters' [Edward Waters College, Jacksonville, Florida] campus. Story_ID: 482549 Speaker 1: Last question in terms of your growing up years, neighborhoods. What sights, sounds and smells remind you of your growing up in New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida] and in Jacksonville [Florida]? What sights, sounds and smells? Speaker 2: I tell--the, the, smells is the fish. I still smell fish, and I think it's because so much of our lives was spent eating fish. But, also, every once and a while my father [Oliver Rhodes] and them would hunt crocodile. And that's an odor you just don't forget, you know, it's an odor that you will remember 'til the day you die. You will always smell it. So, if I'm near it (laughter) that takes me back. When people say to me, crocodile, or, you know, gator tail (laughter) oh, okay. Yeah, so that, and what sights that take me back. You know, my vision is really blurred because Jacksonville was so raped on urban renewal; that my heart breaks for Jacksonville. Really, I feel like Jacksonville was next to Chicago [Illinois]. I think they may have been--greater damage was done to Jacksonville than what was done to Chicago because they not only took out all of the black community in Jacksonville, but they didn't put anything back. They're just beginning now to even add buildings in that site. So I miss that. East Jacksonville [Jacksonville, Florida] reminds me of my childhood. East Jacksonville, there are still a few homes and some life that's still stirring in there. But in the location where Jacksonville really--Jacksonville had a business district which was called the LaVilla [Jacksonville, Florida] area, and all of that was taken out with urban renewal. With one swelled swoop. It was over eight hundred buildings in this area, think about that, eight hundred businesses, eight hundred black businesses. That's a lot of business. So that's like taking out a whole part of your life. So that's missing for me. What I remember a lot is Jacksonville downtown which, you know, was closed because of segregation. They literally moved the downtown area across the water into Arlington [Jacksonville, Florida] and Southside rather than have black people coming downtown integrating. So the downtown still exists, but the piece--so you can see the memories of what was. But it was a big downtown like Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or New York [New York] and that's gone, you know, it's just the buildings there now. And they're trying to get people back in. Story_ID: 482550 Speaker 1: Boston [Massachusetts] was also raped-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --by urban renewal. Remember Bill Worthy (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. I do remember. Speaker 1: Yeah, and he wrote a book called 'The Rape of Our Neighborhoods' ['The Rape of Our Neighborhoods: And how Communities are Resisting Take-overs by Colleges, Hospitals, Churches, Businesses, and Public Agencies,' William Worthy] and he talked about New York [New York] and Boston. The District Six Museum in Cape Town, South Africa, okay. Have you been there to that museum? Speaker 2: No, I haven't. I've never been to South Africa. Speaker 1: Well, that museum documents what the government did by moving sixty thousand blacks out of this neighborhood in downtown Cape Town. So this museum is dedicated to that, to that removal. And what I was gonna ask you, are you aware of any other museums in America that are built around and where the theme is how a community was destroyed other than these section? Speaker 2: Well, we're hoping Crossing Color Lines [Crossing the Color Lines Lecture Series] will do that. This exhibit we're working on now we're in the plans of doing it now, and what we have to do. The difficulty we have is we got three generations that didn't even know this existed. So the difficulty we have is having people to look back and see what is lost, but in this exhibition we intend to let people know what we have lost. Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's the theme of the District Six--what people lost, what they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What people lost. I call it a cemetery. They said, I'm too grim. I said it's a cemetery. I say--and the grieving process for the people of this city has not occurred. And the reason it hasn't occurred, because they haven't had a chance to. It was just--they got up one morning and it was gone. And nobody bothered to say anything about it. They kept one thing from that whole era, and that is the, the sign, the Ritz [Ritz Theatre; Ritz Theatre and Museum, Jacksonville, Florida] sign. Everything else is gone. And, I mean, it's just unbelievable. But they did it. Speaker 1: One of the reasons that we have The HistoryMakers project is not just to be able to have us tell you about your life and what you've done, but to give us the history in this case of what really happened here in Jacksonville [Florida] during your times. See, these are the stories that don't get told. So we're interested in these kinds of stories also. Story_ID: 482551 Speaker 1: You graduated from Stanton High School [Stanton Senior High School; Stanton College Preparatory School, Jacksonville, Florida] in what year? Speaker 2: In 1949. Speaker 1: And what came next after graduation? Speaker 2: I went to Claflin College [Claflin University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina, hadn't been my intentions. I wanted to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And I was prepared to go but my cousin had gone to Claflin, Maurice Waddell [Maurice Waddell, Sr.], and Maurice had come back home and told my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] that this was such a great place, and that the place for her to send me was there, then he could keep an eye on me. And so, my mother decided that I was going to Orangeburg, South Carolina which I knew absolutely nothing about. Now Orangeburg was an enormous learning experience. First of all, Orangeburg was the place, the home, of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], the Grand Dragon. He ran the cab station across from the college. We rode the train from Jacksonville [Florida] to Orangeburg, South Carolina and we'd have to get out there. And the Klan met us in robes, checked us out. In robes. At the train station, and would chase us back to the college campus. That was my first experience having seen the Klan. Heard of them, but in Jacksonville at that time, they weren't coming into the city. They would be on the outskirts, so, you know, my parents would not have--be on the outskirts. But now that I go to college, and the moment I get to the campus, here's this--these hooded men, on horses, chasing innocent black kids. And the first time, it was so shocking and show how--and they had told us to leave there our bags at the station because they must have known that they do this quite often. And that they would send back and get our bags, 'cause they knew we had to run to this campus. The kids, you know, Claflin College at Orangeburg, South Carolina--in Orangeburg, South Carolina and the South Carolina State [Colored Normal, Industrial, Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] are right next door. So the kids who went to South Carolina State--and we had a whole train of black kids going to college. They would go all the way up to Hampton, and we all got on--and they came from Miami [Florida]. The train came from Miami and we all went back to school together on the train. It was some--as I look back at it--it's so rich and so powerful that all these kids were trying to do this. But the kids from South Carolina State would get chased to the dormitory door. We would get chased to the gate because they couldn't come on Claflin College 'cause it was a private college. But I didn't forget that. I didn't forget that and, as you know, in years later Orangeburg became the seat of many of the thing but it was because of that. But that wasn't all. I went back home and I told my parents, because I had a railroad pass. Now remember my stepdad [Alvin Gilmore] is, is working for the railroad. And I went back home, my--I said to my mom, this what happened. She said, "Well, I'll tell you what, next time you all get the bus." It's eight of us coming from Jacksonville. We get the bus, the bus puts us out at Pocotaligo, South Carolina, a fork in the road, in the middle of the night, one o'clock in the morning. We can't go in because the waiting room doesn't accommodate black people, so we're standing in the middle of this road. And I'm thinking about it. And I'm saying to myself, I wonder if kids know how, how (laughter) much we paid for this. We must have been crazy for our education because we were so determined. It never dawned on us that it was a fear there. And we'd stay there and wait an hour for the next bus to connect, and then we'd get on the bus and we'd go to campus. That was better than sitting in the--because the other way I could go, I could get another train, go to St. Matthews [South Carolina] and stay in the train station alone all night and wait for the train to come the next day. So that was the life of going to college at Orangeburg, South Carolina. Very interesting, and we learned a lot about survival but it was very scary for all of us. Not just me, all--and my class, it was people like Theodore Nixon [ph.], who now teaches at Bethune [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida]. He's a math teacher, I guess a professor, I guess you would call him because he has his Ph.D. (laughter) and he'd done all kinds of great stuff. But, I mean, there were people who did great stuff but we all took this route together, and we didn't know that we were in personal danger. We thought our lives were (shrugs). Story_ID: 482552 Speaker 1: How many years did you spend at Claflin [Claflin College; Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: And what did you--did you have a major at that point? Were you focusing (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My major, I started out in art. Speaker 1: In art? Speaker 2: That's interesting, isn't it? I started out in art and then I changed over to library science. I always had history as a minor and then I decided I wanted to go with history. Speaker 1: So why did you leave Claflin after three years? Speaker 2: I got married. I married the captain of the football team, married Clarence Johnson. Speaker 1: Clarence Johnson, what year was that? Speaker 2: He was from Charleston [South Carolina]. That was in 1952, '52 [1952]. He finished college that year, he was from Charleston. He was real Gullah. Real Gullah. I still have ties, close ties, with my family in Charleston. And he went to New York to work, we would go every summer and work and then we'd come back and then I decided that--I got pregnant and I said, "Oh, I don't think I can make it this year." So I didn't go back to school. But I had only six hours to get my degree at that time. Story_ID: 482553 Speaker 1: Given your mother's [Essie Brozle Gilmore] penchant for your education and being at Claflin [Claflin College; Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], how did she feel about the fact that you were gonna kind of end your studies at that point and you got married [to Clarence Johnson]? How did she feel about that? Speaker 2: I think it was two schools of thought, you know, most black parents wanted their children to marry someone when they were in college as oppo- or someone that was a college person. And I think that part of that was in her head. She was a little upset that I couldn't wait until I had finished those six hours, and she was right on it. And her thing was, it doesn't have to be separation it could be death. And you would need this to take care of yourself, 'cause she believed a lot in independence. She really believed in independence. So she had a lot of feelings about it and--but nevertheless she knew that I was determined as all young people are when they decide they want to get married, they want to get married. And I was just so in love with this man from Charleston [South Carolina], who spoke funny, spoke different from us. And although we're considered Gul- a Gullah island, our little place [Little Talbot Island, Florida] is considered a Gullah island too, we never spoke like that. We never, I mean, my [maternal] grandmother [Katie Christopher Brozle] spent her life getting that out of our bodies. We didn't speak Gullah, but they did. And he really spoke it, and he lived a Gullah life. His values, his system, everything was Gullah. Story_ID: 482554 Speaker 1: Your first child was born, a daughter, what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Gwendolyn Donna [ph.] Johnson [Gwendolyn Johnson]. Speaker 1: And what year was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in 1953. Speaker 1: And where is Gwendolyn today, and what is she doing? Speaker 2: Gwendolyn is at University of Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island]. She's a Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] graduate. And she works in the business section of the oceanography department. Speaker 1: And then next year, you had your second child, is that right? Speaker 2: I had my second child, Clarence David Johnson [Clarence Johnson], which is really kind of my junior 'cause his father's name was Clarence Johnson. And he is a retired colonel, lives in Virginia and heads--is vice president of MMCI [Moultrie MultiCorp, Inc.], which is a information service computer company. Speaker 1: Well tell us about your next two children? You have two more, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had another son, Alvie Johnson. Alvie is also a retired colonel. He's also working for an information service company in, in Washington [D.C.]. Both of these boys have been very--I--they were all peacetime vets [veterans], made colonel before they did their last stay in Korea. And they were able to make all of their rank before all this war stuff broke out. They both have children. My youngest son, Alvie has two children [Nicholas Johnson and Krystal Johnson], my oldest son has two children, and my daughter has two children--my oldest daughter has two children. My younger daughter, Wannetta Johnson, passed in 2004, she died of breast cancer and she didn't know she had it, she was forty years old. And it was just devastating. Speaker 1: I'm sure. Speaker 2: She was, she was a manager of fine-dining restaurants in New York and had been doing it for about twenty-five, thirty years. And all of her time she had been up there, she had been doing that. And just a shock, just shocked. Story_ID: 482555 Speaker 1: During the time that you were having a--building your family, and raising your young children in addition to that, of course, that's full time but were you studying, were you doing any work during that time? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had remarried and I had married a [U.S.] Navy man. social service. I had--I was among the, the integrators of the state--State of Florida welfare department and I came to Boston [Massachusetts] in the early '60s [1960s], actually, 1963. Speaker 1: What brought you to Boston? Why Boston? Speaker 2: Well, my husband was stationed in Boston but I, but I thought I had a job with the American Red Cross. And, to my surprise, I didn't have a job when they took a look at my face so I had to face the job market which I had not faced before, because I was right out of school. I had finished Edward Waters [Edward Waters College, Jacksonville, Florida]--had gone back to school, finished Edward Waters. And then I had walked out of that right into a job with the state. And then when I, I just knew that I could get--I was a good--I was known to be an excellent case worker and could write great case statements. So I didn't think I would have a problem. Speaker 1: Just backing up a bit, you said Edward Waters. College? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Edward Waters College. Speaker 1: So you finished there then, you got? Speaker 2: I finished there, yeah. I, I--after my children were born, and after my separation, and later divorce, I, I--before my young baby [Wannetta Johnson] was a year old, I went back and got those hours that I needed and finished college. Speaker 1: Edward Waters is in Jacksonville [Florida]? Speaker 2: Edward Waters is in Jacksonville, and it had been traditionally and--what I call an adult school. It had been a school for returning adults who really needed a chance to start over and wanted to go back to school. And it had been a place where you could go and get your--matriculate and work. And they would work out the classes. You could take classes up to ten o'clock at night at Edward Waters, and that was kind of unusual. But like traditional colleges, Edward Waters adjust to whatever the need was for the African American community (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see. Speaker 2: So to me it was very special. So now I had these four children and I had to get this degree so I could take care of my children. This is back to what my mother [Essie Brozle Gilmore] had said earlier. Story_ID: 482556 Speaker 1: And then I met a man and married him some three years later, and then we--he moved to Boston [Massachusetts]. He didn't move to Boston, he was in the [U.S.] Navy and he was sta- shipped to Boston to the shipyards. And so, I said, well, I'll go to Boston and, and I'll find a job. It wasn't that easy. Speaker 2: So the American Red Cross job was not there, so what was next then. Where did you find (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just--I looked everywhere, I was never so disappointed. I had--the great thing about what's happened to me in my life and, and I need to say this. I've had so many challenges that it made me realize what other people face when they were in the same kind of situation. And I had worked in the field of social work for a long time with the, with the cit- with the state welfare department, but now I really knew what it meant to go out and look for a job and not be able to find it, get turned down because they say you're too qualified, you're not qualified, you, your school is not that good, that kind of stuff. Well, you know, I was on the train one night in Boston and there was this absolutely wonderful person that I saw, that I remembered from my college [Claflin College; Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] days, Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King]. And Mel King had been in love--I should not, I guess I should--he had been in love with a girl from my hometown. And this girl and I were--her father--well, we were just friends. But, anyway, I looked up and I saw Mel. You would know Mel because there's no one like Mel. Mel has a--an identity of his own. And he said, "I thought you were in Florida," and I said to him, "I thought I had a job in Boston." He said, "Well, what do you do?" And I told him. He said, "Come see me in the morning at nine o'clock." And he gave me his address at 48 Rutland [Street]. And I walked in to see Mel and Mel took me over to Union Park [to the United South End Settlements, Boston, Massachusetts]. And I got my first job, I was making four thousand dollars. And I was making eight thousand dollars by twelve o'clock that day. And I said to myself, this is really something. The lesson that I always took in my life, I never forgot that lesson, that you always have to know people in towns where you go or place you go. People connect with other people. It is tough to do it cold, and I never forgot that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Particularly in Boston, particularly. But in Boston particularly. Speaker 1: Anywhere. Any place. I have gone to work in places and I now would seek people out to make sure I knew somebody in that city when I got there. Story_ID: 482557 Speaker 1: So you stayed with the United South End Settlements [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I was with United South End--that was the most wonderful learning-- Speaker 1: And what was your job there, your role again? Speaker 2: I was--I, I really was working--I started out doing--with the community organization program. If you recall Charlie Liddell [Charles Liddell] had been invited by [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson to write the poverty program. So when he wrote the poverty program, a lot of the demonstrations--so we were doing--one of the sections was outreach. I wasn't with outreach in the beginning, I was, I was hired to do a case study on six blocks that the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority] was trying to find out what the, the demographics of the whole area. And I did this amazing case study, which I had been most famous for in Florida. So I did the case study and Charlie hired me then to work in the CAP [Community Action Program] program, and I was located at 20 Union Park [Boston, Massachusetts]. And then, as the crisis of the Civil Rights Movement, the blacks coming into ownership of their own organizations came, well, we were right in the throes of it. And at that time, Union--United South End Settlements had seventy social workers all with master's degrees. What a rare treat to watch, to watch these people. And I mean some of the stuff we didn't know what we were doing, but a lot of it we knew what to do. And those kids were bright. I mean we were doing all kinds--we did the first AmeriCorps [AmeriCorps VISTA], we were doing all kinds of things. Peace Corps kids, I mean it was all happening. And I was right there listening. And my kids were with me while we were doing this, I was learning this. And so, it was a great time in my life. It was a great time. Speaker 1: So the CAP program, the Community Action Program, ultimately became ABCD, Action for Boston Community Development [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it did. Speaker 1: And so you were there in the mid-'60s [1960s]? When all that start--? Speaker 2: I was not with ABCD, I was with the--when the demonstration project-- Speaker 1: Before-- Speaker 2: --was being done with United South End Settlements. Story_ID: 482558 Speaker 1: Then I moved to Harriet Tubman House [Boston, Massachusetts] on the, the bombings had started taking place in Mississippi and they were sending people up, and they were moving into the South End of Boston [Massachusetts]. The previous director had indicated that she didn't wanna deal with these new--this new--and I loved the fact that these people were in movement. And I had just gone through that so I knew what they were facing. And I got over in to Holyoke Street, and it--and to Harriet Tubman and I thought it was the most amazing thing. Here is the other thing, you know, this was the original house to Harriet Tubman, had brought all these slaves in. So, suddenly, I was going to this building that kids were teaching me all of these exits and entrances. It was so fascinating. And I remember the first thing I did when I got to that building, I asked the neighborhood to help me paint the building on the inside. So we had this paint party where we painted the whole building to welcome our friends and our brothers and sisters who were coming from Mississippi (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were you living in the South End of Boston where all this was going--? Speaker 1: Yeah, Claremont Park, Number 4 Claremont Park. Yeah. Speaker 2: So your children were in school? Speaker 1: My kids were in school. My kids were in school. Before I moved to Claremont Park, I had been up in Blue Hill Avenue so I knew it all. When the Muslims were--had all the shops there, and I, I was there for a long, long time. I was long enough to--I was five years in Boston so I knew Boston like the back of my hand. Speaker 2: I hear you. Story_ID: 482559 Speaker 1: Why did you leave, and where did you go to when you left the City of Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I got tired (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you go? Speaker 2: I was right on--we were right on the heels of the riots. I mean, we was spending the summers quelling the riots, you know, Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], and Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King]. All of us had a role out there in the streets trying to quiet the kids. And I was really tired, and then my husband was transferred to New London, Connecticut. And I said, okay, I'll go. And my marriage was kind of rocky too, so whatever I could do to calm that. 'Cause I was growing so fast with this thing and my marriage wasn't growing with it. I was growing so fast. I mean, I had this thirst to do this stuff, and it was there and I wanted to be on every scene. My kids had caught up with it. They were in it. I mean, they were on every march I was on. I mean, we were all together in it, but he wasn't there. So I went to New London, this was gonna save this marriage. Speaker 1: So that's how you got to Rhode Island? Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, once you move there with your husband-- Speaker 2: No, I went to New London and I then I went from New London to Charleston, Carolina. Speaker 1: That's right, wait a minute, I'm jumping ahead. Okay. New London and what'd you do when you were there? Speaker 2: I ran the--I actually set up the New London Youth Center [Groton, Connecticut], and I actually ran that. And that was the first--my first real realization that we had another culture really dealing with. And that was the drug culture. I'd never seen kids that I'd had in day camp now on drugs. That was devastating. All the things that we had been taught, all the things that we had been doing in settlement house work [with the United South End Settlements, Boston, Massachusetts] just went down the tube with drugs. I mean, kids were doing things that we didn't expect them to do. The peace (unclear) were doing it but our kids were getting in it and couldn't get out of it. And that, and that was the first realization I, you know, I was taking courses at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], learning how to deal with these kids, you know. It was just, it was just a very difficult time. I was there only a year, my husband was in Subland so we got sent to Charleston, South Carolina. Speaker 1: He was in sub--? Speaker 2: Subland, the submarine service. And so that we got sent to Charleston, South Carolina. In submarine service you either went to New London, New Port, Rhode Island or Charleston, South Carolina, or you went to the West Coast. So we went to Charleston, Carolina. And at Charleston, Carolina, I just plain taught school. Just taught school. And here's another thing, I'm now in schools that are being integrated for the first time. Schools that had traditionally been black are now white schools and black kids are being bussed into them and seeing on the outside of the fringes of it. And it was really tough for them too, but it was a good learning experience. Speaker 1: How long were you there in Charleston? Speaker 2: We were there two years. I was just there from--I think I was there from '68 [1968] to '70 [1970]. Story_ID: 482560 Speaker 1: And then the next move was to where? Speaker 2: Newport, Rhode Island. Newport, Rhode Island. And I became director of the Martin Luther King Center [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Community Center] in Newport. Settlement house work, I moved in one day and they announced it in the paper. And the next day I was approached, did I want the job. And I got the job, and I did the Martin Luther King Center. And I really liked that 'cause I had a reputation by that time of working with youth and doing some kind of innovative things. But it was there that I realized that I had to do this history. Speaker 1: Getting into your historical preservation work and historical education work, I understand began around mid-1970s in Rhode Island. How did you happen to start this Rhode Island heritage society [Rhode Island Black Heritage Society, Providence, Rhode Island]? What, what was behind all that? Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I think about it, I really got into it a little earlier. In the 1960s, when I first came to Boston [Massachusetts], the only way I stayed grounded was to find out what black people were doing. That's how I stayed grounded, 'cause I was cold coming into a new town. And my kids didn't know anybody. Boston is not an easy town to come into. You gotta know your stuff when you come into Boston (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: So I started studying black history stuff so my kids were going to Shaw House [sic. Shawmut Neighborhood Center, Boston, Massachusetts] and they were getting involved with [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis' stuff. And we were doing anything that we could to find our way and find a place for ourselves. When I went to South Carolina, I suddenly realized what a wonderful life I had. See, South Carolina for me had not been what I considered a utopia. What South Carolina did for me was to make me appreciate this French Gullah island [Little Talbot Island, Florida] that I grew up on and this wonderful culture. I really started looking at the people and what they did and how they did it, and how they survived. Story_ID: 482561 Speaker 1: So that by the time I got to Rhode Island, I knew that in order for me to survive in Rhode Island I was gonna have to establish my way or find my way. So I got involved with researching the Rhode Island black regiment [1st Rhode Island Regiment] working with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. The NAACP use to do an annual program, still does, at the site where these revolutionary black soldiers died. And we had a meeting, and we were discussing what had happened at the meeting. And with my usual flipness of the mouth, I said to Mr. Burton [Oliver Burton, Sr.] that I really thought it was great that we were doing this, but I thought it was disgraceful that we would allow the politicians to use it as a place to taunt their causes during the election rather than us preserving their sacred right. Well, Mr. Burton said, "Well, you know, we appreciate what you say Sister Stewart [HistoryMaker Rowena Stewart] and next year we'll put you on the committee so that you can help us to do it the right way." Well, Mr. Burton died that night. And, you talk about guilt. I had the worst kind of guilt. And when I went to meeting next month, which I couldn't miss, the first thing they said to me, "Well, we don't have to worry 'bout who's gonna take on the park project [Patriots Park, Portsmouth, Rhode Island]. We'll take it on." So at that point, I began to work with the state to develop the park. On--we worked to get it on the National Register [National Register of Historic Places]. Fred Williamson [Frederick C. Williamson] had been working as a historic preservation officer and he pledged all kind of support. I worked with the park people to design it. And then--I began to do--I said okay, I'm doing all this. I really don't know about them. And then I went to the Historical Society [Rhode Island Historical Society, Providence, Rhode Island], and I was so amazed that these black men who had come from these plantations, had fought for the American--on the side of the American colonies and when--and they had just gotten their freedom, and they weren't even trained to fire a gun. And I was so amazed that they would take this stand, this was the only land battle in New England. I was caught up with it. And then I felt like I had to know every one of them by name. And then I felt I had to have kids know the names, so I created a Rhode Island Regiment. And then I, I began to understand--I wanted to know what they did for a living after this. What happened to them? And when I got--when I began to look at it, I realized they were founders of the Prince Hall Masons. And I began to put all this together, and they were all in the Boston [Massachusetts], and in the meeting house movement. And I said to myself, my God, these are black pioneers and nobody knows it. I didn't know it, and I'm sure other people didn't. And I was then hooked. In the meantime, my husband is saying to me, "This is all fine but we got two kids in college and you need to be working. You cannot give up your job to do that." And I said that this was the one thing in life that I wanted to do. And he said, fine. And he left me. I don't know--even know whether I was aware of the impact that it made in my life at that time. I was so caught up with the hype of history. I had the hype for this history. It was something I felt like, if I went to bed and I didn't read more about them, I did something--I just had to know about it. Story_ID: 482562 Speaker 1: And then I did--I did all kinds of things. I went to the state, I found every burial ground that they had. I went to the towns and I was so amazed 'cause when I got in the towns, people not only knew the regiment [1st Rhode Island Regiment] but knew where their descendants lived, you know. And I'm saying to myself, where can you find this in America? And I just got so caught up. So I said, okay, I gotta form this organization. So, Textron [Textron Inc., Providence, Rhode Island], G. William Miller realized I had given up my job. I don't know how he did, I guess it might've been Fred [Frederick C. Williamson] or I don't know who it was, but he called a meeting. He had just gone to Washington [D.C.] to be the, the secretary of treasure. And he said to his--the people he had left to help me get this organization off the ground. So they called a meeting in February of Errol Hunt, Al Klyberg [Albert Klyberg], Fred Williamson, William Robinson, Cliff Moore [Clifton Moore], and they all met and they said, "We'll help you form, form this organization." And I said, "Okay, that's great but I don't want you to pay me any money, I want to learn how to do this myself. I wanna learn how to do this." And Al Klyberg from the Historical Society [Rhode Island Historical Society, Providence, Rhode Island] said, if you got that much guts to do that, I'll teach you. The Historical Society will teach you, and they did. They gave me an office. And I didn't get a dime for two years. I only got--the only income I got was for my gas mileage to come from Newport [Rhode Island] to Providence [Rhode Island] every day. And I learned everything I did. But by the time I did it--but, see, I came with skills now remember. I was, I was a heck of a fundraiser. So I knew how to tap things to do the things that I need to do. So I brought those skills to the table. But that's how I got in it. And I was hooked then. Speaker 2: All right. So you were the founder-- Speaker 1: I was the founder. Speaker 2: --of the Rhode Island Black Heritage Society [Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 1: That's right. It was the black historical society. And it was so good back in those days. If you had a name that was a Rhode Island name, I could tell you, I could tell you where your people were buried or if they were there. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't meet you in Boston [Massachusetts] when you were in the South End United Set- [South End United Settlements, Boston, Massachusetts]. I met you when you were with the Rhode Island Society. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Yes. And I remember the passion that you had at that time. You were so passionate about what you were doing. And I'm from New Bedford, Massachusetts and I said, all this went on in Rhode Island. So you, you were breaking ground, I tell you. Speaker 1: I was so caught up in it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just let that, hold on one beat. And go ahead. Speaker 2: I was so caught up in the passion of it. I mean, I was so excited that I had found these men that I could tell you what they did. I could tell you where they lived. And I had found people in the town who knew them. I was the one who could say to the DAR [Daughters of the American Revolution], "Hey, I got some black members that ought to be members of the Daughter of the Revolution." And, I mean, I could--you could just simply call me--I could--I was the one that published and, and found funding for Jay Coughtry to do his book on the slave trade in Rhode Island because there was nobody doing this kind of stuff, and it was just so fascinating. And I said, wow, you know, this is just amazing. And I was caught up and I mean, I was so caught--I was driven by it. Just driven. It was, it was wonderful. It was really wonderful. Speaker 1: Well, for ten years you opened up the papers, and opened up opportunities for people. Story_ID: 482563 Speaker 1: When you left the society [Rhode Island Black Heritage Society, Providence, Rhode Island], I guess it was about 1985, roughly. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: What were the major themes and, and the content that you left in terms of substance? You had a program, you had exhibits, you had, what did you find (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had, I had--not only I had a program, I had exhibits, I had a well-documented history of Rhode Island. We also had, at that point, a well catalogued collection, a tremendous amount of books. We had a man, George Turble [ph.], who gave us an incredible collection of books on African Americans. And, we--the only thing that we didn't have was a location. Never, never had a home. We were living in various places, we started out with the Rhode Island Historical Society [Providence, Rhode Island] and Al [Alfred Klyberg] and I had a conference one day and he said to me, that he knew that the work that I was doing was so important but the Rhode Island Historical Society's board will never allow them, me to concentrate on this history like I'm doing and that he thought that for--if I wanted to really further this history thing, that I needed to go it alone and get out of the Historical Society's mix. At first I was a little bit upset because I thought--at that time, I thought African American history has to be inclusive with, with traditional history. But he said to me that, "Look, when they see you when you come here, when you lead tours through John Brown House [John Brown House Museum, Providence, Rhode Island], they want you to lead the tours for them, they don't want you to lead the tours from a black perspective." 'Cause I'd go through and I'd talk about what John had (unclear), you know, (laughter) and I'd have as many people coming to the tours as they would have. But he--and he said, "They don't want you to do that. They want you to do it their way." He said, "Now, it's easy for me to say go ahead and, you know, we'll hire you to do that," he said, "but you will lose sight of your goal. And I want you to think about it. If you want to stay, we will keep you." But I decided I wouldn't. Then Mike Van Leesten [Michael Van Leesten] was building the new OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center of Rhode Island, Providence, Rhode Island] facility, he authorized space in there. Rhett Jones [Rhett S. Jones] who was the professor of Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] encouraged us not to do it. He said, it's--OIC is too iffy. You need to establish safe ground on your own. And--but we didn't--we ignored Rhett's advice and we moved with OIC. But then when OIC went bankrupt, they moved the society. But that was after I left and the society didn't have a home. And it still does not have a home. That's the one thing, and I--there's one regret that I have with, with Rhode Island. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I guess I didn't have enough vision because Mayor Cianci [Buddy Cianci] came to me at an annual meeting when I had about five hundred people and said to me, I have decided the City of Providence [Rhode Island] is going to build you a black museum for you. And I knew Buddy Cianci's telling tales. So I said, "Oh, please, Buddy," (laughter). I didn't know across the country cities were trying to find ways to do that. And I did--I just kind of brushed it off. I really regret that because the society never did get a home. Story_ID: 482564 Speaker 1: After ten very solid years and struggling years, and pioneering years in Rhode Island, you moved on to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about that position and what was the institution that you began to work with and direct? Speaker 2: Well, at the time, Philly was the only museum that had been built by a city in America. It was the first one to be built and it was Dr. Wesley's [Charles H. Wesley] project. And it really was kind of a major feat because it was built in response to the bicentennial. Rizzo [Frank Rizzo] was the mayor, the board chairman was really very shrewd as was Rizzo and he had been able to convince Rizzo that the location of the museum should be near Independence Park [Independence National Historical Park, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There was no way that the City of Philadelphia intended for that museum to be downtown. But he had convinced them to that and Dr. Wesley had been hired. Speaker 1: And who was Dr. Wesley? Speaker 2: Dr. Charles Wesley was the preeminent historian who was for many years at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And he probably is the father of many of the history movements. Very much a part of the Association for Negro History [Association for the Study of Negro Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History], he was kind of a leader. He and Dorothy Porter [Dorothy B. Porter] were leaders in teaching us about our history and what to do about it. And Dr. Wesley had been brought in to do--to serve as a curator for that museum. So the museum was created, it was bigger than life. All of the pieces, which was kind of our concept. I mean, our whole growth in the museum movement has been phenomenal. I mean, we've come from AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] images to bigger than life images to now really realizing that most of our artifacts and material culture still exists, because we, like everybody else, was convinced there's no such stuff as this stuff around on African Americans so you can't tell it right. So we had done this--so--but anyway, the, the African-American Museum or the Afro-American [Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as it was called then was the signature piece for the country. It was no question about it. You entered in on the first floor and when you came out, you came out to a free nation on the top floor. It was just powerful, just very, very powerful. And that had been Dr. Wesley's dream to tell that story the right way. But Dr. Wesley stayed for a while and then they went to a series of directors who kind of came--it was like--almost like a revolving door, 'cause it was difficult. In order to understand what is happening in the black museum world then, you have to understand that we really didn't have anybody teaching us how to do this stuff. We were self-taught all along the way, we learned a little bit from here and a little bit from there. We remembered what we did in our own culture and our communities, and we tried to put it into perspective. And that sometime was easy. Story_ID: 482565 Speaker 1: We learned every place we got an opportunity. I had the, the unique opportunity through the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] to get this eight-week trip to West Africa to study in the museums of West Africa, which meant that I got a chance to see how, how the place where we came from really interpreted who we were. And some of it I liked, some of it I didn't like. One of the things that stood out in my mind is, when we were in--we started out in Niger which was a French-speaking country--when I see all the tragedy in the world about Niger and I remember what a beautiful--it had beautiful living history museums, just beautiful. And they had everything, archeology, they did it all. And everybody in each community was trained how to interpret that piece. And the museums were filled all the time. Then I would go to some place like Lagos [Nigeria] and I would see nobody in the museums except tourists, or I would go to Ibadan [Nigeria] and I would see people all through it. And it was always--so we learned those things--I learned what things drew our people and what things were (unclear). And I also learned that no matter what exhibit I did [at Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I always had to make sure that what we brought from Africa had to be shown because people were too easily to separate what we brought from where we are. And so that was a crazy--so when I got to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I saw this, and Philadelphia had a little bit of everything in it, it was a unique opportunity for me. Everybody wanted to go. But it was a far cry from what Dr. Wesley [Charles H. Wesley] had done. [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson had done a major piece and they had really identified that most of the things that we had done was done without real artifacts but rather with graphics and paintings, because we really hadn't done the research that we needed to do. But Charles Blockson got on the case and started looking and did indeed find a lot of stuff. Story_ID: 482566 Speaker 1: So when I got to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I, I was awed about the location, awed about the size. I mean, it was a huge facility to us, twenty thousand square feet. No place in the country had that for black history. And to see people coming in, I mean, Philadelphia loved its history. That was the other thing that I had not seen before. You know, Philly is a very history literate community. They knew--we would have lectures and have three hundred people. We'd have Muslim--little Muslim girls reading books and coming in to discuss. It was just challenging. And Philly loved it's history. So, Philly was a, was a whole new thing for me. Speaker 2: Were you called to Philly to direct or were you--did you apply (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was asked, yeah. No, I was called. Speaker 2: Who called you? Speaker 1: I was called by Charles Farm--Clarence Farmer [Clarence Farmer, Sr.] who was the director. Not the director, the chairman of the board and he was the most powerful black in Philly. Speaker 2: How did he know about you? Speaker 1: I had been recommended, and a lot of people had said, you know, "Have you seen this little girl down in Rhode Island she's doing this stuff." If you could get her--and I think Eleanor [ph.]--what is Eleanor's last name? Anyway, I think one of the literature professors had recommended me, who had been working on a project. Teri Doke [Teri Y. Doke] had been there as the director, she knew me. A lot of people knew me and said, you know, if you could take and--now you got a place to really interpret history. All before you had to find a space in Rhode Island to put up your exhibits and now you will have a place. Speaker 2: So what were your challenges and issues that you faced now coming in as the director? Speaker 1: Well, they'd had a space [sic. spate] of bad publicity and I had to deal with that. They had money--they were getting money from the city but, clearly, the city had marked them to reduce their budget. The third one was the community--Philly is a community that likes Philadelphians to run their particular institutions. And, I think the other challenge was the power of some of the history brokers in the city. There were major African American history brokers in Philadelphia and when you came into their territory, you left yourself vulnerable. They felt that if they didn't do it, it wasn't gonna be done. Speaker 2: How'd you deal with that? Speaker 1: In some instances, I dealt--for a year, I need to tell you, I did the community thing. And here's how I did the community thing, I went to every flea market, neighborhood--Philly is a city that had all these neighborhood festivals. And I went and I carried my card and I would say, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Rowena Stewart, I want you to come to the museum. Come see me. I want you to come see it." And I did this kind of personal thing so people knew me before they knew that--they knew me as a person, an individual, before they knew me as the museum director (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you went out to where they were? Speaker 1: I went to where they are. I did it for about a year. I went with a photographer, Jack Franklin [HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin]. We went every Saturday, every Saturday and Sunday. We were in somebody's festival or in somebody's place where ordinary people went. Where ordinary people, not where traditional, I did the traditional stuff too but I, I spent more time cultivating the average community--'cause Philly was a community where people were literate and they knew that what that museum meant to them. Philly--this is the best example. Every year they would say they were gonna take Philly out of the budget, when time came for the city to deal with the Afro-American Museum [Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], city hall would be packed to the rafters. They'd have stilt walkers in because they would say to them, you are not gonna take this history. They never intended--it was set up as a temporary center. It was never set up as a permanent center but the community never felt that it was that. They thought they had something permanent so they fought for it. And, and so they were very strong. But I also had to deal with that strength, it was not always easy, it was not easy, real tough. But it was a community organized community. Story_ID: 482567 Speaker 1: The other way I dealt with it was in solid research. I brought in the best people, I hired the best people to do the best exhibits [at the Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I didn't put any bad exhibits up, I did good exhibits. And my exhibits would earn a name for me in the field because-- Speaker 2: What were some of the, the new leading exhibits that you brought in? Speaker 1: Well, I think the first one was the 'Sounds of the City' [ph.] that really brought in that I really loved. And that was when I look--focused on the music of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I wanted Philly to have a place of itself. You know, this is the home of Marian Anderson. This is the home were we had fifty-seven doo wop groups, I mean, and, you know, everybody--and when people came in and saw their picture up there even though they weren't doo wopping anymore, they would go back and they would tell their--and this was the home of Philly Joe Jones. And, you know, I had all of this stuff and I just wanted to do this. So, I said--I had the 'Sounds of the City.' That was one of my first big ones. And then I did so many more migrations 'cause so many people have migrated from the South. And migrations touched on me because a lot of the people from Philly came from Jacksonville [Florida], and I was able to move in to collections into Jacksonville and take them in to Philly so that you could see the relationship between what happened. But I did lots of that. We produced per year about three major exhibits and then we had constant changing exhibits in the gallery--and I didn't do, I didn't just hang. We did environmental settings, we spent a lot of money. And I raised a lot of money too. Speaker 2: You were there from I'd say about seven years, roughly. Speaker 1: Yeah, seven years. Speaker 2: And then-- Story_ID: 482568 Speaker 1: Then you went to Detroit [Michigan]. Okay, another big step. What did you do in Detroit? Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you, when you think about Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I try to put--and, and in Rhode Island I was dealing with the historical society, learning how to research, search out, and interpret it. When I got to Philly I learned how to deal with urban history, something I had never had an opportunity to deal with. And really understand how urban history fit in, and how you could be in, in the home--and in Philly, you know, literally, you would be walking on places where slaves once lived and controlled. And so I could do that. Now when I got to Detroit, this was another whole part of this learning curve for me in my life. I never worked for an institution, a cultural institution that was black family owned, that was interpreting their own life. And that is a tough position to be in. That's not easy. I had heard--we had always heard these stories in the music field about the families, the big families and how tough it is to work with their collections because they control their image. And you don't do anything like wherein before in other museums you just--you'd interpret it by the record, you interpret their history based on their approval of what you have found. So, so that was quite different. For, for Motown [Motown Records Company], for Detroit it was a lot, it was a lot of injury. Motown the--Detroit was hurt over Motown leaving. So when I got there, there was a lot of angry Detroiters and then the job that I was hired to do was to, to work with Henry Ford [The Henry Ford, Dearborn, Michigan] to do an exhibit about Motown ['The Motown Sound: The Music and the Story'] at Henry Ford, not even at their site. So I had to curl that around so that we were restoring and doing something for Motown to make the community better, as well as put the exhibit into Henry Ford. And that was a real tough thing, 'cause people were angry with Motown. Speaker 1: I missed the Henry Ford connection, would you--? Speaker 2: Henry Ford had agreed to do an exhibition on the Motown story, a two thousand square--it was ten thousand square foot exhibit on Motown. And they were gonna do it at--out at Greenfield Village [Dearborn, Michigan], well, you know-- Speaker 1: Now, was this before you got there or after-- Speaker 2: No. I was hired to do that. Speaker 1: Oh, alright. Speaker 2: I was hired by [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy to do that. Speaker 1: To do at, at the Ford site. Speaker 2: At the Ford site. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and--but I was gonna go to--I was gonna be based at the museum [Motown Museum, Detroit, Michigan] where his sister [Esther Gordy Edwards] was gonna be in charge of me, okay. So, but my job was to make sure Henry Ford put the exhibit up the right way and I was gonna make sure the story was guided correctly, and I had control of their collection. The problem that I had was nobody in Detroit--everybody in Detroit was trying to figure out why was Motown going out to Greenfield Village, which they had been boycotting because of the way blacks were treated out there and they weren't doing anything, their properties in Detroit were falling down. So you had an angry public. Story_ID: 482569 Speaker 1: Now Motown [Motown Records Company] hired four hundred people in the city [Detroit, Michigan]. When they left to go to California, they left those people there, they didn't even give them a week's notice. They said, "If you can get there to California, I'll give you a job but if you can't, you on your own." So they left those people there. And Coleman Young was angry with them, because it was the--a major black business leaving his city. And then Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] and them was going, and all these people who were there, who didn't have benefits. So the people were angry. So when you talk and you said, "I'm from Motown," they'd say, "Don't tell me about this blankety blank, blank, blank," you know. So, I, you know--in, in the--it's interesting now. I did an oral history project with them, I had a place where they could air their grief. And I did an oral history, I went all over the State of Michigan looking for people who once were at Motown, people who worked with them, so that they could tell their side of the story. 'Cause people just wanted to say, "He didn't do me right, I use to make his clothes. We use to give him money, I'd give him my car. And then when they got to--they left us, they just abandoned (simultaneous)--." Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When did they make that split, that jump to the West Coast? Speaker 1: They made their jump to the West Coast, I wanna say in the '70s [1970s]. It may have been in the '60s [1960s], don't, don't hold me to that one. 'Cause I can't, I can't remember the exact date on it. But when he made that split, he left them there. And they never forgave him for that, but there were other people who were angry 'cause they felt that Berry became so rich off of their music, and they didn't understand why they didn't become rich. They were--and, and working there helped me to understand Berry's psychic, understand family. The family acted like any American family does who is in the industry. I mean, they would tell you, "We copied our guidelines and rules from Sony [Columbia Records; Sony Music Entertainment]. We just took and changed our names, that's all we did." So they had the same contracts that other companies had, or Berry would tell you things like, "I always knew the value." And he did. He really understood the value of their voices, he's an amazing person. That's one that The HistoryMakers surely ought to do. He really did understand the value of his people. And they would come to him and he, he would use their voices because they were street voices and unable to be imitated. They didn't understand that. The industry finally capped what he did and what they decided to do since they couldn't match their voices, was to buy the talent from Berry and then they wouldn't play them again so they would be out of the way. And, Berry understood that and he would try to tell them that, but they didn't hear that. So, that somebody would offer them $2 million and he would later make millions off of their, off of their things. And-so he was very smart in that, and he understood it. And he understood the neighborhood. He really valued their voices. And I don't think they ever understood that. And, but I needed to have a place where they could say it and get it out so that they could feel that their side of the story was told. And so that's what I did. And I did this major, major oral history project that everybody loved. And it went very well. And--but I would leave these meetings and these men would be crying like babies 'cause they would be so hurt for what had happened to them in their lives. And I went to many of their homes and saw many of their lives, just many of their lives. It was just a, just a very--it was a healing space. And that's what I called it. It was a healing space. Story_ID: 482570 Speaker 1: So then I had to convince Motown [Motown Records Company] that they needed to restore the house where Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] started the company, and we found every piece that was in that house and restored the house just as it was when he lived there. And because it--the empire was so large, it gave them an opportunity to see what it had grown from. And then we took one--the house next to it and made it a house for servicing the house, you know, so you could have a place where you could assemble and you could do other things. Speaker 2: So he used his homestead, his house, yeah, for the museum [Motown Museum, Detroit, Michigan] and you were all a part of that. Is that what you're saying? Speaker 1: Yeah. It wasn't as--it, it was no longer his home, he just kept it. They never got rid of property, they just kept the property. And so his sister [Esther Gordy Edwards] had started, you know, putting news clippings and stuff on the walls so people would see, 'cause people liked to come and see it. But the original studio as exists, still exists. The--they had sold off all the equipment, so the equipment--the house Berry paid $19,000 for, originally. But for us to restore that house cost us $2.9 million, because we had to go and buy sound machines and stuff that was in Texas, in people's home, stuff we bought from Canada, we bought the actual beds and stuff back that they had, had. So that you would come through and it would see--you would see the house looking just like it did when they were writing these records. You could go into this old closet that they were recording and you could hear, and you could actually hear. And it was just like that. Speaker 2: So, are you saying that the, the presentation that I've seen there, that we can see there today, that you put that together? Speaker 1: That's what I did, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That presentation, okay. Speaker 1: Although people tell me that they've changed a few things, but I, I did that. But the girls, well, it use to be with The Supremes on stage, I don't know what's up there, yeah. That was mine. Speaker 2: So that was three years of your life approximately, I guess, or more? Speaker 1: Yeah, about two, about two nine. But it was about--it, it was a real tedious job because you really--one of the things I learned about show people is that you really had to run everything by them, and they were fiercely loyal, fiercely loyal. And when I got through opening the house, I was ready to go. Speaker 2: Let me ask you the same question about Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. How did you come to have this Motown opportunity? Were you called there or did somebody recommend you? Speaker 1: Yeah, Berry made the offer. Berry made the offer. I had been approached by Motown to come and I said, "Are you kidding me? Why would I leave Philly?" And they said, "Well, it would be a great opportunity. You could come and you could work." They were concerned about the integrity of the exhibit that Henry Ford [The Henry Ford, Dearborn, Michigan] was gonna put up. And, then I said to them, "I don't know about coming." I said, "You can't offer me enough money." I'll never say that again. I was only making sixty thousand [dollars], and Berry gave me a contract for ninety-eight thousand dollars. I mean, it wasn't a negotiated--he say, I'll give you ninety-eight and you--will give you a nine thousand dollar car allowance. That's kind of hard to turn down, kind of hard to turn down. And when I would say that to Motown--when I said that to Afro-American [Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they said, "Well, you gonna have to go daughter," (laughter). Story_ID: 482571 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995], Kansas City [Missouri], here I come. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Big challenges there. What was the organization that you led there, the name of the--? Speaker 2: 18th and Vine Authority. And their job was--it was called--it was called the 18th and Vine project. That's what I was director of and then-- Speaker 1: 18th and Vine, okay. Speaker 2: 18th and Vine, it was the 18th and Vine Authority. And it was a commission that had been set up by the city to restore this, this community that had been closed since the 1950s. And it included the housing of the baseball museum, the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum [Kansas City, Missouri], the Gem Theater [Kansas City, Missouri], and to build an American Jazz Museum [Kansas City, Missouri]. And we had to put all of that under one roof. So we were restoring this six-block area. And my particular part of this project was to get these museums up. I had been approached by Cleaver [Emanuel Cleaver], the mayor, to do this project and he asked me if I could do it. Now the interesting about this, for ten years they had this money, but the city was gonna--the money was to revert back to the city treasurer if they didn't do the museum. They had $20 million. And they were gonna--it was gonna go back to the city, and the community--the larger community thought that the black community could never do this. They had been fighting for seven years over this. So, when I came in Cleaver said, "I wanna know if you can do it, and I want you to tell me what could you do--what you would need to do it." And I said to him, "I don't want to raise the money to do this. I'd been raising money all my life, and I wanna do a project where I can do it right. But I don't wanna raise the money." He said, "If you can give me justification for a good museum, in a good area, I will, I will find the money for you." And he asked me to go--I told him I had to go and look at it, so I walked--it was a stillness I never will forget it. But it was very still. I mean, it was blocked off, cars didn't come down, it was just all these shops, all these places that once housed blacks were just closed. And, so I walked along the street, I passed a guy and I said, "Can you tell me about this area a little bit?" He said, "Oh, yeah, this use to be our real stomping ground but it's gone now. They just letting this deteriorate." And it literally had been closed since 1950s--the buses didn't even run down this street. So--and it was just a small little section of the community. And what there, there solution to--it had gotten on the National Register [National Register of Historic Places] as a historic jazz district, but the, the solution to the people in the department of the city was to let it fall down 'cause if it fall down, you can then tear it down because it's a problem. So, I, I looked at it and I came back and I said to him, "I can do it." He said, "Can you--how long will it take you to do it?" He said, "I gotta have this done in two years." He said, "I--first of all, I leave here in the third year so I got to have it done." So I said, "I can do it in two years." I said, "I just don't want to have to raise the money for this." He said, "You don't have to worry about the money. You have $20 million and if you tell me you need more than that to do it, if you can justify it, I will get the money. But it must be powerful." So I said okay. And I went back and at first I said, gee whiz, how am I gonna do this? But I saw it, all those years at the Afro-American [Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum in Philadelphia; African American Museum in Philadelphia] in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], all those years in, in New England with the Newport Jazz Festival. I saw all of this. It just, it just, it was there for me to do. And that's what I intended to do. Story_ID: 482572 Speaker 1: So the funding for the resurrection of this neighborhood, this former jazz neighborhood, was not gonna be a problem? Speaker 2: It was not gonna be a problem because Mayor Cleaver [Emanuel Cleaver], when he was a city councilman, had found a way to make the district be able to survive and also have income before, but it had to be done within a certain period of time. He had created a, a tax abatement almost fund for this. Speaker 1: So you tackle this new challenge. Tell us how you proceeded (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I tackled, I tackled this new challenge and I was very aware of all of the pieces that--I was aware of all the trauma that this community had. It was almost polarized with its own feeling. The jazz musicians felt strongly that if they lost 18th and Vine, they would lose everything, and they felt extreme loyalty to Count Basie. Count Basie had come from Kansas City [Missouri] and they had--and they--and he had for years operated out of there. They had thought that he was gonna be the one in charge of the museum, his enterprise. And the city and, and Count--the Count Basie people had some differences over the years. And that didn't happen. All of this took place before I came so there was some real bad blood in there. The city was made up of musicians either retired--there were musicians who were in their eighties or nineties who were still playing but--and then they were saying that they had no place to play, that kind of thing, so they were--but they literally kept the idea of 18th and Vine alive. They would not let it die, but they would not let the city just go in and bulldoze it or do what they wanted to it. And then the Historic Preservation [Historic Preservation Commission, Kansas City, Missouri] had done it piece with preserving that spot. So when I came in, it was a pristine piece of work that really needed just a master to just go ahead and do it. So I started doing a couple of things. The first thing I did, and I did this in every place where I would go, where there were controversial projects, if there is a controversy I don't deal with the controversy at all. I remain aloof from the controversy I keep my eye on the prize. I didn't do anything except what I came there to do, I focused only and that, in some instances, can be a mistake if the community needs you to be there. But I focused on building the building. I remembered and I recalled this because when Buck O'Neil passed the other day, I met with Buck O'Neil and Pat Jordan from the Gem Theater [Kansas City, Missouri] and I said to them, "I'm gonna erect this museum and I'm gonna do it in two years. And it's gonna be tough and you're gonna be upset, but I'm gonna do it." And there was a laughter in the audience that said, "Oh, yeah, we've heard that before." But I'm telling you in eighteen months I opened the door of that museum. I opened the door, and I had opened the door so that--the baseball museum [Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, Kansas City, Missouri], all they needed to do was to move their things into place. But I had done it. Story_ID: 482573 Speaker 1: The other thing that I had to work on real hard was Kansas City [Missouri] wasn't just a talk-about-music thing. Kansas City was--it's a special sound. And I felt that the only way to really give ownership to the community was to have a place where they could have--so I created a nightclub in the museum. The nightclub was called the Blue Room, 'cause that was the famous club in the, in the district. And in the Blue Room we featured Kansas City artists. Every night, you had to be a Kansas City artist to play in there, and so that gave them a place to have an income. So, every night, except one night, and that was Sunday night, you could hear Kansas City jazz in the Blue Room and you still can do that. The Gem Theater [Kansas City, Missouri] on the other hand, was our performance venue. It was a theater with five hundred seats, we could present jazz artists from across the country in that. And the community could use that for plays and all other kinds of stuff. And this had been Pat Jordan's baby, she had worked on it. And so what I did with that was to get that up, so that she opened, the Gem Theater opened, the Jazz Museum [American Jazz Museum, Kansas City, Missouri] opened, and the Negro Leagues Mu- [Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, Kansas City, Missouri] opened the same time. We opened the block up, you know, and so, so we had to do all that. But it was, it was the most important project I ever did because that particular project called together everything that I had learned, everything that I had learned. For instance, one of the problems that I knew we didn't have was public space, outdoor public space. You know, in a--when you have a museum that's dealing with music, you gotta have a place where you hear music outdoors and indoors. So we created a whole garden in the back for nothing but music so you could hear music all the time. We created children's rooms so I could have my own children's class going on in the museum. And in the center of the museum between Negro Leagues and the Jazz Museum, I created the 18th and Vine story which told what the community looked like, what it once looked like, so you had an idea of what the community was before all of this took place. So that even if it was taken away, you would have it. But that was, that was the most significant project, I think. Plus, it had--you know, I hired thirty-nine people in addition to musicians, I employed 144 musicians. But thirty-nine museum people was a lot of people, and, and this was an industry in that community and they rented it out, and they still do. They rent and--so that they can meet their financial obligations they did all of that. Now, is there some things that I wish I had done. I wish I had built a restaurant, and there were people on my board who pushed that but I didn't have enough money in that budget. But I wish I had because it needed a restaurant too to go with it. Although, the city built restaurants, you know, the CDCs [community development corporation] around so that they had it but I didn't have it at the time. So for a long time, I had to find a way to, to make sure food was available for people when they came. So that created another kind of issue. But it was the most successful project, and the only one I had where I didn't have to go to bed and worry about it. But I didn't know that once this museum opened, that I had to raise $8 million in order to keep it operating, in order to keep it operating. That's a lot of money to raise every, every year. That was a lot of money. And the other money I went to the city 'cause we had about $14 million budget. The other money the city gave me, but I could justify it by the rental and all that other stuff. But I had to go get $8 million. Story_ID: 482574 Speaker 1: What was your next move? You left there [Kansas City, Missouri] when, what was your next move? Speaker 2: I left there in 2002, and I came home. Speaker 1: Came home to? Speaker 2: To Jacksonville [Florida]. I came home to Jacksonville after deciding this is where I needed to be. Home was very--I needed to be here. I didn't understand why I was coming at the time. I was kind of concerned, I was fearful that I would miss the cultural life that I had had to Jacksonville, wouldn't have that. That I would miss my friends, they would lose touch with me. 'Cause a great deal of my energy comes from the young people who are in the field, who still call me and still ask questions, and keep--they keep me alive with their projects, asking me questions and forcing me to continue to think about creating, 'cause I love to interpret and to present African American culture. Speaker 1: So you came here quote, to retire, end quote? Speaker 2: Yeah, I came to retire. I came home. This was home, I hadn't been here since the '60s [1960s], and I came home. I had been home, you know, I'd come every year but I hadn't been home to live. Speaker 1: Did you stay quote, retired, end quote or did something else come along? Speaker 2: No, I retired. I do some special projects; I'll work on projects. I'm working on this project with Crossing the Color Line [Crossing the Color Lines Lecture Series] with the Ritz [Ritz Theatre and Museum, Jacksonville, Florida]. I've worked with--I volunteer with a lot of projects--I volunteered with the American Beach piece [American Beach Museum, Fernandina Beach, Florida]. That was a special love of mine. I work with City Kids Art [City Kids Art Factory, Jacksonville, Florida] because I think we don't have any art in our community. Story_ID: 482575 Speaker 1: Let me back up, what is the American Beach project because a lot of people might not have heard of American Beach [Florida] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The American--yeah, American Beach was a beach that was founded in 1920s by the Afro-American Life Insurance Company [Jacksonville, Florida] so that their employees would have a place to go to the beach, and would be able to go to the beach with a certain amount of dignity. We could go to the beach but we could only go on certain days, at certain times. And so this was a private beach that he had purchased for his employees, and his employees were allowed to buy homes and build their homes there. It was like a summer retreat, but pretty soon it became clear that he had to open it up because it, it wouldn't take care of itself without (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who is the he? Speaker 2: A.L. Lewis. Speaker 1: Abraham Lincoln Lewis? Speaker 2: Abraham Lincoln Lewis, and he really is Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] of the, the very famous president of both Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: He was her what, great-grandfather? Speaker 2: He was her great-grandfather. And, and, you know, he had encouraged--he was always thinking about things that black people could of owned. So he had encouraged people to buy and they opened up businesses down in that area. And it became the mecca for the ocean side between Miami [Florida] and Charleston [South Carolina], there was no other beach. There were lakes, there were rivers, but the ocean front beach was American Beach. And he called it American Beach because it was a play on the fact that the blacks could not go the white beaches. Beaches integrated and then everybody started going to the white beaches and left the--but there are still blacks who are there now, it's perhaps part of the richest part of the state. And it's sandwiched between The Ritz-Carlton [The Ritz-Carlton, Amelia Island, Fernadina Beach, Florida] and Amelia Island Plantation [Amelia Island Plantation Resort, Fernadina Beach, Florida]. Part of Amelia Island Plantation is part of American Beach, some pieces that was taken away or lost from some reasons (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is where, north of Jacksonville [Florida]? Speaker 2: It's north of Jacksonville just as you come into, it's north of Jacksonville between Fernadina [Fernadina Beach, Florida] and Jacksonville. Story_ID: 482576 Speaker 1: What is the black museum audience today, what is the audience for? African American historical and cultural museums (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I mean, that's a good question. It's really a good question because I'm not sure anymore, because one of the things that we have found when we started this and I was part of that original pioneer group, when we started we thought that we were, we were falling on Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] words, "You gotta know your history." And all of us would--just came out of that old social work thing, with that kind of zeal to get these institutions up. And we had watched things that didn't work so the--things like the, the arts museums that would--went out for a little bit and then they closed, you know. So the museums were to interpret our history and to help our children understand who they were. And so we labored hard to help our kids have a strong sense of their self-esteem, to understand their place in history, and to see themselves as, as contributors and not as takers in society. Or, and so, we were laboring on a lot of fronts, lot of fronts. One front was to get traditional museums who got all the money to do these exhibits to include us, our presence in it. So we worked with traditional museums to do that. Ironically, some of those institutions do the history better than we do, and don't even bother to include us anymore. The second thing we did was to lobby Washington [D.C.]. We lobbied Washington to make sure that black museums got included in the National Endowment, the National Endowment for the Arts, IMS [Institute of Museum Services; Institute of Museum and Library Services], so that we could get dollars. Our institutions never got what they should have. I testified before [U.S.] Congress for that, and so did Barry Gaither [HistoryMaker Edmund B. Gaither]. We did that. We worked hard to get the museum that is scheduled to be built in Washington, the national museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.], to be built. We wanted it to be built by Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] so it would be equal and competitive to all of the other museums, and, you know, that has been rather slow starting. It's off the ground now, but that's the kind of stuff we did, but we saw ourselves as helping to interpret the story. Now, we made a couple of mistakes, and, and they were big mistakes. We really fought for educational opportunities for our young people who've gone into the museum field. We not only encouraged them, one of the things we didn't anticipate that they would never come back to their communities' to work, that they would go straight to the traditional museum which could offer them more money and it didn't--and require them to change their way of thinking. Now, this is a different person. This is a person who's grown up in an integrated community, attended an integrated school, most times don't have any idea what our history was, and now they are in traditional museum interpreting just like traditional museums are. So it's a real dilemma for us. I've noticed that the museums are not really addressing that, but it's a real issue for us. So, I mean, those are--that was one of the mistakes. The other one was, we never were able to organize ourselves so that we could do what the science museums do, and that--and, you know, the science museums create these wonderful exhibits. They go from museum to museum and are able--they are able to offset their costs. We were never able to do that. And I think it's partly because we never found the leadership to do that. But those are kind of my regrets, for one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 482577 Speaker 1: One last kind of substance question before we do some wrap-up questions. Are the black museums being used by the tourism and travel industry today in ways that we had not intended them to be used, and we're really concerned about preserving our history and education in young people but has this new tourism travel industry begun to look at our museums differently or not? Speaker 2: I think they have. I think they have done. I think the tourism and--I think they've really done a lot to help black museums. I think what has happened is it's a matter of the--how the black museums have learned how to market themselves. They have to learn that they are marketing history now. They're not--you can't sit on it anymore, that there--there's too much technology out there. I think that the tourism pieces in some cities where I've gone, they're really onto the fact that black museums exist, that there is--there're great opportunities there, and the other side about--there is a thirst among the non-black community to know about African Americans that is unparalleled any time in history. I mean, it is unparalleled, you go--overseas visitors come in, they wanna see. You--but, I mean, if we could even just, just do that in our community, that would, that would help. But the tourism industry, all you gotta do is tap a little bit into that and you could get all of--look at what Harlem [New York, New York] does with the churches. I mean, it's just so much that you could do and, so I think tourism has been good. What has happened is old ways of interpreting stuff won't work anymore, you got to have all the whistles and bells. You gotta have all that technology and you can't think that you're doing it when you, when you're not doing that, because people who just want to read will come in the door but the other people won't. They want everything else. I tried to give the whistles and bells, I really try to give the whistles and bells. Story_ID: 482578 Speaker 1: Wrap-up questions: is there anything that you'd like to add to this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview that you granted that I have not asked you about? Speaker 2: I think that the one thing I'd like to say is the most dedicated and ignored group are professionals in this world is black museum professionals. I think what has happened to the founders and those people who really labor, who really labored to get those museums up, and to call attention so that traditional museums can understand that they should put them in there, they should interpret African America, is just so ignored. And there's nobody who see us as priority. Nobody. And that has been a tragedy to me. That has been the major tragedy. When I think of the [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing's. When I think of the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] for where it has come from to where it is now, when I think of Barry Gaither [HistoryMaker Edmund B. Gaither] labored over there with [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis' group all those Speaker 1: Where is this, in what city? Speaker 2: In Boston [Massachusetts]. Both of these museums are in Boston. When I think of Harry Robinson [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.] down in Dallas, Texas, or when I think of--and his is the, the African American folk life museum [Southwest Research Center and Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas], nobody was out there collecting our folk life. Harry did it. Harry built it and didn't have a deficit, you know, and, and I think of the Ritz Museum [Ritz Theatre and Museum, Jacksonville, Florida] here. And I think of what they have done with James Weldon Johnson, when I think of, of the Detroit museum [International Afro-American Museum; Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan], how Dr. Wright [Charles H. Wright] labored so hard to build that museum. And I think of all of this and then I realize that not only are they forgotten by our own public, but they are forgotten by traditionals who have gained a wealth of knowledge as a result of it. And I, I--to me more than anything else I would hope that black museum professionals can take their rightful place in the interpretation of America, 'cause they really deserve it, they really do. They did it with no money, they did it with no money. We were the first to do educational programs. People don't even talk about this. We didn't have collections, so we had people who came in and talked this whole--did this whole teaching thing around education. I mean, I remember going to a meeting once at Ellsworth Brown saying at the AAM, American Association of Museums that African American museums had it on them because we were, we were interpreting history with sometime one or two pieces, and that we were really doing our job. And so, you know, they have been forerunners. And, you know, just the recognition of all of that. Just, just--it's a loss, it's a loss. And my heart aches because of it, because I literally can tell you I gave, I gave my life to this museum business. I really did. Story_ID: 482579 Speaker 1: That leads me to the next question. How do you feel about the way you have lived your life? Speaker 2: How do I feel about it? I think it's been wonderful. It was the most exciting thing; I couldn't have done it any other way. God, it was so full of energy and exciting. I had ups and downs but challenges and struggles, and, oh God, the successes. I had so many successes in my lifetime. I've had--and I've seen it. And I feel like I, I feel like I did all right. I, I was the winner in the long run, I was the winner. I really understood from where I come from and I have a real respect for the roots of this stuff that I been in. I really do, it is so rich. It is so profound, I had a guy once to talk to my--I use to do these sessions at the museum [African American Museum in Philadelphia] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Carlos Moore, I don't know whether you know him. He's an ethnographer from Guatemala, used to be bring him in because his thing was that African America--people of African descent didn't understand their power or their beauty. And that if all of us would just decide one day to stamp our feet the same time, the world would tremble. And he could make people feel so good, and he would talk about how all of us are interconnected and how you can have an opportunity to do this in this museum work like nobody else does. Yeah, I've, I've had, you know, I've been with some great ones. Story_ID: 482580 Speaker 1: Beyond what you've done as a culturalist perpetuating African American history life and culture and using the museums to do that, is there anything else outside of that, that you have not yet done that you would like to do in your life? Speaker 2: I'd like to put this down. I'd like to write about it, and it's been tough coming. I've tried, I've gotten funded in part to do it but I really would like to write about it. I just feel like it needs to be written. That's the one thing I'd like, I'd like to do. Story_ID: 482581 Speaker 1: Two last questions, actually, three. For young people today, especially, young black men and women who might want to follow in your footsteps and be a part of the museum world, what advice do you have for them? Speaker 2: Oh, I think the world is waiting for them so my advice to them is to get connected with their family's history first and then begin--if they interpret their family experience for a small audience and then a large audience, they will understand how it all ties in and that they really need to get connected with a history group early, early. Not just in school, but in their community. They should belong to ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]. They should belong to American Association-- I mean, the Association for African American Life and History [sic. Association for the Study of African American Life and History], it's a wonderful organization. Carter Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] knew this day would come, and it's a place there for them. And somebody has to tell the story. The difference between the story that we tell now and the story that they hear, they don't hear the story. See, I love history because I remember when my grandmother and them would get on the bus and board it to go to the history meetings. I remember them coming back to the church and discussing what occurred. Somebody presented a book about black people, everybody in the audience couldn't read but everybody in the audience could hear and so they could tell the story. So they kept passing this history on. And somehow they have to connect, they have to connect. But the connection doesn't necessarily have to be a black connection. They need to connect their history with their family and if their family's mixed it's okay. Do it together, but do it, because one of the problems we have is we don't know how to bridge the difference--the fact that we are people of many colors. In America, we can't take care of it unless it's separate. We've got to make it work together. Story_ID: 482582 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person who really loved African American culture. I really want to be remembered like that. Speaker 1: And what you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: African American museums and their glory. I think that they have such a unique place in, in our history. With times changing, unless they're here, nobody will know we were there. Story_ID: 482604 Speaker 1: This is a photo of my daughter, this is Wannetta G. Johnson [Wannetta Johnson]. Wannetta was born in--on June of 1959 and passed in November 1st, 2004. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And this was taken when? Speaker 1: And that was taken at the opening of the American Jazz Museum in Kansas City [Missouri]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: You wanted the time, you wanted the time for that? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, approximate time. (Unclear). Speaker 1: That's my mother, that's Essie Gilmore, Essie Brozle Gilmore. She was born in Jacksonville in New Berlin [Jacksonville, Florida] and she passed in 1994. She--this photograph was taken in 1970. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, got two cameras here. (Unclear). Next. Speaker 1: This is my stepfather, this is Alvin Gilmore, passed in--I've forgotten, sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's okay. Yeah, just roughly when the photo was taken? Speaker 1: The photo--this photograph was taken in the 1950s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is the photograph of Katie Christopher Brozle. This is at the homestead which no longer exists. This is--this photograph was taken in the early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is my mother's club group and this was taken in the '40s [1940s]. This is my mother, her best friend Inez Askew and their club organization. This was a mainstay of a segregated community, was the black club organizations. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): About what time frame (unclear) you think this? Speaker 1: I would say that's in 1940s photograph. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is my daughter Wannetta Johnson and this is in--this was taken in 1970s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my grandmother and her trustee board group at Mount Olive A.M.E. Church [Jacksonville, Florida]. This was taken in 1940s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Now did you tell us which one is your mom in the photo? Speaker 1: She's the one that's seated at the bottom. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. In the middle? Speaker 1: In the middle with the glasses. All of them got glasses. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She's the second in the middle. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thank you. Next? Speaker 2: This is another photograph of my mother on graduating from beauty school, real effort for her. This is the early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next? Speaker 2: This is the Rhode Island Regiment [1st Rhode Island Regiment], the black regiment. This is a plate commissioned for the Rhode Island Black Heritage Society [Providence, Rhode Island] in 1976. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next please? Speaker 2: My oldest daughter, Gwendolyn Johnson Briton [ph.], and this was taken in 1980s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, got it. Next? Speaker 2: My oldest son, Clarence Johnson, his family, his wife Roberta [ph.], his two children Robert [ph.] and Clarence, Jr., taken in 1985 when, I think, he made colonel. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: My youngest son, Alvie Johnson and his wife, Claudette [Claudette Johnson], his son Nicholas [Nicholas Johnson], and his baby daughter, Krystal [Krystal Johnson]. This was taken in 1980s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 2: Kids are all out of college now--so silly (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about the bottom photo only. Speaker 2: The bottom photograph is Reverend Andrew Johnson [ph.] and his wife, my mother-in-law of my--of Clarence Johnson's family. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Mr. Hayden's [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden] gonna rotate that and we'll do the photo that is now on the bottom. Speaker 2: That is my children's father and my first husband, it's Clarence Johnson, Sr. That photograph was taken in 19--in 1960s the one at the bottom, the one at the other one was 1950s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so color photograph is '60s [1960s] and the black and white is '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], that's right. Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, go 'head. Speaker 2: This is President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] visiting the American Jazz Museum about six months after it opened. That's in--and it was in 1997. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Did he bring his saxophone? Speaker 2: He didn't bring his saxophone but he wanted us to take ours out 'cause we had Charlie Parker's so he could play it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good thing Charlie Parker was not around to hear that request (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, we weren't gone do it, the mayor was ready to do it though. This is Buck O'Neil, myself, and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and this was taken in 2000 at the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum in Kansas City. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead, please? Speaker 2: That's my mom and this is taken in the 1930s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is her sister, Jenny [ph.], the only surviving sister, a member of the Brozle family and this was 1930s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, the last one? Speaker 2: That's my father [Oliver Rhodes] in the 1930s. That may be nearer the 1920s. I would say '20s [1920s]...