 Story_ID: 12787 Speaker 1: Today is August 19th, the year 2002. This is Adele Hodge, the interviewer. The cameraperson is Matthew Hickey. We're conducting an interview today with Rev. Al Sampson of Chicago [Illinois]. We are in the HistoryMakers office at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue in Chicago. Can you give me your full name, Rev. Sampson, and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Sampson, S-A-M-P-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any nicknames or other names you go by? Speaker 2: No, they just call me 'Rev. Al'. Speaker 1: And would you tell us where we are also? Speaker 2: Oh, we're at 1900 S. Michigan in the HistoryMakers office--, Speaker 1: In Chicago. Speaker 2: --in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Your birth date? Speaker 2: 11-27-38 [November 27, 1938]. Speaker 1: And your age? Speaker 2: Sixty-three, sixty-three. I'm in denial. (Laughs) Speaker 1: The city, state, country of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born in Everett, Massachusetts, the county of Suffolk County, right outside of Boston [Massachusetts] in the United States of America. Story_ID: 12788 Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish. I've been off meat since 1970. And so, I'm really what they call Howard Johnson's baby coming out of Boston [Massachusetts], fried clams and trout. So fish is my, is my specialty. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I love the summer and I love the spring. Maybe the fall because of the leaves changing and I'm from the East Coast, and so I like to see the beauty of God's architecture on nature. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. The blood of our people. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Africa and the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Where have you been in Africa? Speaker 2: Oh, about thirty or forty African countries. I started out when I was in Seminary at McCormick Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois] in Hyde Park [neighborhood of Chicago]. And I went on the East African tour to Kenya. I was excited about that because I'd already read Jomo Kenyatta's book, 'Facing Mount Kenya'. So I got a chance to go to East Africa and Tanzania and stopped over in Uganda. I've spent a lot of time in West Africa and then that took in Ghana. I have a tailor in Ghana, Senegal, Cote d'Ivoire . I traveled with Dr. Leon Sullivan who just died recently, with his African African American Summit [now The Leon H. Sullivan Summit]. So I've been Cote d'Ivoire. I traveled with Rev. [Benjamin] Ben Chavis who's now with the Nation of Islam, but at that time, he was with the United Church of Christ. And we took a group of ministers to Angola because we were speaking out against [Jonas] Savimbi, moving against President [José Eduardo] dos Santos and the people of Angola. So I've been to Angola and Namibia all over South Africa with, with a group of ministers. And then I've--I--one of the biblical scholars for the original African Heritage Bible. So I got a chance to meet the Ethiopian Jews and Ethiopian Christians and went to Demona [Israel] with Dr. [James] Peebles and Dr. Cain Hope Felder, who were also biblical scholars for the original African Heritage Bible. We look at the Bible from African eyes. We think that Charlton Heston was not Moses and Elizabeth Taylor was not the Queen of Sheba, and Jesus was not born in Europe with blonde hair and blue eyes. We really believe all that was in Northeast Africa. And I had the distinct pleasure of being selected by Minister [Louis] Farrakhan. Right after the Million Man March, we went to eighteen African countries, Libya and Ghana and Iraq and Iran. And then--that was in 1996. And then, just recently came on a tour with him to nine more countries. And we went to Syria, Iraq, Yemen, United Arab Emirates. We went to Zimbabwe, Ethiopia--I mean Egypt. And those were a lot of Middle East countries that we, we went to. So in my travel portfolio, there are fifty-three African countries. And God has blessed me seeing at least forty of those African countries. And then I've always had a spiritual pilgrimage with my ministry about how we as a people could survive on-- not only on the continent, but in the Caribbean. So I've gone to places like Barbados and Haiti 'cause I'm chaplain to the World Conference of Mayors. So I got a chance to go into the Caribbean world. Speaker 1: So out of all of these African countries, which one can you-- do you like the best? Speaker 2: Well, one end of Africa is just as beautiful as the other. And I could probably just close my eyes and let the ancestors guide me 'cause it's all beautiful, you know. It's very beautiful. Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: There're--all my life I've operated off the phrase, "To throw all my ideas up to the moon, if I fail, I'll land them on the stars, but at least I'll be off the earth." And as a minister we call that moral authority. To just really take the authority and don't let your past hold you back, hold you back or your, or your present to produce barriers. Have no boundaries 'cause God is awesome and you should be as awesome as God. Michael Jordan in his book, 'Air Jordan' [sic, 'Rare Air: Michael on Michael] said it another way. "Compete or I will dominate you," meaning that there is no goal so high that he can't reach. So every time he went up in the sky, he was taking all of the authority with that little rubber ball (laughter). Story_ID: 12789 Speaker 1: Give me the names and the birth order of your siblings. Speaker 2: I have a, a brother named Paul. And I have a sister named Diane. And we call Paul, 'Chubby' and he's probably now about fifty-five, fifty-two-- fifty-five years of age. Diane's probably about forty-eight, forty-nine years of age. Speaker 1: Okay, let's travel back to your beginnings. Do--you're adopted, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I have only seen my mother twice in my life. And I saw her in a mental hospital. And her, her brother ended up being my adopted father. My mother's name was Flora. Her name--his name was, was Paul. I've never seen my real father. And Paul's wife was Mildred. They never had any children, and I was the oldest. And my brother [Paul] followed after me. And there was two stories. One was that my mother always--my adopted mother always said, "You ain't gone be no good cause your mother was no good." And she was an alcoholic. And so, even to this day, I don't, I can't get drunk. I've got a barrier against alcohol. And I ended up getting the other side of the story which was that she worked in white folks' kitchens up in Melrose, Massachusetts, even though I was from Everett [Massachusetts]. And she got raped. And she ended up in the mental hospital because during that time, there was no therapy for women who get violated. And I saw her in the mental hospital twice. And I guess part of my whole movement experience grows out of working with people who have gotten violated down through the years. So I, I became the eldest son of Mildred and Paul Sampson. Her name was Flora Sampson and her brother was Paul Sampson. And that's how I was able to keep the name Sampson. Speaker 1: How old were you when you visited your mom? Speaker 2: I was just a kid, nine, ten, eleven years of age. Speaker 1: Did you understand any of what was happening or did she try to talk to you about it? Speaker 2: Well, she wasn't in her right mind. But I had an Aunt Stella who told me at her bedside before she died the whole story about the violation and the fact that people didn't want to talk about it because during those days in Massachusetts, there was no legal representation. You know, the Dred Scott decision [1857] was still alive where there's no rules or laws that a black person has, that white folks are bound to respect. So it was out of that context that--I've always kept the memory. I always thought, as old as I am, that at some moment, and as highly visible as I've been down through the years, that I would know who my real father was. But that never happened. But I came out of a good family. My, my adopted mother, her father was a minister in Henderson, North Carolina, right outside Raleigh [North Carolina]. And my adopted father, Paul, was a deacon in the church were I got called into the ministry in 1956, pastor to Rev. Earl Wesley Lawson Emmanuel Baptist [Church] in Malden, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: So you were really blessed that you could have the family tie to the family. Speaker 2: And it was a strong family, especially on both sides. Story_ID: 12790 Speaker 1: Every summer we would go back into the South. And it was kind of strange because my mother [Mildred Sampson] always used to say two key things before we drove away: "Is the food in car? And is the pot in the car?" And I didn't understand it until I got grown enough to get into undergrad at Shaw University and realize that when we were traveling across the Mason-Dixon Line, black people were not allowed to go to bathrooms. And so my mama always made sure because of her southern orientation that there was a pot in car, you know. And then when I went to school in North Carolina in 1957, Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina, that's when I realized the deep-seated pattern of segregation, although growing up, you always got called out of your name. And you, you saw some barriers up in Boston [Massachusetts], but it really hit when we went into North Carolina for the sit-in demonstrations. Speaker 2: So your southern ties were in what state? Speaker 1: North Carolina. Speaker 2: North Carolina. And so you spent summers there? Speaker 1: Well, we, we would go there to visit the relatives. We had a, a cousin, William Perry, and on my mother's side, my adopted mother's side, who was a pharmacist in Burlington, North Carolina. It was the only pharmacist in several miles, in several cities. And we were able to go there and visit in Burlington, North Carolina. I got to Shaw University because--which is in Raleigh, North Carolina, which is the capital of Raleigh--of North Carolina--because Dr. Grady Demas Davis was the Dean of the School of Religion at Shaw University. And he came to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] to study the Father Divine [International Peace Mission] Movement. He pastored a church in my hometown of Everett, Massachusetts called Zion Baptist Church. And we used to bring him over all the time for dinner. And in 1956, I was in high school [Everett High School, Everett, Massachusetts], my senior year. I tried my, my junior year for the oratorical contest 'cause when I was a little kid I used to stutter a lot. And I literally taught myself how to speak because people would tease me about stuttering. And I ended up getting rejected in my junior year for the oratorical contest at my high school. The next year I tried again. I was the thirteenth speaker. I spoke on Friday the thirteenth, and I spoke before 1,300 students. And I won the oratorical contest. That night I went to church. And I read from the thirteenth chapter of Corinthians. And the, there was a revivalist in town, Dr. Hero. And my mother had a thing where if you go to a party, everybody had to come to church. So when the preacher asked for folk to come up for prayer, all of us went up. It was no-- I was 'Peck's Bad Boy' so it didn't make no difference. He reached out in the crowd and said, "One day you're going to be a great minister." That floored me and everybody in the church. That night I didn't go to the party. I came upstairs, and when I was walking up the steps--my house address was 13 Baldwin Avenue [Everett, Massachusetts]. So thirteen has been my sacred number down through the years. We got the telephone call. I picked up the phone. I literally answered that phone, and it was Dr. Grady Davis on the other side of the phone that asked, said, "I understand you're graduating this year. And I want you to come to Shaw." I said, "Well, I just got called into the ministry." He said, "That's great because Shaw is the oldest Bible college in black America." And I worked that summer, and in 1957, I ended up at the school doors of Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. Story_ID: 12791 Speaker 1: I was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth and college chapters all over North Carolina, plus I was president on my campus [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina]. And SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was founded on my campus. We literally gave them the keys. I would have been involved with SNCC, but I was already president of the NAACP. I was in the room when Ezell Blair [Jr., now known as Jibreel Khazan] and the three boys [Franklin Eugene McCain, Joseph Alfred McNeil, David Leinail Richmond] who agreed to sit down at A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. We met with Roy Wilkins who was an executive secretary at the time. And we said, "Roy, you go in the courts. We're going into the streets." And so the whole Civil Rights Movement on the student level of desegregating the Woolworth grocery store--Woolworth chain stores, grew out of the whole NAACP youth movement. And a buddy of mine named James Fox and I became the first two students in Raleigh, North Carolina to get arrested in the sit-in demonstrations. We elected a black contractor named John Winters to be the first black councilman in Raleigh, North Carolina, while we were students. And we ended up meeting [Rev.] Jesse Jackson, who was a transfer student from Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] on a football scholarship. He got transferred to A&T. I was a junior and Jesse was a sophomore. Every year in North Carolina you became state student legislators for a week. But they would always have the students come to St. Augustine [Saint Augustine's College, Raleigh, North Carolina] or to Shaw, segregated so that they wouldn't be able to go to any of the hotels. And they would stay on the campus. But we ended up passing the first public accommodations bill. I mean we're talking about black students who knew nothing about 'Robert's Rules of Order.' We were doing role-playing, how to make a motion, how to amend a motion. And we passed the legislation which shook the state. And the rest of it became history because we were deeply involved in the, in the movement all the way up until 1961. I, I pledged into the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity. There were sixteen of us that made, that went through. Only nine of us made it. And so we ended up with, with all of that piece of history, president NAACP on the campus, president of the student body. And I was always moving towards this leadership strategy on campus. Speaker 2: So your student group took the heat of water hosing and dogs. Speaker 1: All of that, and, and my [adoptive] mother [Mildred Sampson] made me promise that I would go to school and get an education. And I promised her that, and then she looked up six months later, and I'm on my way to jail with my books (laughter) in the sit-ins, you know. But back to this moral authority, you know, we just didn't think it was right, that we could go to one section of wall at Woolworth's and buy school supplies, but couldn't sit at the counter and have a Coke and a cheeseburger. So it was out of that context that, that we moved into the sit-ins. Story_ID: 12792 Speaker 1: There was a man that had a lot of influence on me named Dr. Vernon Johns. He was dean--I mean he was pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama] where [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.]--and the story is that they really wanted to get rid of Dr. Vernon Johns because they felt he was too militant. He loved the black farmers. He grew vegetables. He grew hams, pig, and with the hams and the watermelons. And he would go south--he would leave the South and go to the North. In fact, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar did a major story on Dr. Vernon Johns. He had a marquee at his church, at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, that it's all right to lynch a Negro in the state of Alabama. And the sheriff came by, and said, "Look, you've got take your sign down because people are stopping, blocking traffic looking at it, and you're creating a lot of attention." He said, "I can't take the sign down until you stop lynching black folk in the state of Alabama." So they got rid of him because he was so radical. But I liked his understanding of the Bible being the economic book. And the word economics in Greek is ecos, which is God's house. He would go to the North with a truckload of watermelons and say, "You can afford to pay me, but if you just buy my watermelons that'll be sufficient." Well, if you sell two thousand watermelons on the truck at five dollars, you've made ten thousand dollars, right? So he had a great influence on me when I was in, at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] 'cause he would come through there all the time and speak. And then the other person was Dr. Miles Mark Fisher who wrote Negro slave songs in the United States. It is the book that Dr. Wyatt T. Walker and them used as the base for the 'African [American] Heritage Hymnal' book that's in churches today. Dr. Benjamin Mays [president of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] wrote the book, 'The Negro's God'. And those kinds of books with those kinds of meaning had a lot of impact on me before I even met the man who ultimately ordained me in the ministry, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Lerone Bennett, August of 1961, in 'Ebony' magazine, wrote about a school called ITC, Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta [Georgia]. And I read about him in that August 1961 edition of 'Ebony' magazine. And I ended up writing them, got accepted to go to seminary down there. And when I got into seminary, I met Dr. Charles B. Copher, who did his doctorate on looking at the Bible from African eyes. And then I met for the first time in my life a black man with four doctorates in New Testament theology, Bishop Joseph Johnson. Never in my life, and I haven't since met any man as brilliant as this black man was who came out of Gainesville, Georgia. And he was a CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Bishop, four doctorates in New Testament theology. And I've always been deeply biblical. And I asked him one time, because I was working two jobs. My parents [Paul Sampson and Mildred Sampson] took the position, "We helped in undergrad. It's on you for undergrad--for graduate school." So I literally went to Atlanta not knowing anybody, except having that little 'Ebony' magazine in my, in my pocket by Lerone Bennett writing the article. And so I worked two or three jobs. And I really got tired. And one day in class, I raised my hand and said, "Look I'm clear about the Bible, the whole book. I just got one problem. Did Jesus really die, go in the ground and come back up again? And did his disciples really--did, is that really, really a true story based on your research?" He told it to me in Greek. He told it to me in the native tongue of Jesus which is Aramaic. He said it in, in Hebrew. He said it in Latin. He knew four or five different languages. And then he preached, and he tore up the class that, "Yes, Jesus did die and, and got raised from the dead." And when he got through, I raised my hand one more time, and I said, "Well that's great. I don't need to go work these two or three jobs." Story_ID: 12793 Speaker 1: I'm coming out of seminary [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and at that time, the Freedom Rides had occurred in, in the South. And I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as executive secretary for the Atlanta branch of the NAACP. And I stayed there, and I wrote also for--Jesse Hill at a newspaper called the 'Atlanta Inquirer' newspaper. And Julian Bond was a part of that and Charles Black. And I stayed there for a while. And then I got arrested and was demonstrating in an area [of Georgia] called DeKalb, where Cynthia McKinney is now, the Congresswoman. And Reverend C. T. [Cordy Tindell] Vivian who was a part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], his children were desegregating the schools with his wife Octavia Vivian. She wrote the only book on, on Mrs. Coretta [Scott] King, on the life of, of Coretta. And I ended up getting fired by the NAACP and hired by SCLC. And I was C.T. Vivian's director of affiliates. So in 1962, close to '63 [1963], I ended up being on the staff of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] as assistant director of affiliates with Reverend C.T. Vivian. Speaker 2: Okay, why did you get fired the NAACP? Speaker 1: The NAACP fired me, Julian Bond, all of us because when we were moving on grassroots side, the 'bougies' [bourgeoisie] felt that that was, you know, not the best movement, and, because they still had this Roy Wilkins theory of philosophy that you should go into courts, that all this should be solved in the courts and not in the, in the streets of, of, of America. Martin King had the same tension in this time with Dr. J. H. [Joseph Harrison] Jackson who was president of the National Baptist Convention. And J. H. had a church, Mount Olivet [sic, Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] on 31st [Street] at that time, it was South Park[way]. Now, it's [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive. And when they named the church after, when they named the street after Martin Luther King, he changed his address around to the side of the church so that he wouldn't have to be called Martin Luther King Drive on 31st. The church still stands today--. Speaker 2: What church is it? Speaker 1: It's called Mount Olivet Baptist Church, headed by, at that time, it was Dr. J. H. Jackson, who was president of the National Baptist Convention. So in 1962, '63 [1963], I joined SCLC and stayed there until Martin got assassinated in '68 [April 4, 1968]. And I spent two more years with [Rev.] Ralph Abernathy from '68 [1968] to '70 [1970]. And I ended up coming to Chicago when, when Dr. King came. And I studied in the Metropolitan Applied Research Center, [Kenneth] Ken Clark. And then I also studied, another think tank with Saul Alinsky, community organization and that's how I met Squire Lance who was the architect of Dorothy Brown's campaign, the first black female clerk of the Circuit Court here in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 12794 Speaker 1: Take us back for--just very briefly to when you first actually met [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and tell me what kind of relationship the two of you had and what kind of person he was from your perspective? Speaker 2: See, when we were in North Carolina, we moved into a leadership level. And we had to address the media. We understood that there was international movements going on with the independence of African countries. We read Mao Zedong's [Chinese Communist Party leader, Chairman Mao Tse-tung] book, 'The Red Book', and we read Jomo Kenyatta's book, 'Facing Mount Kenya'. So we understood that we were in the context of an international movement for this whole idea of independence, breaking away from--when I went to school in seminary in [Interdenominational Theological Center] Atlanta [Georgia], I ended up being the first person in America to testify for the United States civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] in the Lester Maddox Pickwick Restaurant case [Georgia Court of Appeals, 1965], which made it possible for folk to be able now to go to hotels and buses and airplanes. And they did it under the Interstate Commerce Act [1887]. When we were in court, they asked Lester Maddox, "Do you have a restaurant?" "Yes." "What kind of restaurant do you have?" "Well, my, my tomatoes come from Florida and my pears come from Iowa, and my, my beef comes from Illinois." And that comes across state lines so that black folk ought to have the right to come across state lines to be in your, in your, your restaurant. So it was out of that context that we already had leadership capability. When we met with, met Dr. King, it was interesting because [Andrew] Andy Young came out of Augusta, Georgia. Bernard Lee came out of Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama] with, with [Rev.] Ralph Abernathy. [Rev.] C. T. [Cordy Tindell] Vivian and [Rev. James] Jim Bevel, James Lawson and Diane [Nash] Bevel all came out of the Nashville [Tennessee] movement. So all over black America in the South, there were various movements that was going on. [Congressman] John Lewis came out of Alabama. And out of those different movements and a lot of them coming out of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth, which is what I was a part of. And in the other side was the SNCC movement, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, by the time we got to Martin King, we all saw ourselves as leaders. In fact, 'Time' magazine said that we were all wild horses and Dr. King had the reins to the, to the wild horses. So from 1962 until his untimely death in, in '68 [April 4, 1968], I had a great relationship with him because I never got caught up in the charisma of the personality. I always wanted to understand what made a man like that. And so I always felt that his intelligence--he was a scholar, he was brilliant. He could take concepts and break them down. And as a young man in the ministry, especially a preacher, you wanted to master that capacity to take a lofty idea and get masses of people to move on your level of ideas. So you had to be intelligent. God never let a fool take care of his kingdom. And so that was easy for me because coming out of the East Coast, I had good study habits, and I, I knew that you had to have an intellectual framework of reference. The other key thing about Dr. King that I admired, without getting caught up with Dr. King, the personality, the charismatic side of him, was his integrity. Martin Luther King was not for sale. And there was something about his coming out of the middle class structure with his father [Rev. Martin Luther King, Sr.] and great grandfather, great, great grandfather being preachers, that, that when it came to hurting poor people and violating people, something was in him that coiled up where he was prepared to die on that principle, that I will not allow you to, to violate. I'll never forget when he got the Nobel Peace Prize, there were Atlanta Scripto Pen workers that were members of his daddy's church. And they came to him with how the unions was not--how management was not treating them properly. And it became a union issue. But he took the position that when he went to get the Nobel Peace Prize, he was gonna launch an international boycott on Scripto Pen. And if you remember, when he got the money from the Nobel Peace Prize, he donated it back to the organization because it was never about money for him. It was really about freedom. I've noticed on several occasions, he would go and speak at colleges and then come back. And Dora McDonald would have a stamp with his signature. And he would stamp the--and she would stamp the checks and the money would go back into SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] because we were only getting paid $37.50 every two weeks and then nothing about benefits. I mean you, you're in war, you ain't getting no health and welfare benefits and a pension, and a pension plan when you're a freedom fighter, okay. So it was his intelligence and his integrity that, that I, I admired. And, and I guess the last piece was his, his understanding of the individuality. I asked him one day, "Dr. King, aren't you lonely? I mean you're out here on a lot of these issues all by yourself." And he took a penny out and said that, that leadership is like a penny. On one side is the right to lead, and the other side is the responsibility of being alone. But you're not alone because you have God. But you are alone because sometimes the people don't understand. And that was just powerful for me because even in his aloneness, not being alone with God, but being alone with people who wouldn't hear his ideas and stay with him on--like on the Vietnam War, all of the black leaders in America told him, and a lot of white folks told him, that he should stay in Alabama and just deal with domestic issues and never deal with the international. And his response was, "If I tell a young man in Birmingham, Alabama to not turn--to turn the other cheek, I don't--I shouldn't endorse him having a rifle to go against Ho Chi Minh, a brown man in Vietnam that, that ain't never hurt us and don't know nothing about us." So it was out of this individuality. So his intelligence, his integrity, but his individuality that he knew he had to do what he had to do, even if nobody else would, would follow him or do what, what, what God had placed on his heart to do. Story_ID: 12795 Speaker 1: In that period, where Reverend Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was going from the civil rights had started to expand out, and come up to Chicago [Illinois] and to other--Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and other cities, and when his reputation was starting to take a beating inside and outside, that was a difficult period for him? Speaker 2: Well, what you had was an interesting dynamic. When we fought for the right to vote, the right to eat at a restaurant, it didn't cost the United States government anything because we wasn't talking about appropriations. We were fundamentally saying to blacks in the South, you don't have to be fearful. A lot--the 'New York Times' kept talking about integration, when we really were talking about desegregating. But you had to get black folks' minds and their spirit at the point that they realized that only God will take care of them. Carter G. Woodson in his book, 'The Miseducation of the Negro', page 119 said that, that black folk used to walk around the back of the door. And if there was no back door, they would cut open a back door. But it was this deep-seated fear of blacks in the South. With the military, I mean remember as a, as a kid in undergrad school [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], when we sat down the, the lady told us to leave. We told her we wasn't gonna leave. The sheriff came in. The police came in. And the whole strategy was, if you don't leave, we're going to lynch you, kill you, castrate you, assassinate you, assassinate your character. We're gonna do all of these military objectives against you. The force and the power of our relationship with God and our relationship at organizing people shut all that military process down. So the whole birth of the Civil Rights Movement was constantly organizing people. And we started with the children because they had no assets. So we used to go into high schools and go into college because we had no assets. So you put him in jail, you know, the mortgage ain't due for a kid. And then the theory was that the, the parents would come looking for their children. And they'd come to the mass meeting, and we would start preaching to the parents. And then they started getting involved, which is what, what ended up being the birth of a movement. Well, it didn't cost the government anything. Right after we had gotten a lot of the legislation, it then started moving to economic issues, which is what gave birth to the Poor People's Campaign. People don't realize that there were two Baptist ministers. One was outside the system, and the other one was inside the system. Ironic enough, the man's name was Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]. He was the only black legislator at that time, that passed more legislation than anybody in the history of--black or white--of electoral politics on the Congressional level, who was born by the way on April 4th [sic, November 29, 1908], and, and the deep part about it is that Adam Clayton Powell passed a lot of social legislation that we have today from the whole issue of daycare centers to senior citizens' housing. Because the things that Martin was articulating on the street, Adam was putting into legislation. The Poor People's Campaign gave birth in Marks, Mississippi when Dr. King went there and saw the depth of poverty where children didn't even have nothing. It was none of the poorest cities in--or villages in the whole state of Mississippi. And he came back and, and realized that we needed to do the Poor People's Campaign. I'm in Coretta [Scott] King's book, 'My Life with Martin Luther King' where we, we came to Chicago to study Saul Alinsky because there was always this charge about Dr. King using the charisma to bring people together. And then when he flew away, back to Atlanta [Georgia], the power disseminated. And so we needed a community organization to contain the power and the development of, of leadership. And so he had a program called, Citizenship Education Project [sic, Citizenship Education Program], that was run by a lady named Septima Clark, that wrote the book, 'Echo in My Soul', which talked about the South Carolina Geechees and the Five Finger Islands down there in Frogmore and Beaufort, South Carolina, Myrtle Beach [South Carolina], where Billie Jean King took over all of that, all of that land down there. And Dorothy Cotton and [Andrew] Andy Young ran the Citizenship Education Project, where we taught people what is a precinct, what is a ward? How to open up a bank account. How to read and write. Fannie Lou Hamer, came--from Ruleville, Mississippi, came through the Citizenship Education Project, which was really the birth of the base for the Civil Rights Movement in the South and for the whole birth of the political education movement that occurred in Alabama with the Black Panther Party, in Mississippi with the [Mississippi] Freedom Democratic Party; that leadership grew out of what we called the Citizenship Education Project. Well, what ends up happening is the charisma of Dr. King now needed to be in an urban world, where you had to learn the whole issue of containing power, transforming of leadership so people would be responsible, back to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], where you had to learn how to open up a meeting, how to process ideas. You've got a room full of people. You can't just preach now, you've got to teach. And you have to be responsible for the, for how they shall be, be led and how they gonna assume responsibility in your absence. So it was a whole new, new dynamic, and, and we made the challenge, looking at Saul Alinsky as, as--for strategies on how do you make social change with, with strategies. Story_ID: 12796 Speaker 1: Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Rev. C. T. [Cordy Tindell] Vivian, sent me to study The Woodlawn Organization. Saul Alinsky had a foundation called the Industrial Areas Foundation. And [Rev.] Ralph Abernathy was a board member of the Industrial Areas Foundation. And so when I came to Chicago [Illinois], one year before Dr. King, I stayed with [Rev.] Jesse Jackson when he was in seminary [Chicago Theological Seminary, Chicago, Illinois], and I went everyday to The Woodlawn Organization. And I learned community organization. When Selma, Alabama broke out [demonstrations that led to 'Bloody Sunday'], I was here in Chicago. And, and--stayed with Jesse, and he took a busload of students down. And that's, you know, another piece of history. After Selma, Alabama, which is around about the latter part of '66 [1966, sic], early part of '67 [1967, sic, 'Bloody Sunday' was March 7, 1965], Dr. King came to the West side of, of Chicago and produced a movement of, end slums [March on Marquette Park, August, 1966]. After we left there, we went to Cleveland [Ohio]. And I became Martin King's project director for the Carl Stokes campaign, which was the first black elected--the first time Carl Stokes ran for, for mayor of Cleveland [Ohio], he lost. The second time, he, he won because there was a brother there named Ahmed Evans, who was a street brother. He was a nationalist. And he understood the street. The first time Carl Stokes ran for office, he hooked up the preachers, but he didn't hook up the street. Because we had worked with the gangs in Chicago, the brothers and sisters from the street, we were able to produce the first convention of all of the youth groups that was written up in 'Ebony' magazine. When Dr. King and Stokely [Carmichael, now Kwame Ture] got into the conflict in Mississippi [James Meredith March Against Fear demonstration] and Stokely started hollering "Black Power," and Dr. King took the position that Black Power is okay because history locates you, but it doesn't liberate you. There's got to be a program after you get through with the slogan. That tension started driving a, a wedge inside of the movement. And when we did the Poor People's Campaign, Dr. King was in deep agony because he knew that the United States government had a responsibility to take care of, of the sick, the elderly, because we had the, we had the right to, to vote, but we didn't have the right to eat in, in America. And there was, there was a man named Robert Theobald that wrote a book entitled 'The Guaranteed Income'. And out of that book, it talked about the minute a child gets born, he ought to have--he or she should have a guaranteed income. That meant you had to restructure the economy so that a child, the minute it's in its mother's womb, becomes sacred because you put an economic floor under the child. We knew that we were going to die when we went to Washington, D.C. What we didn't know was when the assassination would occur. A black FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent in 1966, out in California, told Martin Luther King that the United States Government wanted to assassinate him. He called an emergency meeting in 1966. He ordained me in January of 1966, Martin King only ordained three men. Two of them were assistant pastors of his daddy's church, Homer McCall and Albert Brinson. I was the only one inside of his organization, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC], that he ordained in the ministry. That was in January of '66 [1966]. It was in August of '66 [1966] that he brought everybody from around the country into one room at the Ailey House. And we had a major meeting. There's a man named Dr.--named Cirillo McSween, that owns a string of McDonald's franchises here in Chicago, that was working with Jesse. He was an insurance man with New York Life Insurance Company Million Dollar Roundtable. He said that in the event of his death, Cirillo would become the treasurer. Ralph Abernathy, who had been the Treasurer for fifteen years in SCLC, never lost a dime with the organization; one more time, back to the integrity question, Ralph would inheirit the organization as the president. Dr. King made us promise that we would stay together. Everybody cried and agreed that they would and then Dr. King also made us promise that non-violence would not be a tactic, but it would actually be a way of life for us; that we could substantiate in the Bible that you do have a responsibility to love your enemies, to turn the other cheek and let God move with you through your crises, both personally, professionally and in, and in the larger world. So we took the position that he took, non-violence or non-existence because a person should never be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. So that moved us into it really being a part of our life. When, when we launched the Poor People's Campaign, we really felt that the United States government had a responsibility to take care of its people. And the rest is history, because they assassinated Dr. King [April 4, 1968] on the way because they knew that if he ever made it to Washington, D.C., with the power of his influence with churches--because that was the base of his movement. Story_ID: 12797 Speaker 1: Dr. Leon Sullivan brought him Operation Breadbasket, which was a, a program that had been designed by him in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], at Zion Hill Baptist Church. The good thing about Dr. Sullivan was that he said, here, take this program and make it a, a national program. Speaker 2: And you knew Dr. Sullivan well? Speaker 1: Oh, real well. In fact, several years ago, before his untimely death, he came to my church for one of my, my banquets, where he gave us an award. Speaker 2: Well, did the succession plan work out as Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] thought it might? Or wanted it to? Speaker 1: No, no. I think a lot of folk broke their integrity down through the years. I stayed with, with King--with [Rev.] Ralph Abernathy from, from 1968 'til 1970, but there were a lot of forces. You know, "Humpty Dumpty was on the wall and all the king's horses, all the king's men couldn't put the movement back together again." It was--I, I do a little sermon now, "Shattered dreams; scattered pieces"--that everybody now has a piece of the dream. So if you're in Poland, you'll sing, "We shall overcome", you know. The dream has now become international. What Martin talked about has become both national and international. People all over the world are picketing and struggling because of the impact of, of this man. Even today, wherever I go in the world meeting presidents and, and kings, they have all read something about Martin Luther King and the impact that he had on, on, on the soul of the world. I was very excited the other day. I was with Minister [Louis] Farrakhan, where we went to Durban, South Africa. And we're sitting the room of over fifty different heads of state in Africa, where they agreed to create the United States of Africa, which is now called the African Union. But to see Patrice Lumumba's son, [Gamal] Abdel Nasser's son, to see the brothers and sisters from Kenya and Ghana. And now here I am, thirty, forty years later, a student of the non-violent movement, and then I see in the '60s [1960s], those same countries were fighting for their independence. Now, they're fighting now to be dependent with each other because there are fifty-three African countries. It was a moving experience because when you look at it from a global point of view, we're marvelous people who has moved under great odds and under great economic and, and cultural restraints. Speaker 2: So the [Civil Rights] Movement served its purpose, and had its own transition, if you will into something else? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, because-- Speaker 2: Into many other things internationally. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And we have had nothing to replace it of that magnitude. Speaker 1: No, but I think it's been broke in pieces, that have been moving on it. I think that Minister Farrakhan doing Two Million Men and the Million Man March had a great impact. I was in the room, in the tent really, in the desert, when Muammar [al-] Qaddafi [leader of Libya] told Minister Farrakhan, "I, I saw you all on, on C-SPAN [television network]. I saw you on CNN [Cable News Network]. It looked beautiful to see two million black men standing there in unity, putting money in a bucket. No, no, no liquor, no drugs. Washington [D.C.] was spanking clean. The park was clean when they left, and what I want to do is, is The nation of Libya wants to give you $1 billion so that you can build homes and hospitals and get into the manufacturing." And the 'Wall Street Journal,' two years before that, did a thirty-day study and said that the only problem facing Africans in America is, is the block of capital--that we have a broken-up economy. We have a disposal economy. We don't have a block of capital to do the economic initiatives that we need. Story_ID: 12798 Speaker 1: But I think the, the power of, of a Minister Louis Farrakhan--you know, in 1979, I'm the only preacher in the country that gave him the keys to my church. Farrakhan is, is somewhat from Massachusetts. He lived in Boston [Massachusetts]. He was Episcopalian. He went to school in Winston-Salem in North Carolina. He is to Elijah [Muhammad], who came out of Sandersville, Georgia, what I am to [Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.], who came out of [Atlanta] Georgia. I'm from Massachusetts. He's from Massachusetts. I went to school in North Carolina. He went to school in North Carolina. So it's been a natural relationship for, for us, one Christian, the other one Muslim. I gave him the keys in 1979, never asked him for the keys back. And we've gone all over the world saying that Christians and Muslims ought to be able to work together. Whenever he went to any mosque in--from Africa or even in the, in the Middle East, he had to introduce me. And when he told the story, they gave me a standing ovation because they know that Christians are people of the book, that when Jesus said there are some, some, some voices--there are some sheep that are not of my fold, but they hear my voice--to us that's, that gives room for Islamic folk to sit, folk--the Hebrew children to come and sit at the table. The other day I was with him in Iraq, and, and I was the first Christian and the first African in America to touch the birth place of Abraham, where he was born. And all three faiths come out of, you know, Islam, Christianity and Judaism, all come out of Abraham, the father of all nations. So when you, when you move towards that perspective of looking at this thing from a global point of view--1976, in my church, we did the ZANU [Zimbabwe African National Union]-ZAPU [Zimbabwe African People's Union] Conference, when [Prime Minister] Ian Smith was trying to hold the people down on, on the liberation. Thirty-some odd, forty years later, I'm sitting at the table with President [Robert] Mugabe, who, who changed it from Rhodesia to Zimbabwe. And he's talking about land and the right to have ownership of the land. 4,500 white folks shouldn't be sitting on 13 million acres of land. [Harry Frederick] Oppenheimer, who has the diamond mines in South Africa controls 40 percent of the investments in South Africa and at the same time, controls 13,000 acres of land in Zimbabwe. Nobody should eat all that food at the table while, while the Africans in Zimbabwe have no farmland. They have no, no mineral resources. And everybody knows that they're beating up on them today because if he proves correct with this farm program, then he'll--it'll end up having a rippling affect in Namibia and South Africa, Swaziland and, and Botswana. But sister, even my sitting here now, forty-six years later in the ministry, I'm talking internationally (laughs), and I started out with a hamburger at a lunch counter, you understand what I'm saying? Story_ID: 12799 Speaker 1: Take me back for a second to Saul Alinsky methods, philosophy, ways of getting things done, holding an organization together. How much of that was applied to the post-Million Man March situation. What has been the result of that? Speaker 2: Well, there's been two strains going through our community on this principle of organizing and containing power, developing leadership. In the black church, we argue that there're--I always say there are three types of churches. The first church is called the entertainment church, where folk jump and down with the Holy Ghost on Sunday and live with Casper the Ghost on Monday. But if your God is as bad as you say he is, then there ought to be some change on Monday morning based on how you articulate him on Sunday morning. If Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego is as awesome as you say he is, inside of a fiery furnace when there ain't no fire, and, and then you're out here on these social issues, there ought to be some change. A preacher that can't have the luxury of saying, "In my father's house are many mansions, I go and prepare a place for you," and he hasn't rehabilitated no, no houses in his own neighborhood. If a Negro don't know how to live in a house in his own neighborhood, he'll tear up heaven. How can you talk about feeding the sheep if you're not working with black farmers which is the menu that the sheep, that your brothers and sisters need because we're the only race of people who don't feed themselves on the planet Earth. So the first church is called the entertainment church. The second church is called the containment church where all the intelligentsia is locked up into church. I can show you churches in this town where they've got, they've got lawyers sitting up in the church every Sunday morning, judges. Yet there's no Thurgood Marshall legal clinic. The brothers and sisters at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, location of Cook County Courthouse and Cook County Jail, Illinois] are there 'cause they don't have a lawyer. Where are the lawyers? Why are they able to show up on Sunday morning and become judges on Sunday morning, and yet they don't have no legal clinic. No legal defense fund for our people on, on Monday morning. The third church is what we call the Martin Luther King Church. When [Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was alert--alive, he took the church out the church into the community. When Martin got assassinated, the, the, the church left the community and went back to church. The struggle now is to get the church out the church, back into the community. And so what we did was move with looking at the black hurch because my analysis of the Alinsky program had two or three pitfalls to it. Number one, he was very manipulative, where four or five organizers would literally plan the Shakespearean play. We would literally call folk and say,"Look, I need you to make the motion. This is the motion I'd like you to make." You call somebody else and say, "I need you to second the motion." Well, when you juxtapose how Saul Alinsky moved, the strategies was great, but how you take those strategies and give them to people moved into a high level of manipulation. In the black church, the genius was that, that people will believe in you because of your charismatic personality, because of your integrity. They will follow you because of your integrity. So you can give them the truth. You don't have to manipulate. You can tell people the truth, that there's a problem in the community, and this is how we want to solve the problem. So last summer, sixteen sisters in the Roseland area [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois], where my church [Fernwood United Methodist Church] is located, got violated by, by some brothers. I called preachers together, but I also called the motorcycle boys together because they ride up and down all hours of the night on these expressways. So I said to them, strategy, "I don't want y'all to be riding up and down risking your life at three o'clock in the morning. I want you to hit the bus stops." I did the research. There are seven steps to nonviolence: information, education, purification, negotiation, confrontation, reconciliation and recreation. Re, is a Greek word which means I can return creating because I've gotten some new information. So in my research, I found out the motorcycle people stay up all hours of the night. And they ride up and down these highways. So I, I did the research and got our folk to do the research on where are the bus stops that these rapists had been coming. And so we deployed motorcycle brothers and sisters to go up and down those streets. We ended up having leaflets out in the street to tell the story that if you're going to work, call us at my church number. And then we'll have you escorted from your house to the bus stop. And we're, we'll get a group of brothers that will be right there. And then at the same time, right today, I have karate classes where the sisters can come by and have karate classes and learn karate. So you come with a total program, and you get people involved. And that's, that's a more healthier way with the black church as the model because it's already organized. You just need more churches participating, and you need to keep the integrity from the, from the pulpit to the pew where you don't sell out. And then you, you move with a mass-base movement. The problem with the Alinsky piece from, from my perspective was, it was very manipulative. And, and it was always two or three people cutting a deal without the rest of the people knowing what the deal was. And so today, as we speak, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], high-priced housing was going on in Woodlawn [neighborhood in Chicago], and you don't have the black homeowners' base that you had when, when we were there organizing homeowners. There's no bank there, but there's pretty houses and pretty churches, but there's no bank. And, and you can't run a community without a bank. The church is a very important institution, but the bank is the most important institution because it, it gives you a place for your, your economic wherewithal. Story_ID: 12800 Speaker 1: So you used a combination of [Saul] Alinsky and--, Speaker 2: The strategies. Speaker 1: --and grassroots strategies--, Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --for the Million Man March following. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: What has been the result? Speaker 2: Well, we, we've done a couple of things. One, we created the Soul Slate where we looked at just African American candidates, especially judges. One of the problems that had been confronting our community is that a lot of politicians, especially black politicians, they endorse everybody. They endorse Hispanics. They endorse whites. And if you have a John Smith who might be white or who might be black, running for Judge, if the people don't have anything in their hand as they go into the polls, they'll never end up voting for all of the judges. They'll vote at what we call the top of the ticket and not the bottom of the ticket. So we came up with the Soul Sate. We did a program called Operation Clean Slate 'cause we were helping a lot of brothers and sisters try to get their records expunged who had prison records because it blocks them from, from getting jobs and some of them from going to school. And that is now being processed into legislation from [Illinois] State Representative [Constance] Connie Howard. A lot of black men all over America went back and reconnected with their families, took the responsibility for their children. They started joining organizations, and they started joining churches. And I think the, the key thing was how they broke back up into the black church. It had always been female-dominated, but you see the rise now of a lot of black men coming back into the church. The genius of [Nation of Islam] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan with the Million Man March is that he brought all of the veterans, those of us who knew about mobilization and strategy, he, he opened up the umbrella and allowed everybody who had any kind of movement credentials to come under that one roof, which is what really made it possible for him to have two million folk. And that is not including the folk who stayed home, and didn't go to work and didn't do any shopping. And that's why I felt, and still feel, that he's one of the most important black leaders in the world because when you couple what he did in America with his international portfolio, the man is awesome. Story_ID: 12801 Speaker 1: Do you feel the Million Man, Woman, Kids or whatever [The Million Man March, October 16th, 1995], marching on Washington [D.C.], has that movement or that particular strategy approach, has it spent its life? Speaker 2: Well, I think that the more people are in motion, the more commotion they, they create. And when that happens, they keep destabilizing the world that keeps destabilizing them. One of the problems with Africans in America is that we don't have the luxury of getting out of the ring of racism. It's a constant, twenty-four hours a day, seven-day a week kind of struggle. A lady came to my church Sunday with an awesome, painful, painful picture of her mother, ninety years of age gotten beat up in a nursing home. And, and we're gonna take that as a, as a fight, you know. The problem is, in our community, we have to fight on so many levels about so many things and then turn back around and heal people who hurt on so many levels. A lady came to my church a couple of weeks ago and said she want--I had testimony time--and, and one sister stood up and said, "I need anger management classes." And that's a great confession because we're witnessing now people bouncing babies off walls. We're witnessing now brothers pulling old men out of, out of rented cars for, for drinking in the car, and then running up into the sidewalk and hurting two or three sisters with one of them dying. But this mob action strategy, this vigilante approach of, of not healing the person who's got alcohol and driving with alcohol, but to kill the person. All that's anger management. So the African American community with, with its high level of, of destabilization all along. The police are rounding in and out of our neighborhoods. They know how to find everything except shutting down the drug houses, except stopping the guns that come through our community, yet we know that we're not manufacturing any guns. We're not manufacturing the cocaine. We don't grow any of it. So how does it get here? We find out that Afghanistan had the largest poppy fields in the world. And now the poppy fields have grown back again. And they're bringing all that back into the African American community. So on, on many levels, Johnny still can't read. And it don't look like he's gonna read because you don't have to read in prison because now you can become a part of the prison industrial complex. So with the onslaught of, of the pathology of racism and economic exploitation, we have a lot to struggle about. And, and the, the church has got to be the liberation church where you take the church out the church into the community. And, and you established. So we built on affordable home, and we're now working with Black on Black Love organization to take sisters out of prison 'cause they lose their children when they go to prison, and get them reestablished to have an address, to have a house, have a--get a good home-cooked meal. We're the only church in the country with a department of agriculture in our church, where we produce a marriage between the black consumer, up South [sic, North] and the rural farmer down South, where we make the marriage of bringing vegetables in. And we've been doing the program for the last twenty-six, twenty-four years, where we get black media to advertise that the farmers are coming, down in Kankakee [Illinois], Momence [Illinois], less than sixty miles outside of Chicago [Illinois] we have a group of farmers, who for the last fifteen, twenty years been growing just for our church and the, and the public has had an opportunity to get fresh vegetables because, you know, we have an international belly. I mean the Chinese give us shrimp-fried rice. The Polish give us Polish sausage. The Greeks give us gyro sandwiches. The Italians give us pizza. And we're about to lose our soul food menu. It has only become a movie. But there are live farmers in several Southern states that we have organized and worked with and we're the only ones in the country with a department of agriculture in our church. And, and we're trying to be a model for churches to come out the church and come into the community. I'm very disturbed now about senior citizens going to the casinos. They're losing their homes. They're losing their health. They're losing their pension plan. And so I got a lady in my church that took some seniors fishing, thirty, forty, fifty of them, fishing. They went at six, seven o'clock in the morning and stayed all day. Well, what if ten churches, what if a hundred churches just provided an opportunity for folk to go fish, versus go to the casino to get ripped up, board a bus. So the silence of the church has been the most frightening thing that, that if Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was to come back again, that would be probably the thing that would send chills to him. He struggled with the black church in Chicago and other major cities because he was talking about taking that church out the church into the community. And now we have a lot of entertaining going on inside our churches. We had a--have a lot of psychosexual dynamics going on inside of our churches. And, and we don't have much talk of liberation. It's, it's a question of, of being count--being comfortable in our churches with no risk. You can tip. You don't have to tithe. Story_ID: 12802 Speaker 1: It appears that so often media or other entities will anoint a chosen black leader, whoever it may be--, Speaker 2: Right. Sure. Speaker 1: --for the moment. And we seem, we, African Americans, seem not to do much to--like in the '60's [1960s], you had H. Rap Brown [now known as Jamil Abdullah al-Amin], Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael [now known as Kwame Ture], you had all these voices. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We haven't had that many voices in a long time. It's like, okay, it's this person today. It's that person tomorrow. It's nobody for a while. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's whoever they think. Address that for me, please? Speaker 2: Well, I think the principle of fear is still in our society. We live in a highly structured, military system now. In the '60s [1960s] folk didn't have no problem dying. We knew the price of death. In fact, our theory was either-- mine has always been kill me or let me go. It's not difficult. I'm gonna be here. Kill me or just let me go. With the assassination of [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.], both Kennedys [John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy], Malcolm X, maybe Elijah Muhammad and Harold Washington, it's created a deep-seated fear within our people. It's a created a fear within black leadership that they don't have no problem discussing the cross, but don't nobody want to go on the cross, you know. Jesus had twelve disciples. It's a major question why it was just some sisters and old man John showing up at the cross, 'cause don't nobody want to die. And nor does anybody want to structure issues where you take the position of kill me or let me go. So the price of how do you pay off black church leaders, for example, I don't believe they believe the theology that, that they experience. Nobody really talks about the liberation of Moses in the twenty-first century because it's okay and comfortable if you keep Moses back there in the bible, just keep him as a story in Exodus and not a liberation story in the year 2002. So you have that tension based on the principle of fear. The other problem is that the system knows how to pay us off. In a town like Chicago [Illinois] and other urban cities, because there's no military, black folk do whatever they want. Some person can just wake up one morning and, and become a leader. No training, no--just woo woo for ten minutes. Hit the issue before five and then run home and watch themselves on the six o'clock news because there's a public relations movement out here, but there's no people relationship movement out here, which has created tension. But, but always remember, the people aren't stupid. The people know. And what they're attempting to do is wait to see who has the courage to keep making a difference. And lots of times now what you're finding is that people are taking their own destiny, which really is the ultimate goal of leadership. [Mahatma] Gandhi said, "There go my people. I must catch up with them for I am their leader." And a lot of folk take the position, I'm the leader, y'all come catch up with me. So I believe--I got a lot of faith. I really feel that there is a movement going on within the hearts and minds and souls of people on a local grassroot level. And the media does not want us to know who they are because it means we'd be in the hook-up. If I knew that the block club on 99th Street was doing something with the--in the Block Club on 102nd Street was doing something, then we could have a unity between 99th Street and 102nd Street. And so I think every day there are too many people who are being confronted by the patterns of racism. A lot of blacks are moving out to the suburbs now, and they're finding that there's no peace out there, that there's a police chief who will lock your son up for even though he's the best basketball player. He ain't got no business walking home from school with the little white girl 'cause that's the chief of police's daughter (laughs). And where you ran from the gangs, you're now running up into the Ku Klux Klan who might have a sheriff's badge, and you're messing with the daughter. Okay, so you got all of those tensions going on that's occurring the suburbs. And you're gonna see that's the next level of explosion in the, in the metropolitan areas. Speaker 1: So are you saying with the leadership, that those in a position where a group or several groups might follow them, whoever that is--, Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --are you saying that they're doing things, but they're not as vocal about it as they probably would have been in the past? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there's a, there's a couple of levels. One is that, that there are a group of old-line leadership that the community listens to, but they're not gonna do no serious following because the integrity down through the years has been broken. It's been shattered. But there's another group of people who are struggling with day-to-day, what we call bread and butter issues. The CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] homeless folk, the land grab folk, nameless, faceless, faceless people are running block clubs every day to try to get the, the drugs out of the, the property down the street from them. And, and the press doesn't legitimatize African American leadership anymore on any level. And since 9-1-1 [September 11th, 2001 terrorist attacks], it's been a deeper struggle because it's hard to get heard unless you know the folk at WVON [Chicago, Illinois], which is the only black [radio] station in town. And that turns off in the afternoon. So whatever crisis occurs in the afternoon, we have to wait to the evening show to talk about it. I think that the black church has been too silent on too many issues. And they've moved it toward entertaining our people rather than moving towards some kind of programmatic relationship. I've seen people with churches build schools and then turn back around and turn the school over to the board of education. Yet there are retired schoolteachers walking around in the African American community all day long, that could put together an African-centered kind of curriculum. I think we do what I call emotional programmatic moments. We'll have a black women's expo, but where is the black women's bank, when the women have the checkbook in our culture? Where are the manufacturing facilities when we, we wear more clothes than anybody else? There's a strong African, Caribbean presence in a place like Chicago, but they're not manufacturing our African garments and putting them out there in the street through the churches. We, we, we just have not moved towards the level of programming our power. And the, and the church as the institution, I think is the last institution and the only institution, if it maintains its integrity, it has the opportunity to make a difference in the life of our people. But I think that the church is going through terrible birth pains right now because the, the gospel they preach has, has moved towards what they call a new gospel. They want to have it so that it's nondenominational. And either way you set yourself in the car, you're still confronted with the forces of racism and economic exploitation. And, and I think that because we're first and second generation Africans in America, we haven't gotten used to the things, the automobile's become important, having the two hundred thousand dollar houses in Country Club Hills [Illinois]--it ain't much country and it ain't much hill. Riverdale [Illinois], ain't no river and there ain't no dale. So I think we have to go through that. And, hopefully, there'll be a younger generation that will, that will see that the economic arrangements of Africans with themselves and the Africans in the Caribbean and Africans in America and the Diaspora will, will be the solution. And I think since 9-1-1 [September 11th, 2001] you're gonna find that the government is not gonna allow us to rely on them anymore, that we're gonna really have to rely on ourselves and the whole international arena of Africans in America, Africans in the Caribbean and in the homeland. Story_ID: 12803 Speaker 1: Everett, Massachusetts, growing up, day-to-day, elementary school. What were those years like? Speaker 2: Sports. I was real heavy--we had a baseball, basketball, a park right across the street from my church--I mean from my house. My best friend was an Italian named Al Scraper, and I was Al Sampson. And we did real good in our high school years. When I went off to college [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], and he started seeing me fight for the liberation of our people. I would come back for Christmas. And, and the relationship we had got, got shattered and scattered because he, he saw a different Al Sampson because I was moving toward the liberation of our people and not staying in the comfortability of an Italian family paying rent in my mama and daddy's house or walking to school with him, dreaming about what we were going to be because I've never had the opportunity to live my own personal life because the forces of racism forced us out there in the '60s [1960s]--I mean we've taken a good thirty to forty years of our life to live out here with our people and suffer with, with our folk and never really got a chance to, do quote unquote, "The normal things of life", you know, raise a family, go home and have a job. Story_ID: 12804 Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: Parlin Junior High School [Parlin School, Everett, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Spell it for me. Speaker 2: P-A-R-L-I-N. And the interesting thing--I'll send it to you, they made us every day say this phrase called 'character'. "I would have all young men to respectfully themselves and etc...". And when I was saying it as a kid, I didn't understand the depth of character. And last year, I got a chance to go back as the speaker for the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] observance for the city of Boston. And Martin King went to school at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and he met Coretta [Scott King] at the New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts]. And I spoke at the church that Martin King went to, 12th Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts]. They call it the Martin Luther King church. But I had to go back to Parlin Junior High School [Everett, Massachusetts]. And it's, it's outside of the school, etched in stone, is the whole phrase of 'character'. And I was kind of thankful that, that as a young man, in, in elementary school, I was taught character because in the black pages advertising--one of my members paid for the advertising, she's chairperson of the membership committee, and she said, unbeknownst to me, that the black church, that's not for sale. And, and I take the integrity issue very, very sacred. I mean I really feel that, that a black preacher ought to really look up onto the hills from whence cometh his help, that he really ought to have his daily bread, D-A-I-L-Y and not D-A-L-E-Y [referring to Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley]. That he really ought to build his own economic opportunities with his people. And not try to hustle the system downtown in order to sell your people out. Story_ID: 12805 Speaker 1: Tell me elementary, middle school years, who were your favorite or most influential teachers? Speaker 2: Well, well, you know, I grew up in an integrated community. All of my teachers were white. So I had maybe a little elementary teacher named Mrs. Kernain, Kernain (ph.), but I, I didn't get quote, unquote "favorite teachers" until I went to school in North Carolina [at Shaw University] and then started relating to black teachers. It was a phenomenon for me to sit with black teachers with doctorates, I mean where they called them doctor 'cause all my orientation was fundamentally in the white, suburban world outside of, of Boston, Massachusetts in a suburb called Everett [Massachusetts]. And we went to church in, in Malden [Massachusetts]. So I never had real contact with quote, unquote "favorite teachers" until I got to North Carolina. And, and I remember many a time where I would just listen to black teachers at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina and just--tears would just be running down my eyes because the brilliance of--we had a lady named Dr. Wilmeth Carter (ph.), a black woman with a Ph.D. in sociology, hunch-backed lady. And I mean she just was awesome. Mildred McIntyre, who, who taught us religious curriculum, that whatever we were doing out in the street, she would make us go in the Bible and do a curriculum so that we could learn that we what we were doing in the street had a biblical understanding in the Bible. And we had to search for those truths 'cause her point was, ain't no sense in you being out in the street if you can't document what is the biblical motif with it. So when you get those, those kinds of folk--Miles Mark Fisher, Negro slave songs in the United States. I mean when you see a man who's walking around the campus with white hair, a little short, scrawny dark-skinned guy. And then you turn back around, and you pick up a book, and his name is in the book, I mean that's just a whole new--I loved George Washington Carver. He's kind of like my hero because he was a slave, and he was an orphan, became a scientist. And then they castrated him because they never want--I was in Florida. And I was speaking about him. And an old man in the back of the room with tears in his eyes raised his hand and said, "Preacher, I'm so happy you're talking about George Washington Carver." So I said, "Well, I want to thank you, but where's his family?" He said, "Well, I was one of his students. And he has no children because they castrated him [sic, Carver was never castrated]," because the pathology of, of a segment of white people believed that your genes have something to do with our intelligence. And so by cutting off his genes, he, he would never produce a generation of George Washington Carvers since he, he outflanked--[Albert] Einstein said, "E equals MC squared," which is the theory of relativity. George Washington Carver said, "But if you'd give me a peanut and a sweet potato, I can find two hundred or two hundred different goodies out of a peanut and a sweet potato that are very relevant." So he was too brilliant. But the awesomeness of being an orphan, a slave and then to arrive at the point of being a scientist has always inspired me. At thirteen years of age I read [Mahatma] Gandhi, and cried like a baby, that one little old man could do what he did to the, the British government. Thomas B. Costain's 'The Robe' [sic, 'The Black Robe'] and 'The Silver Chalice.' So I've been on this, this reading trip for a long time. And I never read just to read. I read things that had an impact on building me as a, as a, as a person. And then when I got into undergrad school and started realizing that I would be leading people, I, I really had to read more because you can't lead if you don't know. And you got to know to lead and--because people call on you and pull on you for a whole lot of things. Story_ID: 12806 Speaker 1: Are you married now? Speaker 2: (Shakes head "No") I was married 1970 to '75 [1975]. I married late in my, in my life because of the Civil Rights Movement. And then I saw where everything was, was not gonna get together. So I came back and, and put together my personal world. It was my wife's second marriage, my first marriage. We stayed together for five years--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What is her name? Speaker 2: Wanda, and I ended up wanting to pastor a church 'cause I didn't want to work for white folks. At that time, there were no real serious black civil rights organizations on the move. And so I ended up going back to the church. She did not want to be a pastor's wife. And so I left her with $50,000 worth of assets. I took nothing but my summer clothes and my name back, and I joined the Methodist church in 1975. Although I was ordained a Baptist, they accepted my [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] credentials from Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. And I went to seminary, and I've been at this church [Fernwood United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] since 1975. Speaker 1: How long have you been in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Over thirty years now because I came when Dr. King came, one year after Selma--before Selma, Alabama; that was '65 [1965], and then I came back in 1970. And I worked with Rev. C. T. [Cordy Tindell] Vivian with the Black Strategy Center [Black Action Strategies and Information Center, BASIC]. That was in '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. I worked with Paul King with the National Association of Minority Contractors, '71 [1971], '72 [1972]. So I've been here fundamentally since 1970, and that's about thirty-two years. Story_ID: 12807 Speaker 1: Do you have any grandchildren? Speaker 2: I have two. I have, I have a daughter named Kera [Sampson] and she's given me two beautiful [grand]daughters, one named Taylor and the other one named Kianta. Speaker 1: How old are they now? Speaker 2: They're about twelve--Kianta is twelve and Taylor is about eight years of age now. The greatest gift, the grandchildren can give you is when they say, "I love you, Papa." That's, that's, that's better than all of the mountains that you see and the rivers you cross over. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I know about that. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I love you, Papa. Story_ID: 12808 Speaker 1: What do you think, up to this point, has been your greatest accomplishment? Speaker 2: Maintaining my integrity. I mean I'd like to have on my epitaph that I maintained my integrity, that I could have sold out on many levels. Years ago a lady down around about 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois] that was an alcoholic came to me because round about 47th, 48th [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], there were two liquor stores run by the Arabs. And one of them--each store was right across from each other. They were pulling down $25,000 to $50,000 a week out of each store. And the lady came to me, real thin, sickly woman, because the alcohol was really drying up here life. And she said, "I know it ain't nothing to me, Reverend," said, "But them Arabs didn't need to violate my son." The son. And I went out and did a boycott against those two stores. And to make a long story short, because I had a good relationship with Jeff Fort and the Blackstone Rangers [Chicago-based African American street gang] during that time, he understood that when I got on the issue, I was not gonna sell out. The Arabs called me into a meeting and said, "Look, we'll put your church [Fernwood United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] on a calendar throughout all of our stores all over the city." At that time, it was a couple of hundred stores. And I walked out of the meeting and left my people still there. And I went back on the picket line. So there have been times where I could literally have sold out. I, I could have taken money and came off the table for my own personal grandeur, you know. But I think that my epitaph for me would be, "I'm not for sale." I really did rely on God and people to take care of me down through the years and allow me to be free 'cause I think the, the genius of the black church is that your people take care of you. And they do that so that you can be free to help them and work with them and struggle for them and talk to the power structure about what the power structure's doing, and don't let the power structure talk to you and tell you what you're supposed to be doing, you know. And I really think--I've, I've suffered because of that, but, but as I look around and think things over, all of my good days outweigh my bad days. Story_ID: 12809 Speaker 1: Of the leaders we know of in the world today, all races, creeds and colors, which ones do you identify with or do you see as being like yourself? Speaker 2: Minister Louis Farrakhan. I think that he is the titular head, fundamentally because he's personally maintained his integrity down through the years. And he had inside--he has inside of him what I saw in [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.]. And it's in me also. And that is, you coil up, something kicks in or kicks in when you see a violation. His eyes get cold, his--I mean it's, it's like he's prepared to die on this issue. And he's not backing up on it. And you can't give him nothing, you can't offer him an automobile. You can't offer him a title. He's not getting off this issue. And, and I really, I, I really think he's, he's the one from my perspective. Story_ID: 12810 Speaker 1: What do you think you might be remembered for? What would you like to be remembered for? Speaker 2: That I stood up for our people. I didn't scratch where I didn't itch; that I struggled and I spoke out. When other people wouldn't speak, I spoke. When folk were afraid to speak, I've never been afraid. Story_ID: 12811 Speaker 1: Do you see yourself not retiring or do you see yourself at some point taking on more of a personal Al Sampson? Speaker 2: What I had wanted to do at this stage in my ministry is pour myself out to do some writing, to have a team of people help me put what has happened in the forty-six years in my ministry into several books on the Internet, because of the new technology. And I'm heading towards that on one level. And then on the other level, I've asked God to let me have a building as a warehouse, name it after, after George Washington Carver as a home for the black farmers. I'm really trying to put together a rural to urban connection where black farmers from down South can bring their vegetables to Chicago [Illinois], Metropolitan Chicago. Brothers and sisters from Detroit [Michigan], Gary [Indiana] and Milwaukee [Wisconsin] can come to my wholesale-retail distribution center. That's kind of like a deal I made with the Lord, that let me have the right to do that, and give me the resources that I need. And part of it grows out of the fact that when I was in the South, and we got arrested in places like Uniontown, Alabama and Eprise, Alabama, they would never let you get out based on your own recognizance. You couldn't put up bail bond money. They would make that black farmer walk into that court and put his title up, put his property up as collateral because coming from the North, they just assumed that I wasn't gonna make my court date--that I would run back to Boston [Massachusetts]. And so I saw many a day black farmers become the base of the Civil Rights Movement, and nobody has been back to say thank you to them. You go to a farmer's house. You'll never see any appreciation award in the black farmer's house. But you go to a teacher's house, a preacher's house, his wall is full of wallpaper with plaques, but never, never will you find five plaques, two or three plaques sitting on a black farmer's wall. Or a major article about the black farmer. Yet he was the base of the Civil Rights Movement. When I, when I left Boston and went south to school in North Carolina [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], on the weekends, I used to travel in the rural areas and, and take a bus down there on a Saturday. The people would feed me. Sunday morning I'd preach, two or three different places, all evening, and take the last bus back. I'll never forget the first time I ever preached, I had a little white box and, and I, I looked in it, and it had, it had the raccoon, barbecued raccoon meat and biscuits and sweetbread, they used to call it that time. And the first time I, I preached, I gave it away because I thought that up under all of that would be my little envelope. And, and I, I went and gave all my food away, and then I opened up the little envelope, and it said, "Thank you very much for coming. We hope to invite you back another time," you know. So, so I, I'm just saying that the black farmer has been the base of the movement and black leadership has never said thank you to them. And I want to be--there's a passage of scripture in the life of Jesus. Ten lepers--men got healed, only one came back to say, "Thank you." So if I can do that--in my church, my people really gravitate--especially senior citizens, around the fact that we have this department of agriculture. These farmers grow specifically for us. And they bring them vegetables out every Saturday. And a lot of those seniors still blanch the crowder peas and the, and the butter beans and use them in the winter to eat because everybody knows that in the summer, the prices go down. In the winter, the, the prices go up. So I'm hoping--there's a building in Markham, Illinois that I'm trying to raise $70,000 for. And I get the title, and then I'm gonna open it up as a home for the black farmer to rent space for year round vegetables. And then I'm hoping to get black products from all over black America. There're 530 black mayors in black America. No place is there a building for black farmers' products and for black products year round. In a few days, we're going to experience the African, African Arts Festival [African Festival of the Arts] out in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. But there's no warehouse after the park closes for all of those black products. So if I could, if could fulfill that dream and then do some writing, then my living will not have been in vain, 'cause I've been very, very fortunate, coming all the way from Massachusetts, an adopted child, had a nice family background, and then to be able to go through the experiences that I've been through with the men and the women who have touched my life for 46 years. I've done it all. Now, I, I have to move very cautiously so I don't mess up everything that, that I've done. You know, it only takes a moment if your name is O.J. Simpson, right (laughs). You lose your trophy, right. It only takes a moment if your name is Marion Barry. It only takes a moment. It only takes one accident in history, you know. Story_ID: 12812 Speaker 1: Is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have? Speaker 2: No, I, I think it, it covers--I think you did a great job covering the span of, of my life in two hours. I, I think it was real great. And I want to thank you and sister Julieanna Richardson for even, not only considering me, but being able to hold these, these archives because I have young people all the time that want to know about the [Civil Rights] Movement and the personalities in the movement. And we have a book out on the 'Unsung Heroes and Sheros of the Movement' [sic, Living in the Shadows of a Legend: Unsung Heroes and 'Sheroes' Who Marched with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., by Deric A. Gilliard], because there're a lot of people that have never been interviewed, but they went to jail, they suffered. They were behind that mule, you know. They, they operated on the road of liberation, and nobody has come to them and said would you tell me your story? So it's a great honor. It's a great experience to be here. And I think it's a great, great concept to record history. Story_ID: 12813 Speaker 1: I do want to ask you real quickly about the sexism in the [Civil Rights] Movement. It seems not many women were given the opportunity to shine, just over the whole period. Speaker 2: Well, basically because the black church was always the preacher's church, who was fundamentally male preachers. And the movement came out of the black church experience and it's just been recently that you had a whole lot of black female preachers. I would argue now that you have these female preachers--I really wish that they would come out and speak out more on, on issues. It seems like they get locked in the church and not into the social issues that impact the church. I don't hear of black female preachers doing voter registration drives on behalf of, you know, the people, or being out there picketing on behalf of the people. So they have an opportunity now to pick up their responsibility, but historically, the black church has been so male dominated. Now in my church [Fernwood United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], I have an assistant pastor who is a female, and I also--and she kind of like runs my worship service and deals with a lot of my, my programs in my church. And I have another sister that works with the prison program--Rev. Williams is, is my assistant pastor, and then Rev. Miquita Green (ph.) works with the prison ministry in, in our church because I learned out of the [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.] experience that, that the Bible is not based on race. And it's not based on sex. It's based on behavior; God's behavior to people; peoples' behavior to God; God's behavior to the universe; the universe's behavior to God. And the universe's behavior to people and people's behavior to the universe. So it's a triangle for me. So when I look at the Bible, I look at it based on behavior, and not based on gender. So it's not a problem. In the afternoon in my church, a black woman runs her, her worship service. She's trying to build her church, so I gave her the keys in the afternoon. I get through about one o'clock, one-thirty [P.M.]. She comes in there at two o'clock [P.M.], and she has her worship service. But I'm, I'm free because of my theology because I look at the world based on behavior, you know what I'm--and not based on sex or based on race, that she's a woman. Therefore, I'm gonna run and, and hide behind some scripture that says women shouldn't be in the pulpit. That's ludicrous for you to tell me that your mama can't (laughs), and your mama raised you. Well, she fed you; she gave you your first knowledge of wisdom. So I think a lot of preachers keep, keep funny pictures in their head, but the process should, should be open more. We had some great sisters, Fannie Lou Hamer from Ruleville, Mississippi, Septima Clark, who I, I'd mentioned earlier and Dorothy Cotton. But the, the impact of, of the movement has always been that black preacher approach. And I think also that black men need to stand and be the warriors within the community, that the, that the sisters have struggled on many levels to hold our society together as the mother of the earth. And I challenge black men to take a much deeper role than what they, they play. Speaker 1: [Congresswoman] Shirley Chisholm often--, Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: She mentioned how difficult it was for her to be accepted as a woman. Speaker 2: Absolutely correct, absolutely correct. In the legal, in the legal world, you had the same thing with sisters who were trying to be judges. You know, and I mean just about--outside the teacher social worker role maybe. And I think part of it grows out of the fact that, that black men struggle for their own identity, and they think that they can do it without black women. And then black women struggle to say I'm tired of the pain that you've experienced--I've experienced with you, and so I've got to do it based on my identity. And I think that, that--my prayer is that in time, both of them will see that it's a liberation struggle for, for both of them on behalf of the children and generations yet unborn. Story_ID: 12814 Speaker 1: How large is your congregation [at Fernwood United Methodist Church]? Speaker 2: We have a couple of hundred people. But I have deep influence throughout the whole city [Chicago, Illinois] because my church as been a church of liberation. Story_ID: 12815 Speaker 1: What is the difference, from your perspective, between the media, Al Sampson, and the real Al Sampson? I mean--I--'cause sometimes the media Al Sampson is the rabble rouser, ain't making no sense, just making a lot of noise. That's--. Speaker 2: Well, the, the media is not gonna ever do what you all are doing, ask me about me. And the issues that I've always been on have been issues in conflict with the system. And you don't get accepted when you've got conflict with the system. Ed, [Chicago, Illinois Alderman] Eddie Vrdolyak and [Alderman] Eddie Burke tore up this city when Harold Washington was the mayor. And I'm in Dempsey Travis' book about blacks in politics ['An Autobiography of Black Politics'], where our church was on the cutting edge. In fact, our church ran the 2nd Congressional District under the leadership of a woman, by the way, Mercedes Mallette. When Eddie Burke took a black girl's baby, Tina [Olison], and Tina had been to other black leaders in the town. And when she came to our Million Man March group, I ended up taking the issue. There's a two-pronged issue. One was, should, should Burke and his wife actually adopt the baby? And the other issue was, is Tina fit to be the mother of the--she was already the mother, but to be--for the baby to come to her house. And I did a forty day fast, no preacher has ever done in this town, a forty day fast, all day, all night, out in front of his, his office. And we had an open letter to him. And we sent 100,000 of those letters--I had people on L [elevated train] stops and in schools and everything, everywhere, with this open letter to Eddie Burke. And the courts ruled that he couldn't adopt the child, but they ruled against her saying that she wasn't fit to have the child. Now, they didn't have no problem with giving her the one that her, her mother had. So she still has, has one. She had two children, she had the one. But the Burkes still have the child. But my point is that I got beat up by blacks and whites on that issue. But, but being a preacher, I, I argued that there're three fundamental questions that are hanging in the universe. They're not mine to answer. They're only mine to know. The first is, why would white people build an entire system on the color of their skin at the expense of the content of their character? When was the meeting? Who was in the room that decided that we gonna be white, that we gonna buy--build an entire system on the pinkness of our skin? Where are the minutes to the meeting? What year did it happen? The second question is, why did you go to Africa and pick up a black baby named Jesus and take him back to Europe and give him blonde hair and blue eyes and then tell me his mama was immaculately conceived, and ain't even find out if my mama was immaculately conceived. And then the third question is, why did you build an entire society on Eve and Evelyn and Steve and Cleve, which is the whole homosexuality piece. So I saw Burke taking a black child from the black community like Michelangelo painted a white Jesus in a Bible that was called holy because King James issued an edict. Yet when I go back to the Bible, it looks like it was born in the Northeast Africa to me, and Jesus was sent to, to Egypt after God killed off Herod and then told him to bring the child back. So theologically, the picture in my head was, here's a man who had disrupted Harold Washington's program, who ain't got no black housing, no black businesses in his ward. And he perpetuates the pattern of racism. And he's taking a black baby inside of his house. I had people ask me even today, what would he want, you know, as a, as a slave master, what would he want with a black baby? I, I couldn't answer that, but I knew that I would not be silent about it. And people told me, you know, that I would die and they would assassinate me and all that. All that might occur. But it didn't occur in the forty days that I pledged to stay out there. and when we went in the courts, the courts ruled in our favor on that first point. So the media does not like me because I'm not trying to define my ministry based on the '[Chicago] Sun-Times.' Story_ID: 12816 Speaker 1: You know it's a shame the way the media depicts our leadership because Leroi Jones is a great young man. He's a very brilliant man. And he turned to me and said, "We're going to come back and do a voter registration and political education drive," okay? Forty-eight hours later, they assassinated him. But that was the very thing that he had said. That the pictures that they tried--because their whole strategy obviously is to alienate and isolate you from your community. So that, so that you get written off. And that way the rest of the community can go along and they don't have to worry about being challenged. They can fundamentally go back to sleep. Story_ID: 12817 Speaker 1: Some of the names that were popular during the period, civil rights period, [James] Farmer, is it Cleaver? Speaker 2: Eldridge Cleaver. Speaker 1: Eldridge Cleaver and those who went through quite a few changes. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What do you think of them and their transitions that they through? Speaker 2: Well I think that they were struggling with urban issues. And we were kind of like in the South with the rural kind of issues, the right to vote, you know, public accommodations, that kind of stuff. I think that this system can overwhelm you if, if you don't have a spiritual dynamic. And there's always been this tension with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and a lot of these groups about do you do things as a tactic for the moment politically or are you building a spiritual that you're trying or a spiritual principle that you're, you're fundamentally struggling for. And so you will end up getting blown out the box. You'll end up getting hurt. You'll end up getting quote unquote "burned out" if you don't have a spiritual context because I argue that the Roman-Greco world is, is no longer but a blip on the screen. Africa is still alive and well as a continent, but it's not because of its trees and its rivers and its mountains. It is because of the spiritual dynamic of our people. That's our genius, that's our weapon for survival. That's our catharsis, you know, that's our psychological defense mechanism. It's our, it's our emotional salvation, the depth of our relationship with God and how God has moved with us down through the years. I mean [Nelson] Mandela coming out of prison on a Sunday morning, the rest of the world was quiet. I mean the universe stopped because this black man, twenty-seven years locked down, and he's walking out from a prisoner to a president [of South Africa]. So we have a marvelous career. I mean, you know, when you look at us, as a, as a whole. So I think a lot of these brothers and sisters have been fantastic on the liberation struggle, but they, they've been anti-church because they have not seen the depth of the spiritualism because they stopped at the church being a European model, and not looking at it as a liberation model. We helped--Rev. [Benjamin] Ben Chavis and myself helped Angela Davis, who comes out of Birmingham, Alabama. And she went into the Communist Party, and, and she was on her way to jail. And we raised a whole lot of money for her around the country. I was the treasurer and he was the president of, of the group basically, because we saw her as a Birmingham, Alabama child, not somebody who, who rode in a car called Communism or a [Minister Louis] Farrakhan who rides in a car called Islam or Harold Washington who rides in the car called Christian. You know, when you get past the labels, and you deal with the principle of who the people are, then you, then you have a better freedom about getting people free. Story_ID: 12818 Speaker 1: Did you know Angela Davis at all? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, I thought she was a fantastic sister, very brilliant. Lots of times, the, the anger and the pain and the anguish of, of black women grow out of the fact that they don't have strong black men in their world. And so they have to end up being both male-female. Speaker 1: And to what do you attribute the lack of the male presence? Speaker 2: I think a lot men were afraid of powerful, black women. Story_ID: 12819 Speaker 1: Harold Washington, the movement, paint for me the picture of the period when he was drafted to become Chicago's [Illinois] first black mayor? Speaker 2: Well, my piece of the history, you know, we were with him with [Congressman] Gus Savage at Robert's Motel [Chicago, Illinois], years earlier when he tried to run and the timing wasn't right. The people weren't ready. There was a, the [Black] Expo that a woman called on WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station] and told [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson] that maybe we need to boycott the expo because two white women from Bogan [High School, Chicago, Illinois], you know, was on the top of the school board. But I was in the room with Renault Robinson, Jorja [English] Palmer, at that time -- in fact, I married Lu [Lutrelle] and Jorja Palmer. But I was in the room when a group of us on the leadership side were selected to, to figure out who should be the person. One of our first choices was Roland Burris I believe and then [Richard] Dick Newhouse. Well, it was Roland Burris. And then the problem is I think Roland had gone with--to the Democratic Party to get the endorsement. And then the other person was Dick Newhouse. God rest his soul. He, he just died this year. He had been suffering from Alzheimer's [Disease] down through the years, but Dick was a very, very brilliant politician. And because he had a white wife, they didn't want a white woman to be the first lady of city hall coming out of the African American community. So my point is that Harold wasn't the first choice, that it ended up being Harold. And Harold had all of the pieces. I mean he was a [Illinois] state legislator. He was a [U.S.] congressman. And he understood where all the bodies were, were buried. And we had one of the brothers in the room named Dr. Robert Starks, and all of us was president on some kind of organization. He was not president of any organization at the time. And so I gave them the model that we used in Cleveland [Ohio], which was to be kind of like the Mau Mau, to be kind of like the task force for black political empowerment because there are certain things that a campaign traditionally has to do. But if you have another group out here, they can do a lot of other things that the campaign traditionally couldn't do. And, and so we created this organization called The Task Force for Black Political Empowerment. I was the original treasurer and one of the founders of it. And forty-eight hours after Harold Washington made the announcement, we had a big meeting with him over at the Center for Inner City Studies [CICS, Chicago]. So we had an inside strategy and an outside strategy. One of the key things we did was started to challenge black preachers who was, you know, running with Jane Byrne, and if you remember, Jane Byrne was dropping a lot of money to a lot of black preachers. And I'll never forget the story of black preachers was, was over at 50th on the Lake [Motel, Chicago, Illinois], the restaurant. It's now Ramada Inn. And they were upstairs on the second floor, and we were picketing them. And I was on the phone with Harold Washington. And Harold asked the question, "What shall I do?" I said, "Well, it's real simple. What I need you to do is say to the press that white politicians can come to the black church, but black politicians can't go to white churches. And we think that's an imbalance. And that should be your, your public position." And that's what he did. And he ended up going to the Catholic Church over on the North Side, [Saint] Pascal, where this Father [Francis Cardinal] George, who's now in charge of the Catholics here in the town, was pastoring at the time, even though he got booed and harassed over there. We took out a full-page ad in the 'Chicago Defender' that fundamentally said that the black church is not for sale. And when you read Dempsey Travis's book, 'My Life with Martin Luther King', [sic, Coretta Scott King wrote this book] it talks about all of the preachers. We had about three hundred to four hundred preachers that had signed up, paid the money for the ad. And we ran that ad that Friday, Saturday, in the 'Defender'. And then on Monday morning and the election on Tuesday. We did a lot of voter registration and political education. And so Harold understood the context of the movement because we had a broad-base group of people who understood that it was the right time. And we had the right man for the movement. And things don't work unless you have all of those, all of those pieces to the pie. And it really hurt us when he died that we didn't keep the coalition together, that the system then started pitting [Eugene] Gene Sawyer and [Timothy C.] Tim Evans, which split the community. Speaker 1: He [Harold Washington] had such a hassle in his first term, it was just like staying alive, politically and otherwise -- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Civilly and every other way. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And he was very fresh into his second term, so he couldn't build that base, that connection. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, it was unfortunate the way everything fell apart so immediately after he died. Story_ID: 12820 Speaker 1: Part of the tragedy of living in America, as an African in America, is there's a constant destabilization. We never get rest because the system is 24/7 figuring out how can we keep the African American community destabilized. It's rare that you hear police running up in Chinatown or running up in the Korean community or the Greek community, locking up a whole lot of folk. Now, I would want to believe that somebody up in there, is on drugs. Somebody up in there is drinking and somebody is, is, is having fights. But there's this cost in destabilization that occurs within our community. And part of the, the issue is what we call the color line. White folks don't know what to do with black people. One level would like to just accept them. The other level moves towards always rejecting them. And so with that tension that you get going on, it transfers and transforms itself into the political scene. Harold [Washington] had one dynamic that, that really blew everybody's mind which is, which is what created the tension with both Eddies [Alderman Edward 'Fast Eddie' Vrdolyak and Alderman Edward Burke]. Harold took the position that when the business people came through or developers came to his office, he said, "I don't care what you're gonna build on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. You can call it 'magnificent.' But there's another Michigan Avenue (laughing) that's really magnificent to me. And it's called Link Development. For everyone you put downtown, you got to put the one uptown. Okay, you can't tell me that it's okay to put a hotel downtown and don't put none uptown." And, and that was just too much, point one. Point two, there hasn't been a black alderman in the history of this town that's put together an economic development package and did a bond program, bond financing. We get grants. White folks downtown get bond financing. So the McKee--the McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois convention facility], that wasn't built by a grant. That wasn't coming out of the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs, what they called DECCA. That was done with bond financing. The issue that they kept saying about Harold [Washington], is the bond market gonna go into the river, you know, if Harold becomes the mayor? He ended up tripling the bond market. Maynard Jackson, the former Mayor of Atlanta, Georgia came in town and met with Harold Washington. John Stroger [Jr.], Carol Moseley Braun and Dick Newhouse, and two or three other black lawyers--Jim Montgomery, for the first time got bond financing, where as lawyers, they got an opportunity to do bond deals. They had never done that before, in the history of the town. It wasn't like we didn't have no lawyers. But the system wouldn't let them get in the game. It's questionable now whether they're in the game, who does--what black lawyers are there doing bond financing? But Maynard Jackson, because he did it in Atlanta, he was able to show them how to do it in Chicago. And the problem we had was the economic question again. That they don't want us to have access to capital. They don't want us to do economic development projects from a bond-financing point of view because what that fundamentally means is that you can organize your capital. Well, black leadership ain't got no sense. You got a Negro in this town telling people to take, take their money down to LaSalle Street and Wall Street. And the white man coming back to our street, buying it up. It's called a land grab. Speaker 2: So essentially, we shot ourselves in the foot with the push-pull of [Eugene] Sawyer, [Timothy C.] Evans--? Speaker 1: Oh, most definitely, because we, we misunderstood the power we had. It really should have been Sawyer because that would have made everybody happy. But we could have had the same economic and political agenda. It's a matter of accountability. Sawyer went to Y. T.--Wyatt--[Rev.] Addie [Wyatt] and [Dr.] Claude Wyatt's church [Vernon Park Church of God], so it ain't if he violated us, we didn't know what church he went to. Tim Evans was A.M.E [African Methodist Episcopalian]. He went to Grant [Memorial] A.M.E Church. Or it ain't like we don't know where they are. So the joy of being a--of having a black mayor is that you know where you can catch them, you know, if they, if they're doing something wrong, all right? So what are we arguing about? What are we fighting about, okay? And the word was that Sawyer had made a deal. Now, we find that, that Sawyer is, is very, very sickly now and Tim Evans is the Chief Judge of the, of the Circuit Court [of Cook County, Illinois]. So who made the deal? Story_ID: 12821 Speaker 1: We have not had the kind of strength that we had at that period since then [since Harold Washington's mayoral tenure in 1980s Chicago]? Speaker 2: Well, I think we've got it. We don't use it. It's like Moses with the rod. We've got to pick it up and use it. That's, point one. Point two is, you have a new dynamic out here. You got a group of preachers or leaders, that if you're out on an issue, they come and take the issue. Or they'll come and pimp the issue or they'll come and say, we can do the issue better than, than--so you have this competition for the TV and competition for VON [WVON, Chicago, Illinois radio station] and the, and the newspaper. You'd be surprised, this deep-seated, I can be a better leader than, than the one you got kind of, kind of syndrome. And now what has been out here on the street level is now feeding into the political level where black politicians are getting knocked out of the office because you've got this syndrome that I can be a better politician than the one you got. I know the way to go kind of thing, okay. So you're gonna see a lot of fragmentation in the next several years because a lot of young leadership is trying to come with a new gospel (chuckle). You've got preachers who, who are saying, we've got a new gospel. Ain't no new book. It's a new gospel, okay. Speaker 1: You mean it can be even more fragmented than it, it is? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, it's gonna be--and part of the problem is that, see, you don't have a military base in the black community. We don't have nobody to hold somebody in check. So, so a person can wake up one morning and do whatever, be whatever they want. Who's gonna check them? Who's gonna check them? Speaker 1: Did we ever have--? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had the Deacons for Defense [and Justice] down South, remember? You know, we had the Black Panther Party. We had the gangs, you know, who--you know, we had ways of checking our people and, and having revivals with them and prayers meetings with them. But you can't have that now because, first of all, you don't know who's who no more. You're gonna find that a lot of black leaders, which has already happened, are wired by the government. They're out in the streets of life, right? They'll sit up and let you talk, set you up. The man can get you, you know. So there's a, there's a lot of, there's a lot of destabilization, is the word I, I always use, you know, going on. But, but I think there's hope because out of this darkness, there's gonna be some rays of light. Whoever assumes the leadership has got to take the responsibility, and that's one of the weaknesses, that a leader forgets all the time. They want the right to lead. Lead to them means be in front of the TV camera? But after a while, you keep getting up in their camera, the people gonna keep coming to you, and then when you're not able to deliver, they'll get rid of you. They'll move to somebody who can deliver, you know? Well, so I, I think the purging is going to occur, that we're just going through some turbulent times right now. Speaker 1: So will we ever have the strength again? Speaker 2: I think we'll pick it up. I think we'll pick it up. I think it's incumbent upon people like me and you and a lot of other folk to do some writing, do some teaching. I was with some people the other day that said, "We've got to get you down on paper. And we've got to create some kind of--." How do you teach leaders to be leaders? How to hold a press conference? How long do you talk at a press conference? Do you write it? What do you say? And, and when you're in the struggle, you know, you've got to learn that because there's no school for how do you handle racism and economic exploitation. So while you're on the battlefield, you've got to learn all of these things. And our generation has, has, has been very, very ornery. We have not, we have not translated. Story_ID: 12822 Speaker 1: Is there anyone, anything, anybody, really helping the African American community to capitalize on the positives and the strengths that they do have right at this moment? Speaker 2: Oh, I think it's a lot of things going on. I think black women have, have risen to great heights. I'm gonna be very much interested on what they're gonna do with the power that they have now because they have gone a hundred miles an hour. When you look at the level of intelligentsia that has emerged out of the African American community with this black woman. I mean she's been a phenomenal person for the last five or ten years, whether it's Melody Spann[-Cooper] whose got WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station] or Hermene Hartman whose got 'N'DIGO' [magazine] or the Black Women's Expo or the sisters that deal in high finance. It's, it's a major challenge. The, the question is, when you have this power, who's it for? You know, is it for yourself? Is it for the man? Or is it for the masses? And as the fruits build on the tree, we'll see what the agenda really is. But I think at least they've gotten access to power opportunities. How, how the sisters handle it, you know, is, is the challenge. I think that you're gonna find that there's gonna be a new crop of young black males who are gonna crop up. And, and the question is whether or not they're gonna be able to handle it. Some folk look at the hip-hop community as the, as the alternative for liberation. I don't see it yet. I think they've got power, access to power and money. I'm not sure they want to take the responsibility for the masses. The, the base of our movement has always been taking responsibility for the masses, taking the power for the masses. I'm not convinced that, that the hip-hop community wants to do it for the masses. They might want to do it for the classes. I'm not sure they want to do it for the masses. I'm waiting. I think the jury will still be out on the sisters, on whether they're doing what they're doing for the classes, or do they really want to do it for the masses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They're in two institutions, the educational institution, the social work institution, are female-dominated and the church. And I'm waiting to see if they're gonna hold black males accountable in the church. I'd like to see what their liberation motif is gonna be in the social worker world because we're losing our children through the adoption, back door strategy, where more whites can get a child a lot quicker than Africans in America can get their own child. And nobody's looking at the black male family side to receive to the child. It goes directly, if not into the female side of the family, it goes out the door to the adoption agency which is, which is the white agency. So the power that the sisters have, the jury is still gonna be out on who's at fault...