 Story_ID: 626452 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Omowunmi Sadik, O-M-O-W-U-N-M-I, S-A-D-I-K. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I generally go by Wunmi-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the last five letters of my first name. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: That's right. Omowunmi means a lovely child. "Wunmi" means love, "Omo" is child in Yoruba. I am of Nigerian descent in Lagos [Nigeria]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your last name, Sadik? Speaker 2: The last name is partly Jewish, partly Arabic. And that has to do--it is actually my husband's last name, but it is their ancestral connection with the religion. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your original last name, what your maiden name is? Speaker 2: My original last name is Agboola. Speaker 1: Is that A-- Speaker 2: A-G-B-O-O-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what does that mean? Speaker 2: It means a company of riches. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 19, 1964. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: I was born in Lagos Island, Lagos State, Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay, now, Lagos Island, is that near Lagos, I guess, it's on the coast of Nigeria? Speaker 2: Yes, it's right on the Gulf of Guinea and on the coast, so it's a couple of islands, Victoria Island, Ikoyi Island, Lagos Island. I was born in the Lagos Island. It's originally called Eko, but the Lagos was given by the Portuguese, so the locals call it Eko. So I am from Eko, Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, and this is, you know, an island off the mainland from the city of Lagos-- Speaker 2: That's correct, yes. Speaker 1: --which is the largest city in Nigeria. Speaker 2: It's the largest city. It is, in terms of population, it's one of the mega cities of the twenty first century. The approximate last census was like 10, 12 million people. Speaker 1: Right, right, I was gonna say, I was gonna say 15 [million] by now. Speaker 2: Yeah, by now, it's really growing very fast. Speaker 1: Okay, and, ma'am, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a professor of chemistry. I teach chemistry, and I also do research in chemical science. Speaker 1: Okay, you're in charge of the Center for--what's it called, the Center for-- Speaker 2: I'm the Director for the Center for Advanced Sensors and Environmental Systems at the State University of New York [SUNY] at Binghamton. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is July 10, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're currently at SUNY Binghamton, in my office in the Science II, seventh floor. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626453 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up. And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I do. I like jollof rice. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I like, it's like kind of mint color. Speaker 1: What, I'm sorry, what? Speaker 2: Mint, slightly green. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, mint, okay. Speaker 2: Mint, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, minty green. Speaker 2: Minty green, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love the fall, I love the foliage and the beauty of the fall. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I don't. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Perhaps people who know me can say, but I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626454 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But I'm gonna ask about 'em separately, and then we'll put 'em together-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so we don't get 'em mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Omo Shalewa Agboola. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: O-M-O, S-H-A-L-E-W-A. Speaker 1: And, okay, and the last name? Speaker 2: Agboola. Speaker 1: Okay, same last name. Speaker 2: My maiden name. Speaker 1: A-G-B-O-O-L-A. Speaker 2: --O-O-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay, and, now Omo Shalewa means something about "especially made for the family," right? Speaker 2: Omo Shalewa means the child--as you can see, my name has the same prefix, O-M-O. So, O-M-O means, "omo," like a child. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So as my name is Omowunmi, that is "a lovely child," my mom's name is "the child picked the right home to come." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Omo Shalewa. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my ex-wife's name, actually, so (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Is it right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, so at any rate, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mom was born in May 18, 1937. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Lagos, Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: My mother's side, my grandmother, she used to be a trader. She used to go to the northern part of Nigeria and she traded in onions and meat and they bring what they call the Agicana (ph.) back to Lagos. So she was a trader. She travels from the South, southern part of Nigeria all the way to the North, usually in trains. And she lived there for many years. She spoke Hausa, she spoke the local languages. When she retired, she came, she settled back in Lagos, and she used to sell--She had a store in Ido (ph.) terminal in Nigeria. And so she used to sell the same kinds of material that she was doing. She sells eggs and beef and onions and teas, you know, things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name is Osenatu Jenmi, O-S-E-N-A-T-U, and the last name is Jenmi, J-E-N-M-I. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and now, what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather was a Engine One, Engine Grade One train driver who goes, or takes the train from Lagos all the way to the North. So they used to travel together. Speaker 1: Yeah, that would make it convenient, right? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So he would be, he was an engineer driving the train-- Speaker 2: Driving the train, yes. Speaker 1: --and then she was trading-- Speaker 2: Trading, trading. Speaker 1: --in the North. So that's a, and that would make sense. So that, so he worked for one of the railroads? Speaker 2: For the rail--yeah, for the, it used to be the British Train Company, which was later transferred to the Nigerian Railway Corporation. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so, and so did they maintain homes in both areas or did they-- Speaker 2: Yes, they had their base in Lagos. In fact, my grandfather from my mother's side was part of the people called the Awories of Lagos. They are the original inhabitants of Lagos Island. And so they had their base in Lagos, and then they would travel to the North. And they lived there for many years. I believe that's where they lived most part of their lives until they finally returned back to Lagos. Speaker 1: Now, Awori, there's a game called Awori, is that from that region, from those people that--I mean it's a game that's played. It's a mathematical game played with marbles and-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yeah-- Speaker 1: --Awori, yeah. Speaker 2: It's actually called, I've forgotten the name (laughter). Speaker 1: There are different names for it. Awori is one of them. Speaker 2: Yes (unclear). Speaker 1: And Mancala, it's called that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Mancala, yes, yes, Awori, yes-- Speaker 1: --too as well, and I think it's another name for it too, but, yeah. Speaker 2: We had the local dialect, I'm sure I would remember as soon as I finish, but, I forgot the name. But they have a game. Yes, you're right. It's a mathematical game. You're absolutely right, yes. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. So, okay, so they're part of this original Awori people that were at this site of Lagos-- Speaker 2: In Lagos site, yes. Speaker 1: Do they remember--are there stories in the family that talk about when the Portuguese first arrived there? Speaker 2: Yes, they have stories about when the Portuguese first came. The, you know, the conflict in Badagry [Nigeria]. My great, great grandmother from my father's side would have, you know, stories about, about that. The initial contact with the Portuguese and then the British came. They struggled for Lagos protectorate, they used to call it. And, yeah. Story_ID: 626455 Speaker 1: I don't think I've ever discussed this with a Yoruba [tribe from Nigeria], but I know, in other parts of Africa, people remember like 30, 35 generations back. I mean and they can actually tell you maybe 20, 18 or 25 generations. Speaker 2: Yes, they do. Speaker 1: Is that the kind of ancestral memory that (unclear) have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It is mostly, but I, you know, the, you know, the Yorubas generally have oral history. And families relate their history through, you know, just talking with their, their children and their siblings. And they would also have what they called Oriki. So Oriki is like a type of oratory description that is almost like song like, poet, almost poetical. And this is how they transform information because if its poetical or if it's with song, then it's not likely to be forgotten. And so this is how they pass down the family history to the next generation. So you learn--as soon as a child is born, the, the matriarch of the family would normally come in and sing the oriki to that child. And that allows the mother, the new mother to learn the history of the family and the way they pass it down is that they teach the new mother to sing that song when the child is either fussy or unhappy. And they teach them, in a way they teach them the history of the family. Speaker 1: Now, is this practice still popular? Speaker 2: It is still popular, especially in the interior part of the Yorubaland. The oriki, every family has got its own unique oriki. And so they will-that's how it's passed down. Unfortunately, that practice is disappearing in the cities and especially among the high, you know, highly educated portion of the population. Speaker 1: Do you know the oriki from your family? Speaker 2: Yes, I know some of it. (laughter) Speaker 1: Can you sing--is it proper to ask you to sing some of it? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, oh, okay. So--[singing in Yoruba]. I think I'll stop there. (laughter) That's all I can remember. Speaker 1: This is something that your children would pass down to other generations, right? Speaker 2: I'm not so sure. The--unfortunately, my children grew up in a completely different environment. Even though I will tell them about it, I don't think they would know that far, you know. But even in Lagos [Nigeria] now, most kids growing up probably don't even learn that. It's disappearing. Speaker 1: Just because of just a cultural, popular culture and being-- Speaker 2: Just because there's a lot of dilution that--the culture itself has been diluted by, you know, colonialism, by, you know, travels, Internet. I don't think this generation cares so much about many of the traditions. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, do you think that's a good thing or a bad thing? Speaker 2: I think it's a bad thing because it's disappearing, and, in fact, I think that the, the oral history should be--the practice of passing down the oral history should be continued. And we should use the modern technology to enhance it. For example, it--you know, my--you know, maybe matriarchs or patriarchs of the family should be interviewed, videos so that those practices can be maintained and not forgotten. Story_ID: 626456 Speaker 1: Yeah, is there any--are there any occasions where--are there any--is there any way that these [traditional] practices are institutionalized and passed down over time-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I mean in the-- Speaker 2: They are actually. In all that the, if you look at the tradition of the Yorubas [tribe in Nigeria], they have, depending on the area, the region of the Yorubaland, there are different religions. There're the, you know, the Obatala, the Ife people, the Ogun-Ijebu people, the Egbas, the Ondos. There are different types. And there are traditions that are still strongly practiced in the interior part of Nigeria, especially in those who have not really been exposed to many of the Western culture. These are still heavily practiced. And it's practiced in the form of religion, and it's practiced with a lot of myth surrounding it, you know. So, and in general, people revere, you know, they revere this tradition, mainly because of some of the myth that's, you know, that's tied around it. We have professors of Yoruba, even at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. We have people at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] teaching the traditions of the Yorubaland. And so it is still being practiced. It's been institutionalized, but unfortunately, with some major people living in cities and getting Western education, many of these are also being threatened, if you like. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd just like to say that I have seen the old 'History of the Yoruba' by Samuel Johnson [Nigerian historian] who was a Yoruba, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --not an Englishmen, with his pictures on the inside of it, published around the turn of the century, I guess, and huge encyclopedic history with so many names and myths in it. I mean it's like--this is, it would take--you'd have to have a--you'd almost have to have a Ph.D. to understand-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean you would. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, and that's the level of discourse we're talking about, to understand the--and that's probably just some of the history-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and culture of Yoruba, included in that book. I mean it's really, you know. So I just understand, there's a tremendous amount of information-- Speaker 2: There is a lot and there are those also who will try to merge the Western as well as the Yorubaland. We have Yoruba Nobel Prize winner, Wole Soyinka [Nigerian writer and playwright], who through many of his plays and writings had tried to maintain the culture, you know. Speaker 1: Right, right. So, at any rate, I just wanna, that's a lot of, there's a lot of culture here to try to hang onto and- Story_ID: 626457 Speaker 1: Did your parents have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My mother [Omo Shalewa Agboola] had--she finished like second year in high school. And my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] did not have the opportunity for formal education, but he did a lot of learning by communication. He did a lot of self taught, and he was well educated, actually. He, because of this lack of this formal education, he encouraged education tremendously for his children. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so is there a story about how he became an engineer? Speaker 2: Yes, so he lost his mother at a very early age, and he had to join his father in the family business. His father was a cocoa plantation farmer. And they used to export cocoa out of Nigeria, which is what they use for making chocolates. It used to grow very well in the western region of Nigeria. And so he joined the family business, but he had always wanted to go to school. And so he would do a lot--any opportunity he has with training, with reading, he would just, you know, gobble everything that he could find. Eventually, he started taking the--they call it the, you just learn by communication. So he collects--he would write and get materials. He would take the exams. And that's how he became a technician. So he joined a local hospital and got real training from there. But eventually, he also went back to business, just like his father did. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, I was asking about his training as a-- Speaker 2: As a pharmaceutical technician--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So he has business training too, so he was involved in business as well? Speaker 2: He was involved in business. Speaker 1: And he was an engineer? Speaker 2: He was an engineer. He was a pharmaceutical technologist, actually. Speaker 1: Oh, pharmaceut--oh, your father, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, pharmaceutical technologist. And so he would--that was my father. My grandfather was the engineer. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, (unclear) (simultaneous) grandfather, yeah. Okay, I'm getting 'em mixed up here. Okay, so is there a story about how your grandfather became an engineer? Speaker 2: I don't, I can't remember. I was too little because he, you know, I can't remember. Speaker 1: But your father, though, he had a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, he had a chance to finish by communications, you know, so he would do everything and do it--University of London [England] communications and collect materials and take exams. So everything, he did his high school, which we call the--used to be the, which used to be administered by the University of London, all by communication. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 626458 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Tahir, T-A-H-I-R, Bello, B-E-L-L-O, Agboola, A-G-B-O-O-L-A. Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's, he was born, oh, my goodness. He was born in Lagos, Nigeria, and I really don't know the exact--I think 1924, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's a little older than your mother [Omo Shalewa Agboola]? Speaker 2: Yes, he was. Speaker 1: And, all right, so, and what about the ancestors on his side? Were they from the Lagos region too? Speaker 2: His ancestors were from the Ogun State, Abeokuta. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's the same place that Wole Soyinka-- Speaker 2: Wole Soyinka, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, they're from Ogun State. That's O-G-U-N. Speaker 2: O-G-U-N. Speaker 1: Yeah, spell Abeokuta. Speaker 2: Abeokuta, A-B-E-O-K-U-T-A. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so that was a special, that's a special place. So many people-- Speaker 2: So many people. Speaker 1: --from Nigeria that are famous like Fela [Kuti; Nigerian musician; pioneer of Afrobeat music]--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fela (unclear), yeah. Speaker 1: And Wole Soyinka, and-- Speaker 2: Wole Soyinka. Speaker 1: The former president, [Olusegun] Obasanjo. Speaker 2: Obasanjo, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, all of those people are from Abeokuta. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so, well, tell us about his family. How far back can you trace his family there? Speaker 2: The family moved from Abeokuta, possibly before his father. So, but they still kept the link. They would always go back during festivals. The, they are from the, Ikereku areas of Abeokuta. And his brother, my dad's brother, actually was one of the high chiefs of the Ikereku, his immediate brother was there, so because he stayed back, while the family, the remaining people came back to Lagos. And so-- Speaker 1: And so would this be your great uncle or-- Speaker 2: My great uncle. Speaker 1: Your great uncle, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my great uncle. Speaker 1: Okay, and he was like one of the-- Speaker 2: The high chiefs, yeah--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) high chiefs, okay. Speaker 2: High chiefs, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause Abeokuta from what I understand--I read, I've read about it in the nineteenth century when the British were there trying to colonize it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they were concerned that they didn't have like one person to talk to because the government was shared-- Speaker 2: Was shared, yeah. Speaker 1: --and it was like a republic because there were so many people as a part, and they couldn't tell one guy to tell everybody to do something. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So they were upset about it. Isn't that something? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: Now, you know, now the West claims to be bringing democracy everywhere. But they couldn't-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --operate in those days because of democracy. (laughter) Speaker 2: No, we have, they had, from the history of the Egbas, the Egbas had-- Speaker 1: Egba, E-G-B-A, right? Speaker 2: E-G-B-A, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so they had different regions. And, in fact, there are four major regions led by four Obas ["Oba" is the Yoruba word for "king"]. And so they belonged to the Ikereku area of the Abeokuta. Speaker 1: Okay, and you say Ikereku? How do you spell-- Speaker 2: I-k-e-r-e-k-u, Ikereku. Speaker 1: Ikereku, okay. Speaker 2: Ikereku. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. It's important we got it. So, anyway, so this is a, Abeokuta is huge. In the nineteen century, there are reports of like a--I know Martin Delany [African American abolitionist, journalist, physician, writer] from the United States visited there in 1859 and always had a mind he was going to a village. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, in 1959 it was a city of 150,000 people. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, Abeokuta, yes. Speaker 1: This is a big place. Speaker 2: It is a big place. It's a, it's actually a very valuable place with respect to the history of Nigeria, also of Christianity and education. I mean they're really highly educated. It's--you know, you go, you have to go to school. Speaker 1: Okay. And I know the British Missionary Society under Henry Townsend [Anglican missionary in Nigeria] was trying to-- Speaker 2: Henry Townsend, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, trying to establish schools, which was good, but the other--you know, there's a mixed situation here (laughter). Story_ID: 626459 Speaker 1: Okay, tell us a little bit about the Yoruba Civil War, and the development of the Egba people which is fairly recent in terms, I mean they got together in 1830? Speaker 2: 1830, 1830s, yeah. Speaker 1: 1830 or so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't really, don't know much about it (laughter). Let me try to remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, you know, if you look at the history of the slave trade, mostly this took place around the coast, the coastal region. And, you know, there were wars between the different people. And they would, you know, people would come and homes would be attacked, and people would try to escape, and in the process, a lot of people were being caught. And so the Egbas and the different people of Yorubaland started, you know, the practice--they've always had a practice of having a mark on their faces. And those markers are distinguished by families because when people were caught and can no longer remember their names, but once you see the tribal marks on their cheeks, you know where they're from, you know, because families, you know, Yorubas live in courtyard, so, so many different families would live together. And so this is how they would recognize because if they no longer remember their names or their family names, but they will see the tribal marks and be able to recognize them. Speaker 1: Okay, and Egba from what I understand were refugees from these wars and, who came together and this big rock, and what is it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Olumo-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Olumo Rock-- Speaker 2: Olumo Rock. Speaker 1: --right, right, the big rock outcrop, huge. It overhangs the town-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and it's part of the town. Speaker 2: But that's why it is called Abeokuta. The town was formed under the rock, the big rock. So "Abe" is under. "Okuta" is big rock. So it's almost like the Ayers Rock in Central Australia, you know, and so the town actually developed around the rock. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. So this is all good. Anybody who's interested, this is a rich history that your side of the family has. Story_ID: 626460 Speaker 1: So, your father [Tahir Bello Agboola], so he went on, he finished high school and everything and went on to become a pharmacist. Speaker 2: Yes, in Lagos Island Hospital [Lagos, Nigeria]. And he worked there for many years, and then eventually, went back to business. He went back to the same business he had with his father, which was the cocoa export, it was exporting the cocoa products. So they would bring them down from other, the interior, everything comes down to Lagos. And because Lagos was a coastal town or city, so they were taking things out of Nigeria from Lagos. And so he eventually went into business. And from there he went into real estate and-- Speaker 1: Now, this is--so your father was fairly well situated to get and succeed, you know, yeah? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Is that, there weren't--I imagine there weren't a lot of pharmacists in Lagos when he-- Speaker 2: There weren't very many, in fact, very few. Story_ID: 626461 Speaker 1: One of my aunts from my mother's [Omo Shalewa Agboola] side was the first nurse, trained nurse in the country [Nigeria]. Speaker 2: Okay. She was the first trained nurse in the country, okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is this a maternal aunt on your mother's side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, maternal aunt, yeah, maternal aunt. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: So the family name was Durojaiye, D-U-R-O-J-A-I-Y-E. So that's my grandfather's name. So she was Mrs. Durojaiye, and then she married, she first married a Kaseem (ph.), and then later Lawal. So her history will probably be with those three names, Durojaiye, Kaseem and Lawal. Speaker 2: And Lawal, L-A-W-A-L? Speaker 1: L-A-W-A-L. Speaker 2: Yes, okay. Speaker 1: Lawal. Speaker 2: All right, okay. So you've got like people involved in the sciences on both sides of the family-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: --as you grow up? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, is there a story about--now, I didn't ask you about your mother's occupation, did I, yet? Speaker 1: (No audible response). Speaker 2: Yeah, well, what did your mother--now, she finished the second year of high school, you said? Speaker 1: Yeah, second year of high school. And so she first, for some time she worked with her mother at the Ido Terminus stores where they were bringing goods from the North [Nigeria] to, to the Ido Terminus. And my mother later went on her own and started her own business when her mother sold the business in the Ido Terminus. Initially, they rented a place out, but then she started in her home. So she was a (unclear) trader. She would sell all types of goods, you know, mostly from they were bringing, again, from the North. So she was involved in all of that business. Speaker 2: Okay, and the kinds of stuff they bring from the North would be, would it be like-- Speaker 1: Mostly, there is a type of meat (laughter) called arokano (ph.) that was very popular with Lagosians, and so they bring that. It was preserved meat-aronio (ph.), this means preserved with salt. Onions, eggs, all types of food, fresh foods. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, they'd acquire this in the North and would they trade something in the North for it? Did they bring something with them to the North? Speaker 1: Mostly--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Did they just buy it? Speaker 1: Mostly, they get these from the North, and also from, from Lagos, she would take Ashoke [textile]. Ashoke is the traditional outfit, and so they would take that back. And so they traded in clothings, you know. Speaker 2: Now, Ashoke is a beautiful cloth. Speaker 1: Ashoke, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so this is made in-- Speaker 1: Made in the Western region, you know, using the traditional loom, you know, it's actually woven. And then my, also, yeah, then they do the, they weave, they make like different embroidery on those, and these are all handmade type of clothings that they would take with them. Story_ID: 626462 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Omo Shalewa Agboola and Tahir Bello Agboola] met? Speaker 2: They never shared it (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you know where they met? Speaker 2: I know they met in Lagos [Nigeria]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they didn't, they lived--my dad has a home on 22 Palm Church Street, Lagos. And my grandmother's house was 77 Palm Church Street. So you see the same street. Speaker 1: Okay, this is your mother's mother's house? Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother's house-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --was 77 Palm Church Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's the same, essentially, the same street, although very heavily populated, you, you know, but they lived in the same area. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they had to know each other, they--it would be easy for them to know each other. Speaker 2: It would be easy for them to know each other. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 626463 Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' [Omo Shalewa Agboola and Tahir Bello Agboola] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they look, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I would--physically, I think I took after more of my dad. But in terms of, you know, just--my mother was very down-to-earth, you know, very, very down-to-earth and somewhat funny too. But I would, yeah, yeah, I would probably say I have more of my dad's. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Story_ID: 626464 Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about them and where you fit in the lineup? Speaker 2: So, my mom [Omo Shalewa Agboola] had--there were eight of us, and I was number four. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, can you name them from the begin-- Speaker 2: The beginning? Speaker 1: --the oldest to the-- Speaker 2: Oh, the oldest. So, the oldest was Shakirat. Speaker 1: Can you spell that? Speaker 2: S-H-A-K-I-R-A-T, Shakirat. Speaker 1: That's a sister or-- Speaker 2: That's my oldest sister. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And then in the middle-- Speaker 1: Now, did she go on to be involved in science too? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in, she's a nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's a nurse. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then Biola, B-I-O-L-A. She is a nurse practitioner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my brother is R-I-L-W-A-N, Rilwan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a civil engineer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm number four. And my sister is also a registered nurse, (unclear) Bolaji, B-O-L-A-J-I. Speaker 1: Okay, and she's a nurse too? Speaker 2: She's a nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I have, is my brother, Samson, Samsoden [ph.] Deji, D-E-J-I, Deji. So he is a CPA [Certified Public Accountant], accountant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have, the next brother is Kazeem. He is a medical doctor. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Kazeem, K-A-Z-E-E-M. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a M.D., and Iyabo, she's M.D. Speaker 1: It's I-Y-- Speaker 2: I-Y-A-B-O. Speaker 1: --B-O, okay. She's an M.D. too? Speaker 2: She's an M.D. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, this is a highly-educated family. (laughter) Speaker 2: (Laughter) Story_ID: 626465 Speaker 1: Did you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I remember my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] teaching me mathematics. He encouraged reading, and I didn't have a lot of books, but we had to read newspapers. So we had this newspaper man who would deliver the, you know 'Daily Times', 'Nigerian Guardian', 'Punch', on a bike. So he would come in, and he has a kind of, like a bell, a little bell attached to his bike. And as soon as we hear the bell, we would run out, and we struggled to be the first person to pick the newspaper for my dad. So we always do that. And my dad, you know, reads all of the news. And when he's reading, you cannot say anything. What you can do is just sit next to him and just be reading. And so I used to read everything in the newspaper. (laughter) Speaker 1: So your father would read it out loud and you would-- Speaker 2: He wouldn't read it out loud. He just reads, and when he's reading, you know not to disturb him. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You know to keep quiet. And so the only thing you can do is just sit next, and he wouldn't stop you from reading or taking another one or maybe taking the one from yesterday. So you can just sit there and read. And from there, he would teach us things. Maybe we would do something, and it would come to some teachable moments. He would always take the time to explain, and he would--he just likes to, you know, to talk with us about, about life in general, you know. Speaker 1: Okay so the papers he would get would be like, from what the names you were giving me, I guess would be local papers and-- Speaker 2: Local papers. Speaker 1: --and the papers--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: With some international news, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: So there would always be something, maybe I'll read something about it, and I would ask him questions. And it would just go off from there. Story_ID: 626466 Speaker 1: He [Sadik's father, Tahir Bello Agboola] first taught me about [Albert] Einstein [physicist] because he liked the sciences, you know. He--when you come back from school, he would, he'd look at your report card and the most important to him would be physics, chemistry, biology, English, math. You can add any other thing, but those are the emphasis that he would pay. And so I just thought this is what I had to do. (laughter) Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so that was the rule around there? Speaker 1: That was the rule. And it's, you know, we just, we just did that because--I liked history. I studied the, the West African history, geography. I liked English literature, but in my family that was considered secondary. So you have to do the sciences first. Speaker 2: What particular history did you like the most? Speaker 1: I read a lot about the pre-colonial history. I read about the, you know, the--if you look at the Yorubaland, for example, the Yorubaland, the Oyo Empire, the Oyo Empire was very broad, very, very broad. And it had a lot of history behind it. It had administration. You know, you had the Bashoruns, you had the Alaafins, you had the different levels of edu--of administration, and the Obas [kings] and the chiefs. I learned a lot about that. I learned a lot about the, the old Ghana Empire, the Songhai Empire, the Mali Empire, the influence of religion, the influx of religion into the Nigerian culture, the history of colonization. We read a lot about--most of the, even the literature was all about the apartheid in the Southern Africa. So you learned a lot about the, the old empires, the rise and the fall of the empires and how new ones came about and the people with different languages across Africa. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so you were really--you liked that, and they were teaching that in school? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, we learned that in school, and I loved to just read it, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 626467 Speaker 1: Was there a name for your neighborhood [in Lagos, Nigeria]? Now, you lived on an island of-- Speaker 2: Lagos Island. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But we called it Eko. So my neighborhood would be--there's so many neighborhoods in the island. So my neighborhood would be the Ita Faji area. Speaker 1: How do you spell that now? Speaker 2: Ita Faji, I-T-A, Ita, Faji, F-A-J-I, Ita Faji. That is the area of Faji, the Faji area. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Ita Faji? Speaker 2: The sights and the smell of growing up? Speaker 1: Sounds too. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sounds-- Speaker 1: Other than the, including the bell on the bicycle. Speaker 2: Yeah, the bell on the bicycle. We were very--we liked garri [popular West African food made from cassava tubers] a lot. Garri is a type of, it's a carbohydrate made from cassava. And we, we make Eba. Eba is like a porridge made from the cassava. And so we eat Eba with, a type of stew. And we always like the (unclear) and, you know, we just eat. We just liked garri. We eat a lot of rice (laughter), beans, we ate a lot of beans. So I always like the smell of it when, you know, when we wake up in the morning. You know, my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] had a very rigid way of bringing us up. We, you know, everybody gets up at six [o'clock] no matter what. And we go to, you know, our home, the door to our house is closed at 6:00 p.m. So if you come 6:30 [p.m.], our door is locked. And we're indoor reading. We're reading, we're doing comprehension, we're doing spelling, test each other before we go, you know, we fall off to sleep. And you wake up at 6:00, you know, everyone must pray. You know, my dad wakes up much earlier, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's pretty--so the house, everybody gets up by 6:00-- Speaker 2: You have to wake up at 6:00. Speaker 1: And the house closes at 6:00 p.m.? Speaker 2: Six [6:00] p.m. Speaker 1: So that means that visitors have to leave and-- Speaker 2: We, we--there were no visitors, now. (laughter) We just, you know, we just--he just, that's just the way we lived. We wake up at 6:00 and my dad, being very strongly--much later in his life became more religious, would be praying, long before we wake up. And everybody must go and pray. And I remember one of my sisters refused to, you know, pray in the Muslim way because she said, no, because she didn't wanna wake up that early. She likes to sleep in, and so she said, no, I don't wanna pray. And my dad insisted that if you don't want to pray the way we pray, we--you know, I told you we lived on Palm Church Street. So there, we lived next to a big church, St. John's Church. And so my dad insisted, she needs to get up and join them when she hears the bell, the church bell. So you must do something. You cannot just sleep in beyond 6:00. So that prepared me for high school because I went away from home for, to boarding school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that kind of rigid lifestyle, I was already used to that. Speaker 1: Okay, was life a little slower on the island than it was on the main city of Lagos? Speaker 2: That's actually the main city. The island is the main city. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: It is the main city. Life is very fast. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Life is very quick. Story_ID: 626468 Speaker 1: What, my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] did not want us to be influenced by the city, the fastness of Lagos. So he would always send us off to Abeokuta [Ogun State, Nigeria] for boarding school. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: So I did my high school at Abeokuta. Speaker 2: So, but you started grade school at-- Speaker 1: In Lagos [Nigeria]. Speaker 2: In Lagos. Speaker 1: Yes, I went to St. Paul's Breadfruit in Lagos Island. Speaker 2: Okay, St. Paul's-- Speaker 1: Yeah, St. Paul's School, Breadfruit. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: St. Paul's Breadfruit, bread fruit. Speaker 2: Bright fruit. Speaker 1: Bread, like in bread; fruit, like an (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Bright Fruit [breadfruit], that's the name of the school. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the name of the school. Speaker 2: So this is the elementary school? Speaker 1: That's the elementary school. Speaker 2: Okay, and, so that was--so, now, I take it your father was a Muslim? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And, but he sent you to a Christian school? Speaker 1: Yep. My dad believed that they had the best school. Wherever the best education is, that's where you go. It doesn't matter who was giving that education. And so we went to--I went to a Christian high school, Christian elementary school. Speaker 2: Now, did he--I suppose he read and wrote Arabic too in addition to English? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh, yes, he did. He read, you know, he wake up very early, he reads, you know, all the Arabic scripts. He always read and memorized them and he would wake up and do it (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, so he was well rounded in that regard. So, school is a big part of life. In elementary school, were you primarily interested in history at that stage? Speaker 1: In elementary school, I just liked, you know, like English literature stories. I liked to read stories. And a greater part of stories was in the bible. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We had to learn the Bible. We read different books of the Bible, and so to us, it was just another subject that we had to take at school. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Now, was the, I guess clergy were the teachers at the St. Paul-- Speaker 1: Yes, they come, they come, we had--because it's a missionary school. So we had the church across the street and I don't know whether or not the teachers came from the church. And there was really practically no connection between the school and the church. But they-- Speaker 2: Is this an Anglican school? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's Anglican, St. Paul's Anglican, and, but, you know, from time to time, they would have a, like a bazaar type, and it's usually after school. So we go after school, but we were not involved in the church at all. We'd just go to the school and went back. Most people did that in Lagos Island. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so were most of your teachers, were they African or were they white? Speaker 1: Oh, they were all African. Speaker 2: All African. Speaker 1: By that time, we didn't have much of influence of the colonies. They were all Nigerians, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 626469 Speaker 1: Now, Nigerian independence took place in what, 1960? Speaker 2: That's right, 1960, October. Speaker 1: And you were born in '64 [1964]-- Speaker 2: That's right, four years after. Speaker 1: So you didn't grow up in the colonial period at all? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, you know, no, I didn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You heard stories about it, but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't remember much of them, no (laughter). Speaker 1: No, can't remember that, so, but your father [Tahir Bello Agboola] grew up completely-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --during the colonial (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, he grew up there. Speaker 1: Right, and experienced independence. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Did he talk about that, what it meant? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. He would tell us that they used to sing "God save the King and the Queen,", "God save the Queen", you know, he would tell us some of the, you know, just some of the stories of the colonialists, the interactions with them. But it didn't really make much impact on us because we didn't see that, so--. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, so though Nigeria was still a part of the British Commonwealth-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was still part of the British Commonwealth. Speaker 1: --even after independence, right? Speaker 2: Even after, yes, that's right. Speaker 1: So I know when the, I guess when you were about eight or so, the Biafran War [Nigerian Civil War; 1967-1970] was going on, right? Speaker 2: It was going on, that's right, the Biafran War. And we didn't experience most of it because Lagos [Nigeria] was really far removed from most of the what was going on. Speaker 1: Right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And then maybe because we were too young to even know (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and Lagos is mostly like a Yoruba [Nigerian ethnic group] town? Speaker 2: Yes, mostly, but then-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) other groups are there. Speaker 2: Other groups now, and Lagos is so neutral now. But originally, it's for the Yoruba (unclear) by the, you know, the Awories, the Badagry, the--but Lagos has so much for everybody. You know, if you look at the--everybody comes to Lagos. It's just like the New York City (laughter), yeah. Yeah, and so-- Story_ID: 626470 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chemistry set in grade school? Speaker 2: Yes, in high school, yes. I did. Speaker 1: In high school, but not in grade school? Speaker 2: Not in grade school. I could not remember at all in grade school. No, I did not do--I can't remember doing any sciences. We would go to--no, not in grade school. Speaker 1: So in grade school, science was not a big thing? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, science was not big. Did you have any exposure to science as a--well, your father [Tahir Bello Agboola] was a pharmacist, and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you said he pushed the sciences also? Speaker 2: He pushed the sciences. He would, he would just explain. He just likes to get us involved in it. There was really no--I cannot remember any practical thing that he would do to teach the sciences. But, for example, you would--he would just explain how things worked. He likes to do that, he likes to explain something for us, and we just listen to him, and then I would ask questions. He taught me, I remember very well that he taught me most of what I learned in grade school. He taught me multiplication tables, he would--he had a clock next to his desk, right on that side. And I would just go off and play, and then I'll come back. And he will ask me, so what time is it now? If I don't get it, he would sit me down again, and he will explain. He would take the patience, he would just explain. And then when I'd go and play and I would come back again, say what time is it? Well, if I get it, he would be so happy. So I realized he was excited about it, so I decided to take an interest in it. Story_ID: 626471 Speaker 1: At the grade school [St. Paul's Anglican Breadfruit Elementary School, Lagos, Nigeria] level, were there any mentors or any special teachers? Speaker 2: I think mostly we had a lot of, I remember just very strongly family involvement. My mom [Omo Shalewa Agboola] was very involved. I mean she felt that, you know, she missed education, and we should not--you know, education is an overwhelming focus of the Nigerian community, the Lagos, Lagosians, and then the--also, for the Nigerian-American community. Growing up in Nigeria, education is one of the key ways in which people create social mobility for themselves and create the geographic mobility needed to immigrate to the United States and Europe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The strength of every community, of course, is its diversity, and the diversity we see with people like, you know, the former Secretary of State, Colin Powell, with--of his Jamaican-born parents, the current Attorney General, Eric Holder with his Barbados-born father and his mother, you know, President Barack Obama with his Kenyan father. And a Nigerian immigrant such as myself is a great part of that, that helps make the black community unique in terms of diversity. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have relatives at that point who were in the United States or in Europe? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. My great aunt who I told you was the first nurse [in Nigeria; trained nurse], studied in England. My, on my mother's side of the family, they had two M.D.s. They were all trained in England. Speaker 1: Now, did they come back? Speaker 2: Yes, they did-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because it's just attractive to come back to Nigeria. The country was booming. There was a lot of oil money, oil economy coming up. So that was a big incentive, you know, to return. Speaker 1: Okay, I know like one of the stories I used to hear all the time is that the continent was bleeding brains. Basically, the brains would leave and not come back. Speaker 2: No, they came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, you go--because if you look in the, you know, in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s] with the oil money in Nigeria, it was much more attractive, and it would be, the economy developing, they needed a lot of highly trained people to come back and take on key positions. And there are very few educated people, so there's all--there was the opportunity for them, even better for them to go back than to stay in America or Europe. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so people in your family were going away to be educated and coming back? Speaker 2: They come back, yes. Speaker 1: All right, so, okay. Story_ID: 626472 Speaker 1: So, now, so grade school went to [St. Paul's Anglican Breadfruit Elementary School, Lagos, Nigeria]--did you have like, now, this is the British system, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Basically, it's modeled, the Nigerian education-- Speaker 2: Modeled after the British education, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and so you go, how many years in grade school did you go? Speaker 2: So you spend six years in grade school. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's six years. And then you move on to-- Speaker 2: And then you go to the high school, to grammar school. Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school? Speaker 2: Premier Grammar School. Speaker 1: Primer-- Speaker 2: Premier, Premier, like premier-- Speaker 1: Premier, okay Speaker 2: Premier Grammar School. Speaker 1: Okay, Premier Grammar School, okay. So is that in the neighborhood as well? Speaker 2: No, that was in Abeokuta [Ogun State, Nigeria]. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, that's right. Speaker 2: That was in Abeokuta. Speaker 1: So this is Abeokuta. This is some--how many miles away is Abeokuta (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, so it's about a hundred kilometers from Lagos, but it looked so far away as a kid. So you think you're going out of town. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so there you went to--so you're in a boarding school situation? Speaker 2: I was in boarding school. Speaker 1: All right, even though you did have some relatives there, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we had relatives in town, but we really don't go there, you know. We stayed in boarding school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we come home during the summer breaks. Speaker 1: Now, who--was there, was Premier run by a religious denomination too? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a Baptist church, school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was when I went, first went to church. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't go to church before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 626473 Speaker 1: It sounds like it didn't make your father [Tahir Bello Agboola] any difference which religion you wanted to-- Speaker 2: No, he didn't care. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: He, (laughter) he just wanted--in fact, he tells us, you can do anything you want as long as you do something. He would, he reads everything they would send him. I remember, on his desk, he would have volumes of the 'Grail Messengers'. He would read the 'Watch Tower', the Jehovah Witnesses. They would come in and he would sit down and listen to them. He would--wasn't very strong about, he just thinks that everyone has something positive you can learn from. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he wasn't--he didn't care what you do, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, I've often thought that, when I think about--I know I have friends who, we discuss like the encroachment of Islam and Christianity on West Africa. And I've always thought that people embraced those religions primarily because of the literacy factor. I mean do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Because of literacy? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean just because, if you can read, you can run rings around other people. I mean if you're, it's--no matter whether it's Islam or Christianity. If you can, reading is-- Speaker 2: I think Nigerians--the Nigerians are generally religious people. They're very religious, and if you look at the traditional religion as well, there is nothing like atheism or anything like that, you know, because they have--they, they have the traditional religion and they revere, they believe in worshiping. And so I believe they're really very religious no matter what. But they have been influenced by many, many things. They've been influenced by the Islamic religion. Most of the places in Lagos where I lived, you have Christians and Muslims living together. There's no problem at all. In fact, I told you my home growing up was on Palm Church Street. Next door is a huge St. John's Church. And I went to St. Paul [Anglican] School. And during Christmas our neighbors who were Christians would give us, you know, they would cook Christmas food and we'd go and share with them. During Ramadan we would have meals, and they would come. And so there was no tension. Within the same family, you have people with different religions. That happens a lot in the South. And we lived together. We don't, there's no extremism of one--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I guess the implications of my question are, I realize the Yoruba have a very strong religious culture-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --and powerful. In fact, it's so powerful that when slavery came and it came over here, it basically took over the other, I mean the Haitians, you know religions-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Voodoo and (unclear), a lot of that is related to Yoruba, but I, the question we always raise in these discussions is why would an African become a Christian or a Muslim if he already has this really strong base already? And I always thought it was because of the literacy in those two religions. Speaker 2: Yes, I, now, I understand your question. I think that, to answer that question, why would an African embrace another religion since he already has that. But Africans see--the people who brought religion, let's say Christianity, brought it with literacy. You have to read. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so then we can, if you learn to read and write, you communicate with the colonialists, okay. You get, you could get teaching schools. You get some opportunities. And so they see the--they don't worry so much about the religion, but they see that it comes with education, and it's a way for you to move up, is--it gives you the social mobility. And so they would rather take the education part of it, and, of course, it comes with, you know, it comes with religion. So they don't see anything wrong with that. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was getting, that's what I was kind of getting at, (unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 626474 Speaker 1: So you're in a Baptist school in Abeokuta [Ogun State, Nigeria]. And-- Speaker 2: Abeokuta. Speaker 1: --so, now, is this, now, in high school, is this where you have to kind of choose a path-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you're gonna take, whether it's gonna be in literary arts or-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --in science, hard science, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's what you do. So the first three years, you take all the subjects, you know, civics, social studies, geography, history, English, math. You take Yoruba, the English literature, economics. But when you get to, towards the end of your third year, you now start taking the, you know, the solid science. You're doing physics, chemistry. You're taking calculus, ad [advanced] maths [mathematics] and things like that. When you get to the fourth year, you're separated. So you separate into A, B and C. A, being the sciences, B, being the arts, and C being the commerce, the commercial. So we do A, B and C. So if you get to be in form 4-A, so you're getting towards the scientific part of it. So you're getting prepared for the West African School Certificate. And so you take that in the fifth year, but they start preparing you from the fourth year. You start going to the labs. You're taking biological sciences, earth sciences. So you do labs. So you're now separating. You can still take some arts subject if you like. Like I took history even though I was in the science, I still like the--I did History 12, or geography, the English literature. We learned so many of Wole Soyinka's [Nigerian playwright and poet] and Chenua Achebe's [Nigerian novelist, poet, professor and critic], many of the literature, many of their (unclear), the plays that they have written. Speaker 1: Okay, so at this level in high school, were there any major mentors or teachers that you remember that really helped? Speaker 2: Yes, in high school, yes. I remember one history teacher who also taught us literature, Mr. Sanya Olu. That was his name. Speaker 1: How do you--Mr.-- Speaker 2: Sanya, S-A-N-Y-A, Olu, O-L-U. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was a great teacher. We just, I just liked the way he taught and I remember one day, once they gave us the textbook at the beginning of the semester, I just read it. I really, I read it. I just finish it before we even get to it in the class because that was the only thing I could, you know, I didn't--I like to read everything. And I didn't have a lot of books, so other than going to the library, any book that's given to me, I just keep reading. So I read it. And he came to class and was gonna introduce his subject. I can't remember exactly what the subject was, and I--he asked a question, and I gave the answer. It must have been a very, I don't know how profound the answer I gave. (laughter) But he gave me a copy of the book, and he signed it. And he said, you are university material. I remember he, him saying that to me, that you are a college material. You're gonna go to university. And at that time, I had, I wasn't even thinking about that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Even though there were older brothers and sisters going into-- Speaker 2: They were doing it, yeah, to go to nursing school, you do it, you probably go to nursing school (unclear). My brother went to university, we were still both young--. Speaker 1: So that's not as high--it's not, that's not like going to university? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I hear you. Okay, so Mr. Olu, you know, inspired you. Now, did you, when you were studying the history, did you talk about some of the scientific discoveries in West Africa back in the day? Speaker 2: Not at all. My science background, I just liked the--I remember my first time in the chemistry lab was, I can't remember the instructor's name. But he was teaching us, he was showing all the different glass wares, like the condensers, the Libby condensers, and we were drawing--I was just so very interested in it. And I went to physics class, and we did the light travels in a straight line. And because I was in boarding school, I got back to school to the hostel, we call it, and I was trying to actually set up this experiment on my own. In boarding school, we start prep class at eight o'clock after dinner. And we have to keep studying until ten o'clock. And so I stood there, I sat there--most of the kids were already sleeping, they're tired. But I had a candle, we write with (unclear) candles and lanterns. So I had the candle lit on one end, and I had two cardboards with holes made in it. And I was trying to see the light traveling through that cardboard. And I was so busy doing it, and I had my head on the other side. I didn't know that the school principal was behind me and watching me. (laughter) And as soon as I saw him, I tried to, you know, turn everything off. And he said, no, no, keep, keep, you know, keep doing it. You're fine. (Laughter) You know, because you're not allowed to, you know, do anything other than the ordinary. But I just wanted to see how it happens. So-- Speaker 1: So were you able to see it? Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, I did. I would always study things on myself. I would look for things to make it out of my own, you know, anything I can find. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were confirming what you were learning in school? Speaker 2: What I was learning in school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 626475 Speaker 1: What age were you when you finished high school [Premier Grammar School, Abeokuta, Nigeria]? Speaker 2: I finished high school at the age of fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay, this was 1979 then, right? Speaker 2: I finished high school in 1980. Speaker 1: Okay, 1980. Speaker 2: So I just turned, you know, after--you know, I turned sixteen after. You know, we have the, Almighty June, we called our exams then. So shortly after was when I turned sixteen. So I finished at the age of--let's say sixteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, what were your prospects then? Were ready to go to university then or did you go? Speaker 2: Yes, my prospect, I had to come back to Lagos [Nigeria]. And so I needed to attend the, like HSC, the Higher School Certificate, which you have to do two years before you go to college. And so I had to do it at the Federal School of Science [FSS] in Victoria Island [Lagos, Nigeria]. So I spent a year at the FSS in Victoria Island. But I didn't finish up the two years because I passed the JAMB exam, the Joint Admission and Matriculation Board exam, which allowed me to get to college without finishing the two higher school certificate. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did you have a choice about where you were gonna go to college and how did you make that choice? Speaker 2: Okay, the choice is only gonna be University of Lagos [Unilag] (laughter) and my brother had already got in the year before. And he invited me to come and visit him on campus. We didn't have any counselors. We didn't have anybody telling you, these are the options for you. The only thing we had was our family. We had a very strong family, you know, involvement. And my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] was always telling me, you know, why don't you do this and do this. So he told me, why don't you go to FSS. So I attended the Federal School of Science. And so while attending the FSS, I went to visit my brother at the University of Lagos. And he took me on the tour of campus and took me to the cafeteria and where they had lectures. I decided I was coming there the next year. That was all I needed, only one visit. Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it--I imagine it was not difficult for your parents to pay for it, or was it? Speaker 2: It was--well, in terms of education, the boarding school was private school. So my dad paid. You know, my dad would pay anything, as soon as it's education. He would, he probably wouldn't buy you fancy clothes or fancy shoes. He didn't think you needed that. But he would pay for your education. So that was the most important thing to him. He actually considered other things that your mom [Omo Shalewa Agboola] can take care of that. But he will pay my tuition. So it's very expensive to go to boarding school. I probably wouldn't pay much if we had stayed in Lagos. I could attend any of the high schools in Lagos, and it was free. But he felt that the influence in Lagos is too strong. And most kids my age would probably get, you know, probably end up with teenager pregnancy or things like that. So he believed that the boarding school is the way for us to be more focused. So he prefers to send us there. So it was a private school. He paid all of that. For the college component, by the time I got to--(unclear) the final year of school, I think the free education came in. And it wasn't, you know, everybody could go to school without paying anything. And, but, you know, it was too late for us to take advantage of that. So you don't actually pay tuition for college. But it's very difficult for you to get in. It's very competitive, you know. So the main thing is if I could pass my JAMB exam, I will go in. You pay your room and board, you parents would pay your room and board. We paid some fees like registration fees, but there's no tuition per se. There's no real tuition because, you know, the federal government of Nigeria, from the oil money, made the university actually free. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's why, I guess you went to--so you had to go to FSS first to make sure you could qualify to pass the exams--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, for the, yeah, to be able to pass for the exam, yeah. Story_ID: 626476 Speaker 1: You started University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria] in '82 [1982], was it '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: That's right, '82' [1982], the fall of '82' [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay, fall of '82 [1982]. And so, now, I read that this is when you decided you were gonna major in chemistry, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, how did that happen? Speaker 2: How did that happen? I was supposed, so when you come in for the FSS [Federal School of Science], you have to, you come in from the JAMB [Joint Admission and Matriculation Board] exam. You, if you come in through the JAMB, you do what they call the prelim, preliminary year. So during the preliminary year, you take three subjects. You take physics, chemistry, biology or you could take physics, chemistry, math. So I did the chemistry, biology and mathematics. So I didn't do the physics. That is equivalent to the HSC, the Higher School Certificate examination. So if you pass very well during the first year, then you get to either go to the medical school, which is at the, another campus, at LUTH [Lagos University Teaching Hospital] or you get to stay at the main campus. Or you can go to pharmacy or dentistry, pharmacology, biochemistry, those are the options open. But because I did very well in my chemistry, biology and math, I was thinking--my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] was thinking I should do the pharmaceutical route. And we had already, so I had already filled in the forms and chosen that path. And they had all of the list, the primary list made up, but before we started, there was a change in the administration at the LUTH, which is the Lagos University Teaching Hospital. And there was a change in the administration. And the new person basically disregarded the whole list (laughter) and made up a new one. So which means we had to go back and start lobbying to get yourself back in. It doesn't matter whether or not you're the best, if, you know, he has his own people to bring in, that's what's gonna happen. So I decided, you know what? I don't wanna go back. I might actually do something on campus here. And so I looked at all of the options and choices you needed. I decided--I was still thinking, while I was still thinking about it, I sat next to a, the--there was the foyer where many of us were sitting there. And I had a colleague of mine came up, and she said, you know what? She was in the same predicament as I was. The list was canceled and so you needed to go and start lobbying. She said, "No, I'm not gonna lobby. I'm just, I'm gonna pick chemistry. I've decided to do chemistry." I said, "Oh, really, you picked chemistry? Maybe I should do chemistry." (laughter) So I looked at the prerogatives again, and said, okay, I'm gonna do chemistry. That's how I decided to do chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: So fortunately, you liked chemistry, right? Speaker 2: I've always liked chemistry anyway, so I think it was, you know-- Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 626477 Speaker 1: Who were your major teachers and advisors at the University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, at the University of Lagos, we had, I had a number of really prominent people that encouraged me. Dr. Ladipo (ph.) was a great mentor to me, and, in fact, choosing chemistry was not a problem until I got home because my parents, you know, my dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] actually supported me. But I had to really convince, I told that my--most of the decisions I made at the family level. We don't have counselors, nobody to tell you, this is what you do, this is how you do it. When I went back home, I told my mom [Omo Shalewa Agboola] and dad that I had decided to be a chemistry major. In fact, it was very difficult for me to convince them because they wanted me to go to medical school or to go to pharmacy school. And so my dad said, so you've decided to do chemistry? I said, yes. And he supported me, said, that's very good. Well, (unclear) I really like that. Then my mom came into the picture and said, "You want to be a chemistry major?" I said, "Yes." "So what would you do with chemistry? Where would you get a job?" (laughter) So I had to think very quickly because my mom is very practical, very down-to-earth, and you'd better have your correct answer for her. And so I said, "Oh, yes, I can get a job." You see all of these oil companies. I can get a job there. She said, "So what do they do there?" So I tried to explain basically how we get the kerosene that she uses to cook from petrochemicals, the petroleum that we put in the cars and things, and I explained that to her. And she looks up and said, "Hum, well, if anybody's going to be ready to pay you for doing that job, it's probably worth doing." (laughter) So, it was a big challenge to convince her. But she was never really happy with it. You know, she felt that I should have, you know, just following the, you know, the medical route like she wanted me to go. Speaker 1: Yeah, we have this discussion all the time with scientists where their parents wanted them to go on and become a doctor, become a medical doctor-- Speaker 2: Yeah, doctor, you have to be a doctor, yeah. Speaker 1: That seems to be the thing that parents are most proud of, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, because they could relate to it. They've seen doctors. They don't know what a chemist does. They've never seen a chemist at work (unclear). So there's no way they could have encouraged me (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, and I think the popular culture notion of a chemist is a mad scientist, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: --with boiling beakers and that stuff, but that's, yeah, that's always an issue. Story_ID: 626478 Speaker 1: Okay, so was there any particular aspect of chemistry that you focused on the most in college in Lagos [Nigeri; at the University of Lagos (Unilag)]? Speaker 2: I was, you know, I liked, I was very good in organic chemistry. I liked organic mechanisms a lot, but I always liked something very practical. I liked something that I can see that, you know, I can relate to in terms of how, what would we do with it. We did industrial chemistry. I liked that a lot. So I've always been drawn towards the real-life application of whatever it is I'm doing. Story_ID: 626479 Speaker 1: Yes, what were the facilities like at University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria]-- Speaker 2: Of Lagos? Speaker 1: --in retrospect? I guess at the time, they were like the cutting edge, I guess, but were they, you know, in retrospect? Speaker 2: The facilities at the University of Lagos were really, really excellent when I was there. We had world-class education. We had, most of our curriculum were fashioned against the British education. And even many of the textbooks were all British. I had some American textbooks like for organic chemistry, (unclear) for inorganic chemistry. They were all standard, you know, in terms of the curriculum, the content. We did not have large class sizes that we have now. So, which means that you really have, you know, in terms of the faculty to student ratio was very small. Now, things are changing. There's a lot of influx of students and the pressure is on the university administration to continue to admit, admit an increasing high number of applicants. But then, it wasn't, it was not large. We didn't have the very large class sizes. It was at the University of Lagos that I first got what I could consider real career counseling, you know. You had career counselors, you know. They give you, they tell you, you know, the types of opportunities open to you, you know. So, it was a world, we had a world-class education. Speaker 1: Okay, so your laboratories are really good. You had like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Our labs were good. In fact, we had, many of our professors were foreign trained. Many of them came to America for training, were trained in England. So they tried to maintain the same level of rigor that they had been exposed to. And that was the kind of training that we got. Speaker 1: And I read somewhere that some of your mentors were, I don't know if they fit in here or not, but Adam Wanekaya, was he there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at the University of Lagos? Speaker 2: No, Adam Wanekaya was here. He came here. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: He was here. He was of the--my Ph.D. student, former Ph.D. student. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were telling me that Dr. Ladipo (ph.) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Dr. Ladipo was my mentor for analytical chemistry at the University of Lagos. He was trained in England. I had Professor Shu Moree (ph.) who was trained in Bristol [England] for organic chemistry. I had Professor Adiyemi (ph.). He was trained in Helsinki [Finland], industrial chemistry. I had Professor Raman [ph.] for physical chemistry, the, you know--we had a lot of, many of them are foreign trained. I had one, only one that was trained at the University of Ibadan [Ibadan, Nigeria], and she was one of the few, female mentors then. Story_ID: 626480 Speaker 1: Now, was there a distinction made or was there a--I know in this country it was thought at least at one time, that women should not be involved in science. It was a popular notion that it was harder for women to be involved in science, even in the historical black colleges, than it was for men, you know. Did you have that kind of attitude in Nigeria too? Speaker 2: Not--you know, these day, there's that belief though that, you know, women can't handle the hard sciences. But if they actually played out, I wasn't exposed to it at all. I had a lot of female, I had three female professors at the University of Lagos. Before then I hadn't seen any female teacher in the, not in high school. They were mostly males. But my dad, again, it always goes back to my family. My dad [Tahir Bello Agboola] made no distinction between myself and my brothers. If you're open and you really wanna do it, he gives you--he's always my, just encourages you. So I didn't even perceive that. Even if it was there, I didn't, I probably didn't pay attention to it unless I'm told clearly, you cannot do this. And I was never, you know exposed to that at all. So maybe I was lucky. (laughter) Speaker 1: You're lucky in some ways. I've heard, we've interviewed African Americans, women, who were told that actually in school. You don't belong here. You can't do this, you know, and that sort of thing. But we-but, you know, that's good. I mean it doesn't happen a lot, but it does happen. Speaker 2: Yeah, but in Nigeria though if you see that, women, there's a very large percentage of women in education. Maybe, you know, because--there's all--I mean every society has its own, you know, biases. But I cannot, as long as you can do very well, you know, you pass the exams, and you're able to do it very well, I have never been told that, you know, because you're a woman you cannot do this. Maybe my generation, the generation--my mother's [Omo Shalewa Agboola] generation, maybe they had that. But I was just always very, I was always very enthusiastic, and when I want to do something, I just do it with so much vigor, I don't pay attention to the detractor, if you like. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So, it was there. Maybe I was just too feisty and too much into it that I didn't really care what they thought, as long as I'm not stopped, physically stopped, I just kept on. Speaker 1: And you had that family support too. Speaker 2: And I had the family support, yes. Story_ID: 626481 Speaker 1: What aspect of chemistry was trending when you were in college at University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria]? Was it, what was new on the scene that you were paying attention to? Speaker 2: There was a lot of emphasis on organic chemistry. In fact, I would probably say, if I look at that curriculum now, in fact, a few years ago, I went back to the website, and I was looking at the curriculum. I think we had a lot of disproportionate content of organic chemistry. Physical chemistry was there. We had, I had a female physical chemistry professor. Physical organic chemistry, there was a lot of organic chemistry. There were very few, there were only two analytical professors, Professor Kamsin (unclear) (ph.) and Professor Ladipo (ph.). And Professor Ladipo taught us environmental chemistry. I liked it. I didn't think I was gonna actually major in it at all. I think I went into analytical because of the project, my senior project that he gave to me. And the senior project was more of electro analytical chemistry, and so I had to research on my own. And in some ways, that gave me the bias towards analytical. Speaker 1: Okay, but you were saying before we had our last break that you really thought about the application of whatever you were doing and how it was gonna be applied, and in some ways, did you consider becoming a chemical engineer? Speaker 2: Actually, I've always thought about the, yes, the practical aspect of whatever it is I was doing. Chemical engineering, at the University of Lagos, we had chemical engineering. And I took some chemical engineering courses, and especially, you know, with respect to the petrochemical industrial in Nigeria. So there was a lot of emphasis on, you know, the petrochemical, you know, the industrial chemistry aspect, the flow charts and things. And I felt that, you know, I didn't want to do too much of flow charts, you know, because you never get, seem to be able to get out of the flow charts. So I wanted to (laughter) do something slightly differently. But I thought about, you know chemical engineering, but I was, again, drawn back to my main chemistry. Story_ID: 626482 Speaker 1: Was college life at University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria] similar to college life here in terms of, you know, did you have sororities and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and-- Speaker 2: We had some social, you know, there was a lot of societies, you know. We had the (unclear), you know, we had, they had the--there are different societies. You just pick whatever you feel drawn to, and it was a typical college campus with everything. They had sororities and things like that. Speaker 1: Were you involved in student government or any of that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't. (Laughter) My parents [Omo Shalewa Agboola and Tahir Bello Agboola], again, (laughter) had such strong influence. Each time, there's always student unrest between--students are always demonstrating and what happens is that you see the military government send tanks to stand in front of the campus. And in one of the stand-offs between the students and the military, students--one student got killed. And so my mother told me that any time there is any unrest, and you see students trying to organize and to get--you need to find yourself home. And so we, my brother and I were in, at the University of Lagos at the same time. And so we always look out for each other. We just, you know, we just never got involved in the political aspect or, you know, many of the arrests. So I wasn't part of that. I was just too much focused on the academics, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the--Nigeria in those days, well, ever since those days, since, I guess, the early '60s [1960s] has been involved in political turmoil one way or the other-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a lot of changes in government that are not planned changes-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and they happen because of coup d'etats-- Speaker 2: Yeah, coups and, you know, the students are always demonstrating, and, you know, you get the military out and they open fire. And so my mom--I had a very strong family influence. It's, to me, you know, when they tell you, this is it. You know, we just, we just kind of listened to it. (laughter) I wasn't too much of a rebel, I think, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 626483 Speaker 1: Was there discussion when you were in college [at the University of Lagos; Unilag, Lagos, Nigeria] about the environment in Nigeria in terms of--'cause I know what the martyred Ken Saro-Wiwa [Nigerian environmentalist and writer], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ken Saro-Wiwa. Speaker 1: He was concerned about the environment. Speaker 2: Environmentalist, yeah, the environmentalist, yeah. I was already out of college when that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. You were in college from '82 [1982] to '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '82 [1982], I finished bachelor's [degree] in '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, you know, so I was already done. Speaker 1: And you went on and got your master's [degree] in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: I got my master's in '87 [1987]. So I went back for my master's in '87 [1987], yeah. Speaker 1: But he wasn't really prominent at that point, in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: No, not at that time. Speaker 1: I think he started, around '87 [1987] is about when he started making international news. Speaker 2: Yeah, international, yeah. So I was already out of Nigeria at that time, yeah. Speaker 1: So, there wasn't a high-level discussion about the oil and the environment and that region where the oil was spilling out and all? Speaker 2: There probably was, but, you know, if you look at the daily news, the environment is not prominent. Most of the people who got interested in the environment were mostly international community, until--many of the plights of the Ogoni people were not coming out. Most of what you would probably read in the news would be the political, the local, you know, political views and the environment was not--people weren't paying much attention to them probably. And I don't think they still are. Speaker 1: I think now, when you were graduating the president of Nigeria was [Olusegun] Obasanjo? Speaker 2: Obasonja. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right. And he was from Abeokuta [Ogun State, Nigeria]? Speaker 2: Yes, he was from Abeokuta. And then we had [Ibrahim] Babangida who was a military--So by the time I finished college, Babangida took over. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he was there as a military president, if you will call it president. We didn't vote for him, but that's what he called himself. Story_ID: 626484 Speaker 1: Okay, so, but in college [at the University of Lagos; Unilag, Lagos, Nigeria], and so your grades are high 'cause you're really focusing on school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you go on to get your master's degree? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your master's thesis? Speaker 2: My master's thesis, I was looking at the, I was using electrochemistry to understand some of the heavy metals in Nigerian fruits and vegetables. So I was using--that was really where I started slightly looking at the ocean, you know, the types of fish and the level of heavy metals in fish. So I was focused on that, and that led me to my job at the Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research [NIOMR]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked after--so your master's degree looked at the amount of heavy metals in-- Speaker 2: In Nigerian fish and vegetables, yes. Speaker 1: What were your findings? Speaker 2: We found for the vegetables, that most were way below the, the WHO, the World Health Organization levels. For the fish, the, you know, it was more or less was still at the baseline. Speaker 1: Okay, so your findings was that, it wasn't really so bad, the heavy metals--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't so bad. It wasn't so bad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't so bad. Speaker 1: And what area did you study, the area just around Lagos or-- Speaker 2: Yes, mostly in the, you know, like along the Nigerian coast. We were mainly looking at the lagoon, the Lagos lagoons. We were taking samples from Lagos lagoons and they were so close. But when I went to NIOMR, which is oceanography [institute], we would sail off, beyond the Nigerian coast and go off to the Escravos and where the oil region were, and so those areas were actually, it, somewhat being polluted at the time because there was a lot of, you know, oil spill and, you know, things being dumped into the ocean. And people weren't paying much attention. Speaker 1: Okay, the idea, is that the ocean's big enough to handle the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Everything goes in there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 626485 Speaker 1: You went on to get your Ph.D. [degree] at the University of Wollongong in Australia. Now, how did, how was that set up? How did you--did you have a counselor tell you about that or-- Speaker 2: No, when I went off to the NIOMR [Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research], when I, as a research assistant--I was doing research at the Nigerian Institute of Oceanography in Marine Research, we would have seminars and colloquia at the institute every week. And they would bring professors from overseas. They would bring researchers from across Nigerian universities, and I was--I became interested in what they were talking about. I just liked the fact that, you know, they had so much broad view of research than I had been exposed to. And so I started thinking about doing a Ph.D., even though my professors at the University of Lagos [Unilag; Lagos, Nigeria] had already told me I'm a Ph.D. material, I did not want to do a Ph.D. Speaker 1: Why not? Speaker 2: Why? Because I looked at the people doing Ph.D.s at the university, and many of them took like eight, ten years, some fifteen years. It took so long, and I didn't want to invest that much time. And so I didn't think I was gonna do it. But when I got to NIOMR, I realized that I needed that for the job I was doing. I was a researcher. And I--that was when I started thinking about maybe I should do a Ph.D. But I didn't wanna do it again in Nigeria. I wanted to go overseas to do it. And so I started talking to some colleagues there at the institute who had studied overseas. Speaker 1: Let me ask you again about the name? How do you--you're saying Naoma? Speaker 2: It's N-I-O-M-R, N-I-O-M-R, Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's in Victoria Island [Lagos]. Speaker 1: NIOMR, okay. NIOMR, we call it NIOMR. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, well, go ahead. Now, some had been to-- Speaker 1: So many of them had gone overseas to do their Ph.D., and so I started to ask them questions and I started getting interested in it--because I saw that it was gonna be the next thing forward for me if I was still gonna be in research at all at the institute. I needed to have my Ph.D. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So did a speaker come over from Australia that you-- Speaker 1: I never heard anyone from Australia, but I got the Australian connection by--I went back to University of Lagos. And I was speaking to one of my professors who told me that, look, with your result you should be able to get one of the scholarships. They sent this--you know, Australia was then giving merit scholarship to people from, in the Nige--you know, African countries. And one of my colleagues received one of those scholarships. And so I thought perhaps I could get that because, you know, we had almost the same result. We finished the same time, we finished at the top of our class, and that was what led me to start thinking about Australia. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so was there a long time before you found out if you were accepted or not or did you-- Speaker 1: It was couple of months. I had applied to many places. I had applied to places in the U.S. [United States] and Canada. In fact, I got accepted in Canada, and, but I didn't wanna go to Canada. I thought it was too cold. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: (Laughter) In the U.S., I could not afford to pay. Speaker 2: So where in Canada and where in the U.S. were the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Alberta, University of Alberta, another in Calgary-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that is cold up there. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I thought, I don't wanna go to Calgary. So, and my sister, one of my sisters already here, you know, so but I couldn't afford--. Story_ID: 626486 Speaker 1: So you heard back from the University of Wollongong [Australia]? Speaker 2: Of Wollongong, yes. Wollongong gave you, if you apply, and you get in, but if you get the scholarship, then you get two letters. So one for the admission and one for the scholarship. So I got the admission letter, but I felt I've been given admission in so many other places, the only reason I cannot go is because I cannot afford it. So it really doesn't mean anything only if I was admitted. You know, I was admitted in so many schools elsewhere as well. And a few weeks later, I got the scholarship letter from the ADAP (ph.) (unclear) that I've been offered the Australian Merit Scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did that pay for your transportation too? Speaker 2: Yep, that paid for my transportation and my Ph.D., four years, yeah. Story_ID: 626487 Speaker 1: Well, this is a big adventure, I guess, going to Australia [to the University of Wollongong to pursue her Ph.D. degree]. Now, is, had you imagined Australia before or thought about it very much? Speaker 2: No, I'd read about it. I looked through, I looked at the maps, and I knew that at least New South Wales [Australia] is warmer than Calgary [Canada]. (laughter) So that's number one, and, but mostly, the most--what really led me there was the research that was being conducted by Gordon Wallace in conducting polymers, you know. I was just curious about these conducting polymers. What kind of polymers are conducting? Most polymers are insulators. What do they mean by conducting polymers? Speaker 1: Okay, what do we mean by that? What-- Speaker 2: Conducting polymers. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, conducting polymers. Speaker 2: So conducting polymers are polymers that are made with some types of salts incorporated. Typically, in the synthesis of polymers, you do everything you can to actually prevent any type of conductivity. So you try to remove salts, and you clean them up. You do separation. Speaker 1: And a polymer is a kind of a aggregate of materials that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --make something, a synthetic material made out of a-- Speaker 2: Yes, synthetic material, yeah, made out of organic molecules. But in conducting polymers, you actually, intentionally incorporate salts. And salts, once the polymer is, you now apply voltage to make them. You want--then they incorporate the salt. The salt allows the conductivity, resulting conductivity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they can be, they're used in many things. They're used in sensors, they're used in electronics, many other applications. Speaker 1: Okay, I think a microphone uses a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, conducting polymers. In fact, the Noble Prize for, I believe Alan MacDiarmid received the Noble Prize [in 2000]. He shared it with two other people [Alan Heeger and Hideki Shirakawa] on conducting polymers. That's how much that, you know, researchers got interested in it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you knew about this before you went over, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was reading about it, and I liked it, and I thought, you know, it'll be interesting to work with them. And that was what he did in the department. He was known for that. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's by treatment with a salt that these polymers are made-- Speaker 2: Conductive. Speaker 1: Yeah, conductive. So, okay, and, so and they can be used in a variety of ways as sensors? Speaker 2: As sensors, for electronics. There's a lot of--it's mostly at the research level. They're later found out to have a lot of disadvantages in terms of their non-solubility, they're very difficult to process, and so that in some ways had prevented their use in, you know, broader commercial settings. But there was a lot in terms of the electronics, in terms of the physics studied in the '90s [1990s], early '90s [1990s] and late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Now, some of these electroactive polymers are polypyrrols, right-- Speaker 2: Polypyrrols, polyanilines, (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, and they all have like specific applications that they can be-- Speaker 2: Mostly, some applications and a lot of it is just to teach, you know, mainly at the research level, lab fundamentals. Story_ID: 626488 Speaker 1: Your dissertation was entitled 'New Sensing Techniques Using Conducting Electroactive Polymers', right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, so exactly what you said you (laughter) you would do, you did it? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: And, well, what was your process, what was your scientific process and what were your observations and your findings? Speaker 2: You know, conducting polymers, you actually make them using, you can do chemical, purely chemical synthetic way where you really expose them to some oxidants like ferric chloride and maybe pyrrole. And pyrrole is, you know, it's organic and heterocyclic. And when you bring the two together and you apply, you know, you just--the oxidation of the pyrrole takes place and it forms polymers. So you start from a monomer and you form the polymers out of that. So what I decided to do was to find ways to make new sensors out of this. So what happens then, instead of using salts or strong oxidants like ferric chloride, what happens if you now have, like proteins, biological molecules incorporated within the polymers, is it possible for us to understand how biological molecules, that incorporated biological molecule can interact with the environment in which it is placed. So let's say you have antibodies that the body makes, how does it recognize the antigen. So if you bring the antigen close to it, what is the type of recognition and what is the timeframe of that recognition and can we use the understanding that we gain from that to study the human body or can we use the, can we make devices out of that to probe the human body. And so that was what I did in Australia, and, of course, that led me to making more of the sensors to probe the larger environment. That took me to the [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency, the EPA. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is really important from what I, I mean people thought it was really important when you were doing it. Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, my, I think the main thing that we found, especially from the Australian type of research that we did was, if you have--you know, the human body, once we get exposed to some foreign organism, the body fights by producing the antibodies. So can we understand the timeframe. Typically, the antibodies will attack any foreign agent in the body and form--and basically, the binding is so strong. And so is it possible for us to disrupt that binding by using some sort of applied voltage. And so that--what we did was to use voltage to control the recognition and the disruption of the antibody to the antigen on conducting polymers. It was very interesting work, actually. I, that led to some patents, and some interests from the U.S. companies. That was what brought me here [United States]. Story_ID: 626489 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you find, was it easy to adjust to Australian culture or was it--this was your first time out of Nigeria, right? Or was it? Speaker 2: No, I was, I used to travel. In fact, when I was NIOMR [Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research, Lagos, Nigeria], we used to go for, you know, they would have some analysis done at the University of Sussex [England] or I would go on the ocean. We would go on cruise to take fish samples from, you know, across the African coastline, you know, Gulf of Guinea, out there. Australia, first, I was very home sick because by that time, I was married with two children. And I wasn't very happy leaving my little ones. Speaker 1: Now, you got married in Nigeria, right, before you left? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: We met at the University of Lagos [Unilag, Lagos]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I met him, and we dated until I finished. He was in the final year in engineering, and so he finished and continued there until I was done. And then we got married the year that I finished college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I had two young children. My daughter was four [years old] and my son was less than two years old. And so I had to leave them. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a difficult decision to go there. Speaker 2: It was a very difficult decision. Speaker 1: To go to Australia, you know, 'cause he was staying there, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he was still in Nigeria with them. And so it was a very big decision, and in fact, I was--again, it was still the focus of what I was doing, you know, just the research. But I was fortunate to meet people in the lab that was very international. You know, there were people from England. There were a lot of Iranians at the lab there. There were Africans, and so just like I was, they were, you know, kind of motivated by what he [Gordon Wallace] was doing with conducting polymers, and wanted to come there [University of Wollongong]. But, so just seeing the international community there was good because it made me feel perhaps I wasn't crazy to leave my two children (laughter) to pursue this dream. But my husband was very supportive as well, you know, because people always tell me, you're Ph.D. material. My professors and everyone, and he didn't--he felt that, you know, he should encourage me along that part. He didn't want me to just let it go like that. So I think I was very fortunate. Story_ID: 626490 Speaker 1: After your dissertation [entitled, 'New Sensing Techniques Using Conducting Electroactive Polymers', at the University of Wollongong, Australia] was published, and it was favorably, you know, received by a lot of people from what I understand, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now, this is--were you invited? I mean how did your post-doctoral position take place? Speaker 2: So, I came to the U.S. for a conference, for two conferences. I presented my work at the Pittcon (ph.) conference in Georgia in '93 [1993] and also in '94 [1994]. And my--the presentation was well received. We got interested--we got some companies interested in the work. Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, California became interested, and they started to fund a portion of the work I was doing, especially the polymers and using the pulse, you know, the applied voltage to control binding. And so they brought me here to demonstrate some of these techniques. And so after I came, you know, there was interest--I became interested in the American, you know--at the conference, there were some companies, you know, major multinational companies that were there. And so I decided to apply. I did apply and I got invitation actually. I got some, you know, I got Kellogg's to be interested, Dionex, so many other companies. But I didn't have the green card or the paperwork to, for a job. So I went back. So when I went back, I applied to the National Research Council, the NRC. So for the NRC, you have to write a proposal. And so you propose an idea, and it gets reviewed. It's a compet-- it's a national, international competition, and if you get very high ranking, rating for the proposal, then you get invited to do the work. And so that was how I--I proposed that the pulse idea could be used for environmental applications. And at that time, [Gordon] Wallace's group [University of Wollongong] wasn't doing that. You know, I felt that, you know, we could extend that to that environment. And so that was how I got into the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is in, this is nineteen ninety-- Speaker 2: '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: '94 [1994], okay. Speaker 2: So I came to EPA in late '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so all your Ph.D. work had been done. You said, they hadn't awarded you the Ph.D. yet in '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yes, I had completed the Ph.D. I passed the final defense, and so I left Australia, because I won the NRC Fellowship, postdoctoral fellowship. So that brought me to the EPA in [Las] Vegas [Nevada] to do the research that I was proposing. They wanted me to come and do what I said I was gonna do. Speaker 1: Now, what about your family at this time? Were they still in Nigeria or did they come-- Speaker 2: Okay, so my family joined me. My husband came after six months with the children. So we both came to the U.S., we all came to the U.S., all four of us. Story_ID: 626491 Speaker 1: So you're living in Las Vegas [Nevada]. Now, this is (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: This is radically different from University of Wollongong [Australia] and from Lagos [Nigeria]. Speaker 2: And from Lagos, it's completely different. Speaker 1: Yeah, so how did you like Las Vegas? Speaker 2: We went to Las Vegas, you know, I mean didn't think about--I wasn't involved in most of the things going on at the University of Lagos [Unilag, Lagos]. I was too focused on my research and my academics. There was no way I could get--you know, my life was just kind of very, it's just very different. And so I thought it was interesting. I thought it--it's very different, very different, you know. I was--I had never seen those big, huge hotels, and, you know, I thought it was different, so--. (laughter) Speaker 1: Yeah, it's quite a sight for anybody, I think--. Story_ID: 626492 Speaker 1: But EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] has a facility there [Las Vegas, Nevada], a big facility-- Speaker 2: Yes, they do. Speaker 1: --and, okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: EPA has a facility there, and you know, that the EP--Nevada has the site, the Yucca Mountain environmental site was also of interest there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you were doing environmental analysis. What aspects of the environmental were your sensors used to measure or, and-- Speaker 2: So, you know, you can actually measure a lot of things from the environment, and you can use the environment as a measure of the human health, okay. So the concept, the idea behind many of our environmental systems is that one could potentially create a vast number of sensors that could be placed in the environment, and you could communicate with the sensors remotely to give you an idea of what's going on. There are very few sensors that can do that. In fact, it is still, at the research stage, if you like, but there are portable sensors that you can design and use for monitoring the environment. And so my idea is that, you know, one can make many of these sensors really small, to the extent that it would almost be--and also cheap. So you can have a massive distribution of the sensors, not only for you to know what's going on in water or in air or in soil, but to also provide some biological level of information, you know. It should be able to give you what's going on in the level of, you know, maybe biological warfare agents and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, it'll give you--the more sensors you have, the bigger your sample, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, sample, yeah, and it also gives you on the time, information unlike what you would expect to have to send researchers out, take samples, bring the samples back to the lab. The time that you're using, you're spending doing that, is taking away from--you're not really getting the full picture of what's going on out there. So if you can have the sensors massively distributed and you can step back and find ways to communicate back to wherever you are, it's a lot better. It gives you the round-the-clock type of information rather than this, you know, special-- Speaker 1: Give us an example of a phenomena that you were measuring and how you distributed your sensors? Speaker 2: So, we, you know, we're using--again, we're using conducting polymers. At the initial stage, we started with conducting polymers. Our conducting polymers are lightweight. They're polymers, they could be used for printed circuitry. And so, you can measure things like heavy metals, you know, like lead, like chromium. You could look at, you know, water, you know, the cleanliness of water. You could understand the transformation of many of these things with the human body because at the end of the day, what's important is the human body, the human health. If the human--if the environment is healthy, it's gonna impact the human health itself. And so the idea would be to have massively distributed low-cost sensors over a very wide range of space and communicate with the sensors, remotely if possible. Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you tell me about an instance where you actually did that, I mean where-- Speaker 2: Where you did that? Speaker 1: Yeah, where you actually did it and what you were trying to-- Speaker 2: To measure? Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Okay, so we did one for PCBs, PCBs are polychlorinated biphenyls and we had samples from many of the areas in New York State. We've had samples--we had sensors located for wastewater treatment plants. We have one in Pennsylvania. And we have portable sensors that, you know, we basically put, that we can communicate with the sensors remotely. Story_ID: 626493 Speaker 1: What do they [sensors] look like, and what are they mounted on, and how do you, I mean well, how do you physically monitor what they're doing? Speaker 2: Well, a typical one would look like, in fact, one of the sensors is sitting right behind there. The one I'm carrying there, the one I'm holding right there in front of me in my picture. Speaker 1: Ah, okay. Speaker 2: That's one of our sensors there. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --now, this is, it looks about the size of a laptop? Speaker 2: Yeah, like a laptop, yeah, laptop. Speaker 1: Okay, so this, is this whole device the actual sensor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, the whole device because the sensor itself is only a small part of the overall system. It's a system. So you need the sensor to do the sensing. You need the recognition, the signals to be generated. You need the signal to be processed, so you need everything. You need sample prep as well. You know, for example, let's say I want to look at human body. I want to look at blood. You know, I cannot simply inject the blood into the device. There has to be some processing that must be done, you know, to have that take place. And so it's a system. That's why we call it environmental systems. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so it's, it looks like a small computer. Speaker 2: Yeah, like a small computer. Speaker 1: All right, and the polymer, the electro-(unclear) charged polymer is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is calibrated to measure--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's right inside it. Speaker 1: --these different, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, right inside the box. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what, do you send students out with these or send people out with these to certain areas at a certain time to get readings or are they mounted somewhere where they-- Speaker 2: At different times, we've done different kinds of things. Some of our sensors are being placed at wastewater treatment plants. Speaker 1: So they have to be housed at a-- Speaker 2: Physically, yeah, physically placed. Speaker 1: --at some kind of a waterproof housing or something? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, we put, yeah. So you have that, you know, you have inline, we call them "inline sensors." The sensor principle has been applied for--we've done, for pain, you know. We call this the pain bio-sensor. So if somebody is in pain, how do you know how much pain they're in? Speaker 1: By how loud they scream. (laughter) Speaker 2: Exactly, so typically, you go to the hospital. They give you a (unclear), and they ask you on a scale of one to five or zero to five, how much pain do you have? And the patient tells you, you have to rely on what the patient tells you know, if the patient tells you the pain is five, and they don't look like they really have five, how do you know the real level. So what we are doing is to look at the biochemical signals that are released when people are in pain, and especially for people who cannot tell you they're in pain, maybe children or people who are unconscious. So we're measuring the bio-markers of pain to develop pain bio-sensors. So we're working with doctors to actually see if what a patient tells you, correlates with the markers that we measure from their blood samples. Speaker 1: Now, is it--I was wondering like how, is--to what extent pain is subjective, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Pain is very subjective. In fact, the definition of pain is actually what the patient tells you. And so there are people who, you know, would be--you know, they're also, they have the ability to--they can--when they're in so much pain, it doesn't show very much. And there are those who cannot even hide it at all. And so we're looking for something much more, less subjective, much more-- Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Less subjective. Speaker 1: So, with this sensor, you're actually measuring like nerve, signals from the nervous system. Speaker 2: With this sensor, we're looking at, we're taking few pinches of patients' blood and measuring an enzyme called Cyclooxygenenase 2 (COX-2). That enzyme is only produced if there is huge inflammation or some chronic pain. The--when we have something, when we have regular pain, when we have some injury or bruising, cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) is produced and once you use a painkiller, you know, you feel better. But for chronic level of pain, you have this level cyclooxygenenase 2 that is not natural. It's induced, and so if you, if we understand how this enzyme is being produced in the body, we need to know how much of this is produced for every type of pain so that we can calibrate how much of the painkillers one would need to disrupt the activity of this, this enzyme. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, you started doing that research after you came here [State University of New York (SUNY) at Binghamton], right? Speaker 2: Here, oh, yes. Story_ID: 626494 Speaker 1: Tell us about the transition from EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] to, where you were measuring environmental-- Speaker 2: Environmental. Speaker 1: --phenomena to here [State University of New York (SUNY) at Binghamton]? What happened? Speaker 2: In fact, I still do a lot of environmental work as well. Most of my research, even since I've been here, I have been funded by the U.S. EPA. We're trying, you know--so, but I've, over the years now, tried to look at other aspects, you know, beyond the environment. For example, human body, you know, like the pain sensor that I just described to you. Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to make--you came here in 1996, right? Speaker 2: I came here in '96 [1996], yes. Speaker 1: And was, did they, did you have offers from a number of universities around the world to come or did you--well, how did you choose this one? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, I came here, I came here because, primarily, because they were looking for analytical environmental chemists. And it was the right fit for me. I wasn't looking at a big university where you just get lost. I wanted to be able to do teaching and also do research. I wanted to be able to impact students. So it was the right fit, and me coming from the EPA and what they were looking for, it was the fit. Speaker 1: Did you take into consideration to your family and how they were gonna fit in? Speaker 2: Yes, in order for the family, you know, we--I didn't think that they'd like to have, to come to a very cold area. And so one of the ways that we were able to convince our daughter was that they get to do a little skiing and playing with the snow, and that coming from [Las] Vegas [Nevada], which was very hot, they felt that that was very good. They were really looking forward to it. So. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, all right. Story_ID: 626495 Speaker 1: So you come here [State University of New York (SUNY) at Binghamton] in 1996, and you were appointed a professor of chemistry, State University of New York at Binghamton, and now who was--were there any other Africans or African Americans in the faculty, on the faculty there or were you the only one? Speaker 2: I was the first one, and I was the only one. Speaker 1: Okay, did it remain that way? Speaker 2: We now, you know, we have this pipeline, we have a lot of African American students in the undergraduate. I've mentored so many of them. You know, at least, you know, they've been encouraged to see me. In fact, you see many of them saying, oh, I, you know, I've really read your work, and I would like to, you know, be part of what you're doing. I want, you know, and so that has actually encouraged more people to be involved in that research. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, you head up the Center for Advanced Sensor Research and Environmental Systems or CASE, right? Speaker 2: CASE, CASE. (laughter) Speaker 1: That's a nice acronym. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Acronym. Speaker 1: And so, and the center is primarily funded by who? Speaker 2: Initially, it was funded by the university, as a university research organized center. But over the years, we've received money from the [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD]. We've been funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF]. We've received funding from EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency]. They've continued to fund us. We've received funding from other, maybe private sectors at well, Procter and Gamble Pharmaceuticals, funded some of our work. Speaker 1: I can just imagine so many entities that would be excited about having sensors that, you know, that could be small and monitored at a distance and--so does the Department of Defense, I mean you mentioned them first, that's, they were really interested in--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, the Department of Defense was interested in UPAK [ph.], the box that I showed you, and the idea, we'd be able to look at bio-agents dispersed in the air from a distance of maybe like five kilometers, and being able to communicate with the sensor without physically being there, remotely. Speaker 1: So this is directly related to some of the fears around what happened in 9/11--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: 9/11, yes, in fact, we got them-- Speaker 1: --in 2001. Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: It was the fear of biological warfare--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Biological warfare agents, yes. Speaker 1: --and what would happen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and we know there're environmental issues, and then the medical professional also, I mean has health, you know, it has health-- Speaker 2: Health. Speaker 1: --it has health-related applications as you were explaining with the pain. Speaker 2: So the biosensor work is really health related, you know. We also have biosensors also for the environment as well, like the, you know, anthrax, bacillus (unclear), you know, biological warfare agents, being able to know what you have in air and more recently, looking at nano technology, nano particles. You know, we have a lot of nano particles in consumer products. Many of the things that we wear right now have nano particles. Story_ID: 626496 Speaker 1: Now, what is a nano particle for the uninitiated (laughter)? A small-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, one-billionth of a meter. So it's really tiny. Speaker 1: It can only be detected through instrumentation, right? Speaker 2: Yes, so you have to use highly, high resolution, scanning electron micrographs or transmission electron micrograph to be able to see that. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the danger of nano particles in your clothing (laughter)? Speaker 2: Now, we can actually buy nano particles, nano silver-impregnated socks and consumer products because some of these particles are believed to have anti-microbial properties. And so the issue then would be they kill the bacteria, and you take many of the socks, and you wash them off or you, you know, dispose of the consumer products anyhow, there might be some unintended consequences of exposure to the nano particles. And so now, we're trying to understand the possible transformation of the particles, starting from the time they were made to the time they--the lifetime, the whole life cycle of the particles in the environment and back to the grave, what we call the "cradle to grave," you know, starting from the product to the time it's disposed of by the user. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that--and the socks models are a good example of nano particles in your-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --in clothing. Speaker 2: Yep, they're used now in many ways. The nano particles are gonna be part of the future. They, you have nano particles in consumer products, in food packaging because they preserve the food. They kill the bacteria. They're, you know, they have nano particles in toothpaste, many of the cosmetics, and personal products that we use at home. So they're gonna be ubiquitous in a few years. And so we're trying to understand the chemistry, the transfor--the changes that would happen. And if they dissolve, what do they form, and whatever is formed, what is the relationship, the reaction of the product resulting from the dissolution with the human body and the environment? We need to understand that. Typically, we wait and play catch up. We wait until things are produced in massive quantities, and they're now being sold, but we want to be able to preempt that by understanding upfront, you know, what the fate and the transportation and the transport and the mechanism of transformation of the particles in the environment and the human body. Speaker 1: Okay, what else are you doing? Speaker 2: The nano particles? Speaker 1: What's the most exciting--is the nano particle sensing the most exciting thing you're doing now? Speaker 2: Right now, we're doing, we're developing sensors for nano particles, we're making--again, conducting polymers in form of membranes that can used to trap or filter them. So membranes--we just finished some research with Harvard School of Medicine [Cambridge, Massachusetts], where our membranes were being linked, combined with their (unclear) so that you know, we have aerosols of (unclear) or aerosols of ion particles trapped on our membranes. And then the membrane because they're conducting and also electro-active, they can serve as sensors. And so we're using the sensors to serve as filters as well as--the membrane to filter the particles as well as to sense them. So we're linking our work with Harvard. Our work is just coming out, our publication. Story_ID: 626497 Speaker 1: Can you give an example--now, this is material science too, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, because, you know, once you make the polymers, the, you know--generally, in chemistry, you know, chemistry deals with materials. We look at the materials and material world around us. And so our conducting polymers, we are now making them in terms of membranes, flexible membranes that you can incorporate into electronics that you can use as filters, that you can use as sensors. Speaker 1: So do you have to make--you have to make, you have to use, you have to fabricate one material for one job and another-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --material for another job. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Give an example of the kind of material you use for say, for one and the type of material you use for another? Speaker 2: For another, so for example, we're making what we call polyamic acid. We've gone away from the polypyrroles because they tend to be very hydrophobic. They just, everything--they stick, you know. And so we were looking, we're designing materials that would have specific functional groups, things in it that can talk to the environment in which it is placed. And so polyamic acid is one of those. It's very cheap, and it has a lot, over 600 different types of linkages so that when we make the membranes and we make the materials, we can basically use it to interact with chromium, for example. Chromium-6 is a carcinogen, and Chromium-6 is what they use in industry for tanning, for other types of applications. And so, so membrane, polyamic acid is, we're using it to reduce Chromium-6 to Chromium-3. Chromium-6 is a carcinogen, but if you change it to Chromium 3, it becomes almost benign. In fact, you can actually buy Chromium-3 on the shelf at Wal-Mart. People use it as a food supplement. And so the idea would be not just ways to detect what is in the environment, but for you to actually use--take something that is toxic and convert it into less toxic form. So we call that (unclear) remediation or transformation or detoxification. And so polyamic acid is used, is being used in chromium detoxification. The same polyamic acid is being used now as a, for electrodes in arrays for water cleaning, you know, for, you know, water purification. And we do this by the chemistry, by changing the chemistry of the material so that it would actually allow salt--you know, we capture the salt, remove the salt, and it passes, you know, clean water. So you can use it for clean water, especially for very resource challenging communities, you know, low cost, you know, technology that you can use in the third world for cleaning. Speaker 1: So this material can be used to purify water--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Purify water, yes. Speaker 1: --in a-- Speaker 2: For water purification, yes. Speaker 1: --which is important all over the world now. Speaker 2: Exactly, water, that's right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: How you can purify water--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Water purification to remove metals in water, remove salt from water, and make it cheap so that it doesn't require a lot of energy input, and so it would be--it can also be used by small communities and across the U.S. as well, with, you know, not a lot of population. Speaker 1: Now, tell me, do you fabricate these materials yourself in your laboratories or do write a recipe and send them out to some-- Speaker 2: No, I fab--we make them in the lab. (laughter) That's what we do. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: We make them in the lab, we fabricate them. We change the chemistry to get the better one. Sometimes we have one, some that are not very strong, you know, they're very brittle. We change the composition such that they are more flexible, and we control the pore sizes so that only certain things can be allowed to pass through and not the others. So we do, we make this in the lab. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Story_ID: 626498 Speaker 1: You started in '96 [1996], this is in the Clinton Administration. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did that--I mean has your funding remained steady from sources like National Science Foundation [NSF] and EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] and that sort of thing or has it be up's and down's in it? Speaker 2: It's ups and downs. I mean, you know, you have good years, and you have not so good. I currently have funding from the National Science Foundation, and my EPA funding ran out last year. So other times I would have, you know, EPA continuously. Other times, you know, I would have EPA--DOD [U.S. Department of Defense], I've had DOD. But it's ups and downs. It depends on, you know--it's a challenging time for funding, for science funding. It's a challenging time. And if you consider that this is how we train the next generation, you know, I've had over 100 undergraduates pass through my lab, many of these, over 70 of them will probably go to colleges or professional schools. And some are ending up in research and going on to do Ph.D.s. And so it's--not only do we do the research for the good of the society, but it's also a training tool, a training avenue for the next generation. This is how we train and encourage and motivate others to, to do--that research is important. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how's your, what's your, I guess, teaching load in regards to your research mode here? Speaker 2: So, I will teach, I teach undergraduate courses, I teach graduate courses. So I will teach, I could teach one major course, and then I would have five or six Ph.D. students who are also in my lab at any one time. I would have several undergrads working with those Ph.D. students. So maybe I would have like eight undergraduate students, doing research with them. And then I would have, at that higher, somewhat higher level, the post-doc [postdoctoral researcher], maybe one or two post-docs. All of these students are gonna be supported. They have to be supported, you know, through their courses. It takes an average of five years to train a Ph.D. student. And, you know, they have to be supported in the stipends. So many of the grants that I get through the government will, you know, go towards supporting the students for their stipends. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626499 Speaker 1: What percentage of your students are minority students? Speaker 2: Right now, I have, let's see. So I have--so I have three minority students, two males and one female. I have, African Americans, so Africans, and then I have white Americans, I have Asians. So it is actually pretty mixed. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, and, now, are you--do you have time to be involved in university-wide activities here at SUNY [State University of New York] Binghamton as well? Speaker 2: I do, I do serve. I serve--I'm currently serving as--you know, we have this new Strategic Initiative for Smart Energy. And, you know, I do serve on that committee. I serve on, you know, student thesis [committees]. I've, also I do a lot of collaboration across campus as well. I have collaborators with engineers and biology, and so, you know, I take some time to do my level of service. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626500 Speaker 1: How many patents do you have? I know you've got at least two, but-- Speaker 2: I have four patents now. One was just awarded this year, and I have, I believe four or five patent applications. So UPAK [ph.], the box that we fabricated here has been covered with two patents, you know, because it's a system that can do a lot more, you know, that can do a lot of things in terms of sensing. Speaker 1: Okay, and what are the other patents involved in? Speaker 2: My other patents, we have one now that's going through for the membrane for water filtration, you know. That's another one, and there's another patent that we did for Gallium, conjugated, for bi-conjugate sensing, mostly in the sensing area, sensing, sensing systems. Speaker 1: Okay, and now have you been tempted to set up a commercial business to deal with your patented work or-- Speaker 2: No, some of my patents, some of my patents have been licensed to companies that should-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, will take this, hopefully, to the market. But I have not been able to--I do what I do well. (laughter) Speaker 1: You're a researcher, you-- Speaker 2: Exactly. (laughter) So the pathway is for--we have a technology transfer office on campus. Scott Hancock, you know, is a very great person who works with companies to liaise with them about technologies developed here. Story_ID: 626501 Speaker 1: I know in 2001, you received the Chancellor's Award, and so they, the school appreciates your work, apparently. And you also have a book that was produced in, that you edited called 'Chemical and Biological Sensors for Environmental Monitoring'? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes. Speaker 1: Is this widely used in universities now or is it-- Speaker 2: It's mainly used by researchers and graduate students for sensing, you know, environmental sensing. Speaker 1: Okay, you also were a visiting scholar, research scientist at the [U.S.] Naval Research Lab-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in 2001. Speaker 2: 2001. Speaker 1: Was that for a year or was that just intermittently? Speaker 2: No, I was there, in fact, that was--I was there consistently for six months because I was on mini-sabbatical here at the time. And after six months we came back, but we used to go back once a month with my students to do measurements and use some of their facilities. So that continued for some time. Story_ID: 626502 Speaker 1: Okay, and you've had tenure [at the State University of New York (SUNY) Binghamton] since 2002? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes. Speaker 1: Was it hard to get tenure here or was it--did it happen fairly easily? Speaker 2: Oh, it's not easy to get tenure. It's a lot of work. If you, you know, there's a, you know, tri--(unclear) contribution that you have to make. You have to be able to do good teaching. You have to have research funding with publications, and you have to do service. You have to do service, even community service or professional service. And so if you do not have funding with publications, perhaps with student training, there is no tenure. And so it was not easy at all. No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 626503 Speaker 1: According to our outline, one of the latest things you worked on was an electronic nose. Tell us about this electronic nose, and-- Speaker 2: Electronic nose was a technology that, you know, got very popular in the early '90s [1990s] and late '80s [1980s] and essentially, it looks at the concept, then look--the human nose, the principle of how the human nose processes odor. And so the idea would be to take the concept, learning from nature, to develop sensors, rays of sensors that are not particularly specific for something, but would have cross selectivity. For example, if we, if I smell coffee, I know this is coffee. You know this is coffee. If I smell pizza, I know that's pizza. And that's only because in the upper epithelium, in the human nose, we have rays of sensors that are non-specific, but are continuously being renewed. And so those sensors will bind--if you understand how they bind to odors, and they process the signals through the human brain, and then we recognize the odors. So how can we learn from the human system and then create an instrument that will do that? And so that was the idea of the electronic nose. And from our part, basically, what we did was to have--again using our conducting polymers to create arrays of conducting polymer sixteen or thirty-two at once. And we changed the chemistry in such a way that each of them would sense different things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we would use them to, and then we would collect all the signals and process them and reduce them to single, one thing and get one single information from it. So the sensors are now gonna specific for only one thing. So we have cross selectivity because, for example, the human nose, if only you can smell coffee and I can smell bread, freshly baked bread, then we have trouble. But the human nose, the human system is trained. So we train the nose to recognize odors and connect them with something. And so the concept of the electronic nose is simply that, looking at nature, looking at how humans process odor, create sensors, or rays of sensors that are not specific, but they will have cross selectivity. And then train them, using some software, for example, artificial neuron networks, so that the same way the human brain will process the orders once it's been smelled and then create a device out of that. And so they were useful for the time, mostly for agricultural, you know, fresh food, fresh taste applications and so we did that. Speaker 1: So, I'd be right in saying that every smell is a combination of different signals that are sensed, and it's that pattern that creates that one smell that-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you, that I would say is coffee or pizza-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, pizza--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --or freshly baked bread. Speaker 2: Yeah, because we train, the human, you know, we train the human body, the human brain is trained to recognize that the same way you would train the sensor. So you continuously expose the sensor to a particular odor and collect the signals, and you process that over time, so that when it is now being fed with something that's unknown, it can quickly associate that signals, with a particular odor. Speaker 1: Um-hum, so the sensor would actually know that something smells something like coffee-- Speaker 2: Like, exactly, like coffee. Speaker 1: --even if it's not. Speaker 2: Exactly, even if it's not. That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and they would know if it's coffee, and you would know by looking at a readout that it's the smell of coffee, yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right. Story_ID: 626504 Speaker 1: You developed HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] sensors, right, that can--I mean sensors that can detect-- Speaker 2: HIV. Speaker 1: --do they--HIV. Do they do it through smell or through what? Speaker 2: So they use this mainly through antibodies, antigen recognition. So it would have antibodies to HIV, immobilized in our sensor so that if there's an antigen, HIV antigen, in blood or serum, it binds to it. And then we record the signals. And it gives you, instead of waiting for hours and, you know, days and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: For a laboratory analysis? Speaker 2: For extensive lab--yeah, we can do a quick, almost like pregnancy-type, quick tests for that. Speaker 1: So is this process being used today in communities, like when they go give you an HIV test, and bring the truck in the community and then people stand up, and they go in. Speaker 2: Again, it's one of the patents that's being--that we've received. And in terms of, the process of actually taking this to the market is a whole, you know, lot in itself. So we'd love to see that. We'd like to see it used, especially, you know, for low-cost technology. Speaker 1: Have you ever been--now, I've talked to other research scientists who have been frustrated by the process of an invention or discovery, the slowness in which it comes to the marketplace. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Have you ever been, you know, upset about, you know, the slowness of the commercial process or the-- Speaker 2: I have been, actually, because, you know, there's so many things that we're currently doing that many practices that could be, you know, completely improved, the technology is there. The research is there, but it's really little or no communication between the researchers and the developers. And so this is where the discontinuity lies. And, in fact, to even be able to communicate this to the extent that people will understand, you know, we have this. This can, you know, it is there, you know, we know how to--we can use this. But the gap is there. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I've talked to a few very frustrated-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --research scientists who know that there's something that they've developed that could be useful to society, and it's not there yet. It's not produced yet. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Not in the world yet. So, at any rate, so the HIV sensor works by sensing certain antibodies--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Antigens-- Speaker 1: --and antigens--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Antigen antibody, like immunoassay, immunochemistry. It uses immunochemistry principles. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626505 Speaker 1: In 2010, you were elected as a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry [RSC]. And I know this is a, this is big, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that put you on the platform with the big chemists. (laughter) Speaker 2: Yep, it puts you in the platform of a select group of chemists who, you know, are consider, you know, a very small percentage of your peers, actually. Speaker 1: Right, so it makes you in a way one of the elite in the chemistry world? Speaker 2: Chemistry, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so that's 2010. And how are you selected for that? How do they do it? Speaker 2: So, you get nominated by your peers, and the nomination gets, (unclear) by the whole fellowship, and then they get to a vote, and if you get certain numbers, then you become members--you need to have a minimum in terms of 75 percent of the entire membership, you know, saying, yes, you know, looking at your accomplishments. And then you get, you become a fellow of RSC. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 626506 Speaker 1: Now, at this stage of your career, are you still primarily involved in research? Is that your primary-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I will continue to do research as long as I have the funding. Research is the highest form of intellectual pursuit. When we teach, we pass on known knowledge, but when we do research, we add onto it. And so it's how we understand the world around us. It's how we know it better. It's how we understand the mechanism of how things work, and so it's how we motivate students to be involved in what we're doing. It's how we tell them, look, you can be a part of this, especially if you're able to make the research practical, that, you know, we don't make the science too abstract that we turn away a lot of people. But we find ways to make it understandable and make it, create practical things for them to see that they can actually make a difference. And so I can see, I see myself combining the teacher's collar approach. I like the two, you know, but I will continue to teach and also do research. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're gonna do it as long as you can, you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Many people we interview are tempted to go into administration or, you know, become a dean or something instead of, you know, do research or they get--in a lot of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], people are consumed with mentorship because they don't have the research facilities that you have here. So, but you're determined to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I would like to continue to do research. I know at some point, you know, we still end up in administration. You know, the beauty of the academic institution is that, you know, you really have different career path. There are those who prefer to be in administration, you know. You go into dean, and you become provost and university president. And they make a lot of impact along their path. There are those who prefer the research--I know of many colleagues who, you know, being in research, and my mentors actually, researchers. Professor George Whitesides at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, he's a foremost chemist and researcher, and I, I didn't think he was involved in much of the university administration at all. But he has made a lot of impact and influence a lot of people doing the research, and even more recently, his involvement in low-cost diagnostics with technologies that one can use in resource-limited countries and to help people to do things that would help humanities, that is what I like to do. I like, you know, that kind of direction. And then, you know, service, in fact, mentoring. We get, we mentor a number of students. I would like to see many of my students go on to do greater things. I think that's one of the major fulfillment that you get is working with people. That's what I like to do, you know, working with students, mentoring students and seeing them doing greater things. Story_ID: 626507 Speaker 1: What are you working on now in terms of research that's exciting right now, that you see? Speaker 2: Right now, we, well, working on the pain biosensor. I'm excited about that. We, we've recently, well collaborating with physicians to see if--and computer scientists, to see if when a patient comes in and says they're in pain, the report of the patient correlates with our sensor, the level of the biochemical signals that we get from our sensors, and what the computer scientist gets from taking the visual picture of the patient. Is there a correlation? If we find a correlation, it's something that could help physicians correctly diagnose pain so that people do not abuse drugs, you know, drugs so that, you know, we basically are able to titrate the level of pain they're in so you know how much drugs they will need. Speaker 1: Now, this is what you were referring to earlier, right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the pain biosensor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And we went through the dynamics of that. Speaker 2: The dynamics of it. This is one--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the current research that you're doing? Speaker 2: That's the current research that we're doing. In fact, just two weeks ago, we just got a couple of samples, patient samples to look at this, and then the filter, the nano filter project using the membranes, making the membranes to filter, is another project that we're involved in. Story_ID: 626508 Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've figured out what I was trying to think of before, and this was when you were talking about mentorship, there were, there's a set of names that were mentors of yours in this country, I think, that we didn't discuss. And who are some of the people? There's a gentleman, University of Missouri-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Missouri, Adam Wanekaya. He's a professor, associate professor of chemistry. Mariam Goodie [ph.] she's at FDA [Federal Drug Administration]. I've had, some of my mentors, one is (unclear) Pasteur, who is involved in vaccine production. Some have gone to industry, some ended up in academia. I've trained students who have gone back to Kenya, they are professors there, and you know, lecturing, teaching chemistry, some in Nigeria. Some of my mentees are in South Africa, in Cape Town, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I know there's a, like an international feel to the lab here, lot of different people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah, very (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Is there a special bond amongst the African students and professors? Speaker 2: We have a number of Africans coming over, you know, to get trained. And as I said, I think that the, we, you know, one of the education--at least in Nigeria, education is an overwhelming focus of the Nigerian-American community. If you look at the statistics, there's a very high percentage of Nigerian, Nigerian-American community who are highly trained professionals. Now, the strength, again, of every community is its diversity. You know, we're bringing different perspectives into the discussion, into conversations. We, I think the Nigerian-American community, along with other communities of immigrants from the sub-Saharan Africa is gonna play an increasingly important role in the, in both the conversation and the black community as well as in the national community as a whole. Story_ID: 626509 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, that's an important thing you said a little while ago, that the communities here [United Stateas], the Nigerian community here, the, and even broken down into the the Ebo community, the Yoruba community-- Speaker 2: Yes, Yoruba people, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, the Ghanaian community, and then the Ga and the Ashanti, you know, different groups. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Speaker 1: You know, they're highly educated for the most part. Speaker 2: Yes, very highly, and if you look at the studies, they're highly, you know, educated community professionals, and we have a lot to contribute in terms of the conversations that's going on. I've heard students, I heard one time, it's been a few years ago, this student came in. I was just getting ready to go to lectures, and this student came in. I've never seen her before. She had seen my name on campus, you know, on the website and things. And she said to me, are you Professor Sadik? And I said, yes. I said, she said, can I talk to you? I said, sure. So I had to sit down, and she said, I want to drop out. I cannot take this any longer, and I just wanted to talk to somebody, and I wonder if I could talk to someone like me. And I said, I'm so glad you came, you know. I said, please tell me why do you wanna drop out? So she explained the problems and the questions and the--she was going through. She's African American, grew up in the Bronx [New York]. And she felt out of place. She didn't feel like, you know, she could continue. And so I took out my pen, and I said, so this is Plan A. Your Plan A here was to get your degree. What would you do now if you drop out? And she said, I would get a job in nursing home. And I said to her, but in five years, what is that gonna fetch you? I said, so let's talk about your Plan A. Your Plan A was to get your degree? She said, yes. So let's talk about the problems you are having. So when you study, what are the problems? She explained that to me, and I said to her, do you know we have, you know, this extra help. I gave her the list of places she could get extra help. And so we wrote it--by that time, she had stopped crying. I gave her a box of tissues. She wiped her face. Speaker 1: Solve that problem first. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So we did that, and so, and she said, but how did you do it? I said, look, you are very fortunate to have this here. When I was, you know, growing up in Nigeria, I didn't have like, you know--there's no scholarship or anything to help me get through. When I lost my mother [Omo Shalewa Agboola] in the, you know, before I finished my college, it was very tough. So I said, but the family, the family, the community strengthens you. It's like, you know, you have to do it. So I gave her some tips for her to continue, to address some of the challenges and said, you know, how do you study this? You know, what's your study plan? She didn't know about study plans. I gave her a study plan. You know, these are questions at the end of the text. You try to study. You don't read--you don't study chemistry like you do like a novel. You know, you really need a pen and pencil and try to see how much you really understood. Anyhow, and I told her to try and see me once and a while. I said, even if you cannot come, please do me a favor. Send me an email; let me know you're doing very well. So after that, she would send an email a couple of weeks, and then after a while she stopped communicating. Then like two, three years, and then she came back to my office. She said, Professor Sadik, I'm graduating. I said, you're graduating? Excellent, you made my day. This is somebody that could have dropped out because they did not have the mentoring that they needed. And so it really doesn't matter. Just because she never met me, but she'd seen my name. She said, you know, she's like me, and I can be like that. And we need to have that communication. We need to have means of passing this on so that our students, our children, our community will understand what the challenges are. Everybody faces challenges, no matter what. But how do we address our challenges? Story_ID: 626510 Speaker 1: Now, you've published scores of research papers, and I was looking on--when I look at the bulletin board on the outside in the hallway coming in here, there are charts that have been published by SUNY [the State University of New York] Binghamton with your names and the names of your colleagues, and stuff, and you're the head of CASE [Center for Advanced Sensor Research and Environmental Systems], but the, you have a lot of colleagues where that are working too. Now, just tell me who some of your colleagues are and some of your research collaborators? Speaker 2: My collaborators, I have collaborators in engineering, Chris Wigg (ph.), Yu Chang (ph.). I collaborate with Tim Turner, Begas Amacur (ph.), also mechanical engineering. I collaborate with biology in biological sciences, Dennis McGhee (ph.). So I get along very well with people here. We, you know, we're people, we have ideas. We sit down over lunch and flush it out and discuss how we can write proposals and, you know, actually develop and try things out. And, you know, but, again, funding is always a challenge. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a particular funding strategy that you use for CASE? Speaker 2: You know, the funding strategy, the strategy that we've developed at CASE is to correct--to have a uniqueness of our system because sensor, you see many centers across the country, you know, they'll pro-focus on maybe one part of the sensor. But we, our strategy is the system. It's, we have taken a system approach because the sensor is only one part of the overall thing. And so in, you know, in order to make sensing work, you need sample prep, you need signal processing, you need signal reduction. You need information retrieval. And so we have a strategy of creating portable devices and possibly finding ways to miniaturize them so that they're easy to use outside and secondly, it should be energy sustainable. You know, we should not have to invest a lot of energy to make it work. So if you make it too energy intense, it gets very expensive. And so we're, we have a STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] focus for our sensing, and we have a low-cost approach for our sensing. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and that's, and the portability of the sensing devices is becoming more and more important, right? Speaker 2: Very important. You know, you want to be able to go to the middle of the desert and where you have virtually nothing and you wanna be able to make it work-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and make it robust, make it low cost, and make it portable. That is our approach. Story_ID: 626511 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back over your career, and everything you've done to this point today, what are you the most proud of? Speaker 2: I'm proud of the fact that, you know, you can make impact, you can mentor people. You can motivate students to be their best, you know, to get the best out of them. You know, as I said, we do the research, but the overall, the overriding things are the people. So, to me, this is the most fulfilling, is being able to encourage the next generation and mentor the next generation, and let them carry it on. So I'm very proud of the fact that, you know, being able to work with students of different backgrounds, to make something better. I want them to be able to, you know, when they're done in my life, when they've finished, to be able to look back and say, you know, yes, I did the research. But I enjoyed the human interaction the most. I want them to know that, you know, the little time that we spent together, however long it is, like many years, whatever it is, it's still a snapshot, it's a very small portion of the entire career that's ahead of them. I want them to have a good, to know that they've made, you know, it's a good--it's been a good ride, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 626512 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think that the, as I said, the strength of every community is diversity. We have a lot of things that we can learn from each other. There is a, you know, the diversity of people, you know, I see this in research. We have an idea, we sit down. This is the idea. Just across the table, everyone comes up with different things that the others have not seen. Someone makes a presentation, and the questions will come from areas that you've not even considered. This is how we do research. It's a, and it's a group, it's team effort. This is life as well in the microcosm of our research. I see that the, I think the Nigerian-American community, and along with the other communities of immigrants from sub-Saharan Africa is gonna play an increasingly important role in both the conversations, in the black community and the national conversation as a whole. I think that we need to have this dichotomy of conversation to understand one another and to learn from one another. Story_ID: 626513 Speaker 1: Tell us about your children, and you've got three children, right? Speaker 2: I've got three children. Speaker 1: And I noticed when we looked at your door in the hallway this morning, you have a doctor and a lawyer. I see them prominently displayed on the door. Tell us about them. These are the two that came from Nigeria to the United States? Speaker 2: That's right. Addie [Adeola Sadik], that's my daughter. She was born in Nigeria, and Adem, Ademola [Sadik] was also born in Nigeria, two years apart. So Addie is currently a resident physician at the Mass Gen [Massachusetts General] Hospital, Harvard's [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] hospital. She's, she's doing, she's going into anesthesia, you know, anesthesiology, that's what she wants to be. And Dem is just finished his law degree, J.D., at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] this May. He's studying, studying currently for his bar exam. So he basically locks himself up. But he's starting work at the (unclear) in October in New York City. And then we have a, our younger, youngest son, Ola [Olaolu Sadik], you know, who is in elementary school. Speaker 1: He's eight years old, right? Speaker 2: He's eight years old (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, okay, and your husband's an engineer? Speaker 2: My husband is a, an electrical engineer by training. But in the last, maybe fifteen or so years, he's been in broadcasting engineering. So, who is, he manages two TV stations in town. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is your father [Tahir Bello Agboola] still alive? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so both your parents have passed? Speaker 2: Yeah, long gone. But my mom [Omo Shalewa Agboola] had passed on before I finished my bachelor's [degree], you know. She was, just only one year after I declared chemistry, when we had the conversation about why do you wanna be a chemistry major? So she passed on the year after that. And then my dad died in '97 [1997] after I got to [the State University of New York (SUNY)] Binghamton. Speaker 1: Okay, did your father, I know he encouraged you. Was he impressed by your work? Did he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My dad was absolutely, absolutely proud of me. He would, I would, you know, anywhere I go, and from Australia, I used to go to conferences. I would send him a postcard, and I'll tell him, "Dad, I'm right here," and he would display--they told me he would display those cards (laughter), and he was very, very proud. I sent him my thesis after I finished my Ph.D. And we had a conversation about what it means, what, you know, what did you do? What did, you know, he was just--he always soaks in information. You know, it was almost like he wanted, you know, he was like what he wanted to do, what he wanted to be. It was probably, it would probably--if he had the opportunity, he would have a professor. But he told me long ago when I was going to Australia, you're gonna be a professor. And I said, no, I was only going to do my Ph.D. He said, yes, you're gonna be a professor. And it happened (laughter). Story_ID: 626514 Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered that I tried to be fair. I'd like to--one thing that people don't talk about so much that's not politically correct, is about your faith. I'm a very strong believer in the Bible, even though I wasn't raised a Christian. I became a Christian at some point in my life. And that had played a significant role in many things I have done on a daily basis and the way I raise my children and the way I live my life. I know people talk, but very few people actually practice. I'd like to be, I hope that, you know, to be remembered that, you know, I mean what I say and I do what I say. But I'm fair, but most importantly, that she's a woman of faith, that she has faith in the divine, the God of the Bible, that's been the guide of my life. That's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 626515 Speaker 1: So that was me receiving the Chancellor's Award for Research, and the president, the university president giving me the award in 2010, I believe. Speaker 2: And what's the president's name? Speaker 1: (Laughter) He only came for two years. Oh, my goodness. Speaker 2: This was when I received the SUNY [the State University of New York, Binghamton] Chancellor's for Outstanding Inventor. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, do you care to name any of these other individuals? Speaker 2: I can't remember their names. (laughter) Speaker 1: So I remember the names here. So here, I received the Research--SUNY Research Award, and here was President [Lois] Defleur on the right and Chancellor King on--give me the award. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: So that's my family. Speaker 2: Start with this one. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's my baby, Ola [Olaolu Sadik], and that is my daughter, Addie [Adeola Sadik]. That's my entire family portrait, and that's the baby, Ala, again. And that's my oldest son [Ademola Sadik], who's just graduated from Yale [University] Law. Speaker 2: Okay, can you the name the people on the second photo for us? Speaker 1: Okay, so starting from the left, we have Dem [Ademola] and Addie [Adeola], and then Abbie, my husband, and then Ola [Olaolu] and myself. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was the interview from 'Black Enterprise'. It was published in the 'Baltimore Business Journal'. Speaker 2: And that's me holding the UPAK instrument sensor that we developed from here at SUNY Binghamton...