 Story_ID: 176864 Speaker 1: Okay, great, so we start off by slating our interviews, so I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including your middle name-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and your date of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Kenneth George Standard and I was born on September 4, 1936, in Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, and can we have your date of--I'm sorry, today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 14, 2014. Speaker 1: Okay and--I see the numbers there. And then I'd like to have our location. Speaker 2: And we're in my office at the law firm of Epstein, Becker, and Green, which is located, at least our New York office where we are today, at 250 Park Avenue in New York City [New York]. That's the borough of Manhattan. Speaker 1: And also your occupation. Speaker 2: I am a lawyer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I do labor and employment law, representing the employers. Story_ID: 176865 Speaker 1: And then I want to--we ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. They're People magazine-ish. Okay, so I'd like to have your favorite food. Speaker 2: My favorite food? I don't think I have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, that's okay. Speaker 2: Or, or a favorite cuisine even. Speaker 1: You, you don't have to. Okay. Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Oh, you think that--okay, that's nice. Okay. Favorite color? Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --color. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Probably the most--probably Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. And a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Story_ID: 176866 Speaker 1: Okay, so we wanna--I wanna start with your parents and I'd like to start out with your father. Can you tell us about him? And I'd like to have his year of birth and what you know about his, his side of the family and how far back, and his growing up. Speaker 2: My father's name was Byron Stafford, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D, Standard, and he was born in Barbados in the West Indies. And it's interesting, I'm finding out more about him because I have a young cousin, she is the daughter of one of my first cousins, who started to compile a family history of--about her mother's side of the family and she was involved with a writing club in the town that she lives in in western Massachusetts. And in discussing what she was undertaking with the members of the club and showing them what she had accomplished so far, they suggested that instead of doing a nonfiction, that she convert it to a novel, and that is what she has done. And I just received a copy of her novel about two weeks ago and I've started reading it. And what she's doing is she's writing about her grandmother, who was one of the older sisters of my father. She was my aunt Dellie [ph.], as we called her. Adele [ph.] was her middle name as I found out in reading this book, assuming that there hasn't been too much author's license taken. But my aunt Dellie, my aunt Mae [ph.], my aunt Maud [ph.], my father, some other siblings were born on a plantation in Barbados. The plantation was owned by a white man who apparently took liberties with the women on the plantation, particularly the girls. In fact, in the book, there is description and I'm assuming this is based in fact and is not pure fiction, but my grandmother appeared to try to keep the girls from having too much contact with the plantation owner. Now, my grandfather, and I've never met my grandmother or my grandfather, my grandfather apparently was the carpenter for the plantation, and this jives with some of the comments my father said. And one of the caveats I will give you, is my parents were not terrifically forthcoming in telling us about their growing up experiences. But my father had always said that his father was a carpenter and that certainly jives with what I've read so far in this book. And what I've also learned from the book is--confirms what I had heard during the years, that there was an emigration out of Barbados. People were going--many of the males in particular were going to the Panama to work on the Panama Canal. You, I'm sure know about all the health issues there and the very rigid segregation that existed there, and the two-tier pay scale and so on. But it was still better in terms of the economics than what was available in Barbados for men, so a lot of young males went to Panama. Others came to the states. My aunt Dellie, my aunts Maud and Mae, all came to the states, and they settled in Brooklyn [New York, New York], in downtown Brooklyn. My father followed them and he arrived in 1912, and he worked at various times as an elevator operator, and I'm not sure if that was his first occupation when he arrived in this country or not. My aunts, I think, worked as either live-in domestics or as what they called day servants--day women or day girls probably in that time. Story_ID: 176867 Speaker 1: But my father [Byron Standard] then when the U.S. got into World War I [WWI], he was in the American Expeditionary Force [AEF] and served in France. Speaker 2: So what years were that do you think? Speaker 1: I--well, I know we sent troops to Europe in 1917, I believe in the spring of 1917, and they were there past the armistice, which occurred in November of 1918. I don't know the exact dates of my father's service and I haven't been able to locate it yet using Internet sources. I do know my father also said that in addition to serving in France, he served in our southwest during the border wars with Mexico, and I'm not clear if it was before World War I, after World War I, or both, but I did know--do know from what he said, that he served in the [U.S.] Army commanded by the man they called Black Jack Pershing, John J. Pershing. And I remember seeing remnants of my father's uniform when I was a child. Speaker 2: So he didn't tell you much about growing up, though. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Did he--any, any--except his father was, you know, this carpenter-- Speaker 1: Carpenter. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: And he really didn't talk much about the plantation or the life, at least that I can recall occurring in my presence. And I never met my grandfather. I know my older sisters did meet him because he came to the United States at one point, and I know we had a photo portrait of him that used to hang in our house and that somehow we lost track of. And it's interesting that in this fictionalized history I'm reading, there is a reference to that photo portrait. Story_ID: 176868 Speaker 1: Did, did your father [Byron Standard] ever speak proudly of being a Bajan or not? Speaker 2: It's interesting you, you use the word Bajan because that's how they refer to the--to themselves. I think there, there was a feeling that--of pride coming from that island [Barbados] and that they prided their heritage over--the heritage of people came from other islands. One reason might have been the educational system because despite the rigid segregation that existed there, my father and others all were literate and had some education. My father I believe finished the third form and my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] who is also from Barbados but did not know my father there, I believe finished the sixth form, and they were both literate and numerate. And that is very important because it influenced our upbringing, and when I say our, I mean my siblings and my upbringing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176869 Speaker 1: Do you know the years that your aunts came? Did they come like just a couple years? 'Cause you said 1912 (unclear). Speaker 2: I think the next one, I think my aunt Dellie [ph.] came in 1910. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe so. I think they all came within a relative short time of each other. They were trying to get away from that plantation owner for one thing and to seek a greater economic opportunity here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176870 Speaker 1: So, tell us about--well, I wanna--one more question about your father [Byron Standard]. How would you describe him, personality, temperament? Speaker 2: Good-humored, but he could be stern. He did have a temper. He was rather fiery, self-reliant I would say, and family, family-oriented. Story_ID: 176871 Speaker 1: And so, tell me about your mother, her name and-- Speaker 2: My mother was Winifred Lizette Sealy, and from what I know of her situation, her father owned a plantation and also owned a general store. And this is of interest because I was talking with somebody else, the father-in-law of one of my nephews over the Thanksgiving holiday, and he was telling me that he has relatives by the name of Sealy who also owned a plantation and a store, so we're wondering if there is a relationship there. And he's due back here in this country, he and his wife are due back here in April, and I'm going to get him together with some of my relatives from the Sealy side of the family to see if there is a connection there, which would be really an interesting small world story. But-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --my--yeah, my mother--my mother's father married at least twice. My mother's mother died and her father remarried, and there was a second family, and I've met some of the children from that second marriage. But it was soon after that second marriage that apparently my mother came to the states; she came in 1920. And I don't know if it was to escape the jealous stepmother. One story I heard is that my mother was babysitting and she dropped the baby from the new marriage, and it was after that incident that she had to come to the states, but I don't know if that's apocryphal or that's the truth or what, but in any event, she came here in 1920. Speaker 1: So she never spoke much either then. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And I've met--I have met some of the children from that second marriage over the years. Speaker 1: And so, now is she from--she's from where? Speaker 2: Barbados also. Speaker 1: So she--so they both were-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Bajan, okay. Speaker 2: But did not know each other there. Speaker 1: But did not know--well, there's an eight year difference. Speaker 2: Yes, between them, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And I don't know if they lived--how close they--their families lived to each other either there. Speaker 1: I see. Story_ID: 176872 Speaker 1: So the question I have is, how did your parents [Byron Standard and Winifred Sealy Standard] meet? Speaker 2: I think they were introduced; I'm not sure. My father was married twice 'cause he married after he was discharged from the [U.S.] Army, and his first wife whose name I believe was Merle [ph.] died in a Spanish Flu epidemic that occurred 1918, 1919, around that time. And then he and my mother married in either 1919 or 1920; I can't recall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176873 Speaker 1: Your siblings, can you give their names and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --birth order? Speaker 2: Muriel [Standard Outlaw] was the first born, Phyllis [Standard Johnson] was the second, Shirley [Standard Welcome] was the third, Byron [Standard] was the fourth, and I was the fifth, and there, there is a gap of seven years and one week between Byron and me and a gap of about fifteen and a half years between me and Muriel. Speaker 1: All right. So Muriel was the older-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and, and she's the one who I think I read that worked at the N-A--you know, for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Correct, yes. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you about Muriel because she perhaps had the hardest life because she was the first born and she came of age during the [Great] Depression and finished high school, and all of my siblings are very smart and all had some college, and three, three of us finished college, two of us had graduate degrees. Muriel finished high school at around seventeen during the height of the depression, smart enough to go to college but couldn't go to college because of the economic situation, so she became a sleep-in domestic. And she worked in that capacity for about probably four or five years. I remember she worked for a Dr. Giley [ph.] and I would sometimes get hand-me-down clothes from that family, but she worked for Dr. Giley. But when World War II [WWII] broke out, she was able to get a job working for the federal government in Washington, D.C., so she moved to D.C. and worked as a clerk typist, stenographer, et cetera, and so that was her advent into a white collar position. And then from there, in 1943, they developed an opening with the NAACP in New York [City, New York], so she was able to move back to New York, and she worked for the NAACP. She started out in a secretarial position and then later moved up to an executive position as what they call branch secretary, which is the manager of the branches around the country. Speaker 1: So she did well for herself really. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 176874 Speaker 1: I mean, you're the baby, so you're sort of coming at-- Speaker 2: That's what I was called. Speaker 1: You know, you're coming at, you know, the tail end of everything, but you're living--so you're living in Brooklyn [New York, New York], you said, down-- Speaker 2: We--when I was born, we lived in an area of Brooklyn that is now gentrified, but when I was there, it was either private homes or what we call old law tenements. Old law tenements are apartments that don't have central heating. There's no dumb waiter for trash removal. There is no bathroom. Under the old law, there was no bathroom in the apartment. There was a toilet in the hall. I can't remember if it was shared with another apartment. I don't recall that because when we moved from there, I was seven. There was no tub in the apartment. There was no hot water; you had to heat your own hot water. There was no central heating; you had a potbelly stove that used to heat. You burned coal or wood in the stove or if you're prosperous, you might've brought in a portable oil burner and burned oil in it. And you didn't have a refrigerator; you had an ice box, so you bought ice from the iceman in the street and you put it in the ice box, and that's how you kept your food cold. In the winter, you--we saved money on ice. My father [Byron Standard] built a box that hung from the window outside, so you'd put your stuff in there to keep cold in the winter. And if you wanted to take a bath, you had to ask others to leave the kitchen, and if you were an adult, you would sit in the side-by-side sink, your buttocks on one side and your feet in the other side and wash yourself, and that's how you lived in the old, old law tenements. Speaker 1: So these were the tenements your family lived in? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you--do you know the location or the address? Speaker 2: 577 Warren Street, Brooklyn, New York. I took my grandchildren there to see it about a year and a half ago, and now it is gentrified, quite changed. Speaker 1: Changed from the time, from even the beginning of them, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or maybe they had-- Speaker 2: From the beginning. Speaker 1: From the beginning, right. Speaker 2: From the beginning. For the tenements. Speaker 1: For the tenements, right-- Story_ID: 176875 Speaker 1: So your community--can you describe your sort of neighborhood [in Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Who--you know, or who's around you. Do you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was multi-ethnic, multi-racial, mostly working class people who lived there and neighborhood schools, you walked to schools. The schools were not segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And there was a library within-- Speaker 1: That was-- Speaker 2: --walking distance. Speaker 1: Do you think that was a Carnegie library? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a Carnegie library, still in existence actually. I showed my grandchildren. Speaker 1: Yeah. 'Cause I was--I was just talking to someone who's general counsel for a New York Public Library on Sunday. Speaker 2: I know her. Speaker 1: It's [HM] Michele Coleman Mayes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. And so we were talking about the, the, you know, the library system and the--and the Carnegie libraries 'cause she said a lot of them were not air-conditioned (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but they still are--were sound construction, you know, but--. Story_ID: 176876 Speaker 1: So I want you to really describe family life. You know, well, I would like first for you to describe your earliest memory and then I would like some description of that. Speaker 2: My earliest memory probably is I, I talked about our stove. When I was two years old, my father [Byron Standard] was sawing up some scrap wood he had salvaged from the street some place, and typical two year old, I was helping my daddy, and I was holding the wood, and he almost cut off the fingers of my left hand. He, he didn't realize my hand was where it was and so my oldest memory is that experience and being taken then--my brother was sent out to hail a taxi, which was a rare event for us (laughter), we never rode in taxis, to hail a taxi, and then they took me by taxi to a hospital. And the doctor gave me a nickel, put a nickel in my palm and asked me to grasp it, and he said if I could grasp it, that meant he could save the finger, and I was able to grasp the nickel, and my finger was saved. So I got stitched up that day and I had to go back for follow up visits. That's my earliest memory. Speaker 1: I know your father was one happy-- Speaker 2: Yes and my--'cause my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] was very upset (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, very upset at that. But, you know, at least-- Speaker 2: And he's the son of a carpenter (laughter). Speaker 1: Right (laughter), so, so she said she-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: She let him know that. Story_ID: 176877 Speaker 1: So describe family life. Speaker 2: Well, it had to be very close because (laughter) we lived in very small place, so we interacted a lot with each other. But I, I can't remember that much about what our day to day life is. I remember going to school, my first day at school. They didn't put me in kindergarten for whatever reason, so I went to first grade. And I remember I went to school that was closest to our house, was about a block and a half away, and I went there for two or three days and then they said I was in the wrong school district, because apparently it was on the wrong side of the street. Now that's the story; I don't know whether it's true or not, but in any event, they moved me to another school, which was about ten minutes further away. The first school was P.S. 133 [William A. Butler School, Brooklyn, New York], still there, and then they moved me to P.S. 47 [Brooklyn, New York], which is no longer there. And I went to P.S. 47 for first grade and second grade. Story_ID: 176878 Speaker 1: And by that time, excuse me, World War II [WWII] was well underway, and the federal government was hiring, and my father [Byron Standard] was able to get a job in Brooklyn [New York, New York] at the Brooklyn Army Base. Now my father had lost his job at the beginning of the [Great] Depression; he had been an elevator operator. And he had last--lost his job because, according to him, he had bought a watch from somebody and the employer, my father's employer, accused him of stealing the watch, not having bought the watch, and fired him. My father says he was fired because the boss wanted to hire a white man, remember this was the depression so this is 1929, 1930, because jobs were so scarce. And so my father was then thrown out of work and he had four children at that point 'cause my brother was born just before the start of the depression, August of 1929. And so the only work that my father had during the depression was WPA [Works Progress Administration] when he could get WPA. Aside from that, we lived on something called home relief, which is the equivalent of, of welfare today, so that's how we survived that and hand-me-downs, and so on. Speaker 2: How long did that last? Speaker 1: That lasted from 1929 when he lost his job until 1942, so thirteen years, almost thirteen years. Speaker 2: You know, you don't think of that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --so much-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --sometimes, you know, 'cause you hear people talking about the Great Depression or you used to more, you know, you know. But I, I remember hearing that at one point that it was long, so-- Story_ID: 176879 Speaker 1: I want you to take--I wanna take you back though to--because you're staying--you're, you're in those same tenement building-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the whole time 'til-- Speaker 2: Well, yes--well, I was. Before that, we lived in another tenement on Baltic Street [Brooklyn, New York, New York], which was a block away, a block to the south. I don't remember the number. My godfather lived on Baltic Street and I remember their number. Their number was 563, but I can't remember because I had visited 563. I don't know where we lived on Baltic, but we lived on Baltic and then Warren [Street]. And I don't know why we moved from Baltic to Warren, whatever reason. Speaker 1: Do you know what age you were when you moved from Baltic to Warren? Speaker 2: I would've been an infant still. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You grew up more on Warren. Speaker 2: On Warren, Warren. Speaker 1: Okay, on Warren. Speaker 2: That's where I started school and so on. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And so can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Sounds of push carts. We had an alley behind our apartment building on Warren Street, and there would be push carts and peddlers, people grinding scissors, sharpening scissors, people buying junk, people selling fruits and vegetables. They would all come through the alley and people would go down. I also remember the fig trees. We had a number of Italian Americans who lived in the neighborhood, and they would cultivate--they did cultivate fig trees. And I can remember the fig trees being pruned and wrapped in the fall so that they would survive the, the winter. Speaker 1: Anything else? So, so that's-- Speaker 2: Traffic was very-- Speaker 1: Those are sights. Speaker 2: Yeah, traffic was very light. Speaker 1: Sounds. Traffic was-- Speaker 2: Traffic was very light. There were very few automobiles or trucks. You still had either push carts or horse-drawn wagons. Speaker 1: Okay, but sounds, do you--are there any other sounds that come, you know, besides the push cart sounds? Speaker 2: No, I can't remember the sounds of people. I assume there were sounds of kids playing in the streets, but I don't really remember that. I know growing up in Brooklyn, we always played in the streets. We didn't have that many playgrounds nearby and the streets were close-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so we always played games there. Speaker 1: And so, sights, smells, sounds--smells, did you say smells? You didn't say smells. Speaker 2: Cooking maybe. On occasion my-- Speaker 1: Any, any kind of cooking smells? Speaker 2: Well, my parents would cook food they were familiar with from the West Indies, so I remember they cooked a dish called coo-coo, which is a cornmeal dish. I never liked it, didn't eat it. And they cooked something called okra, which they liked, and I, I didn't like, like the taste of either. I remember they made--my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] made fish cakes and I enjoyed the taste of those. I can't remember much else about the food that we had back in that era. Speaker 1: Okay so the, the, the okra, was it cooked--was it-- Speaker 2: It was cooked. Speaker 1: Was it just cooked but it was plain? It wasn't like-- Speaker 2: I can't-- Speaker 1: --fried okra-- Speaker 2: I, I-- Speaker 1: You don't remember. Speaker 2: I can't remember. Can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't like okra. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: My father [HM Julius Richardson], he loved okra. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, I was like, that's horrible. Story_ID: 176880 Speaker 1: I want, though, to take you--you're doing a very good job, I just want to understand how the family structure was. Because Muriel [Standard Outlaw], just as--she's almost as old as to be your mother. Speaker 2: Yes, because she's about sixteen years older, right. Speaker 1: So is she in the household when you're there? Speaker 2: Well, she was like a second mother to me on reflection. And in fact, sometimes when she had me out in the street in the carriage, she would get upset because people thought she was the mother of me (laughter). And so Muriel and--Muriel and Phyllis [Standard Johnson], the two older ones, were the ones who did the most with me both then and in later life. They were the ones who took me places, spent money on me. I remember Muriel having me visit her at her office when she worked at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And so, for example, I know Mrs. Thurgood Marshall [sic, Cecilia Suyat Marshall]. I've know her from the time I was a child of seven or eight. She was a co-worker, a Filipina, and she was always very generous, and she used to travel; she was single. And whenever she went on a trip some place and vacationed, she'd always send something back via Muriel to me, some gift she brought back from vacation, so she was always very generous with me. Story_ID: 176881 Speaker 1: So what school do you go to? Speaker 2: Well, I went to P.S. 133 [William A. Butler School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] for about three days and then I went to P.S. 47 [Brooklyn, New York, New York] for about a year and a half, year and a quarter. So I was in the--I was in the second grade there, when we moved from downtown Brooklyn [New York, New York] to Bedford-Stuyvesant [New York, New York]. And we moved to get a better apartment, one with steam heat and a bathroom inside with a bathtub and a toilet and so on inside the apartment. Now we, we moved, however, to a neighborhood that was less diverse because it was a neighborhood that was then shifting from white to black. Story_ID: 176882 Speaker 1: What is school like for you and are you automatically a--you know, 'cause the youngest a lot of times gets the advantage of, you know, everybody else. They're--they also-- Speaker 2: That was an advantage for me being the youngest and having educated older siblings, particularly siblings who were so much older than I, not so much my brother, but my sisters because they all were more sophisticated and were more involved with educational issues. Muriel [Outlaw] was very involved with educational issues because of her work at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Phyllis [Johnson] and Shirley [Welcome], the other two sisters, both went to college, graduated from college, and became school teachers. Phyllis is the other one in the family with a graduate degree; she got her master's in, in teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember my parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] always spoke to us about the need to get as much education as you possibly can. That's something I--there's not a time I can remember when that was not discussed in the family, the importance of an education and preferably having a profession. Story_ID: 176883 Speaker 1: I just wanna understand a little bit more about, you know, the, the household. Were there--where you sit down as a family, you know, was it formal dinners or was there conversation? Speaker 2: We usually had dinner together and there were discussions at dinner. I don't recall much of the specifics. And also in my early years, I spent a lot of time alone with my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] because my siblings were out at school or working and my father [Byron Standard] was at work, and so she would take me to the grocery store with her, for example, go shopping, so obviously we'd be talking, and we might talk during the course of the day while she was doing her chores after I came home from school. Story_ID: 176884 Speaker 1: I wanna go back. So you had family dinners, you were--your mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] took you out, were there any special holidays that--you know, you say you love Christmas. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, Christmas. Speaker 1: Does your love of Christmas go back to those early-- Speaker 2: Yes, Christmas was obviously a special holiday. And I'll mention something about the dinners. All of my aunts on my father's [Byron Standard] side were widows; all three of them were widows and I never knew their husbands because by the time I have any conscious memories, they were widows and raising their children. They--and they all had children. One aunt, aunt, aunt Maud [ph.], used to come to our house every Sunday for dinner for many, many years. I don't know how that developed, but she always came for Sunday dinner. Aunt Dellie [ph.], the one that this book that I've told you the young cousin has written, was the one I was afraid of 'cause she was always loud and boisterous. And I was told that, that whenever she came, I would run and hide. I didn't wanna have anything to do with her. Speaker 1: And so--I mean, that's an interesting thing. Do you think that was common-- Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: --back then, you know, I mean that they all were widowed, you know, that's-- Speaker 2: I think it was more common and I don't recall what killed their spouses, but certainly divorce was rare in that era, so when people were--woman was--were living a separate life, it was typically because they had become widowed. And I think it was more common to have widows than widowers, and it might've been the nature of the work that black men had to do. Speaker 1: And also maybe the conditions and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. So women probably would die from childbirth, you know, things like that. Story_ID: 176885 Speaker 1: I just wanna get a sense of your household and then we'll get out of the household. But, I just--are there chores? Is there--you know, because you're coming-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --along later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now who's in the house when you're in the house besides your mother [Winifred Sealy Standard]? You mentioned-- Speaker 2: Well, the, the sisters were there-- Speaker 1: Oh, I-- Speaker 2: --until they left and went out-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on their own-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and my brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my sisters were there, Phyllis [Johnson] and Shirley [Welcome], until the, the '50s [1950s]. Phyllis was the first school teacher in the family and my sisters--well, there's a lot of adventurousness in the family. Obviously, Muriel [Outlaw] was willing to leave home and go to Washington, D.C.-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to work. Phyllis subsequently was a school teacher in Brooklyn [New York, New York], but she learned there was an opportunity to go overseas and become a teacher to the dependents of the army of occupation, so she elected to do that. So she spent a year, I think it was 1950 or 1951 school year, living in Germany, teaching the dependent children of, of our troops, and it gave her a chance to see Europe and to be on her own. And when she came back, she was married, so she was out of the household, but she still was a big supporter of mine and she helped me by lending me money, get through college. Story_ID: 176886 Speaker 1: So when you were a little--what kind of child were you then? Speaker 2: I would say I was good. My parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] were-- Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: --happy, yes. Speaker 1: So you were obedient. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't troublesome to them. Speaker 1: Did you feel somewhat like an only child? Speaker 2: A little bit like that because of the great difference-- Speaker 1: In age. Speaker 2: --in age. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So I was able to get more attention from them than the siblings who were close together who had to share it. Speaker 1: Did you live inside your head at all you think? Or were you rambunctious at all where you were just, you know, really mainly well behaved? Speaker 2: I think I was generally well-behaved. I, I, I didn't get into any serious trouble. I got into Boy Scouts very early. I joined the Boy Scouts and I stayed in until I went away to college, and Boy Scouts were a very good influence for me and I got experience there, leadership. I became a leader very early, within six months of, of joining. I was an assistant patrol leader, then I became a patrol leader, then senior patrol leader, and so on. And I became an Eagle Scout. I'm, I'm in fact the last Eagle Scout, that troop, so it's more than fifty years. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: The scoutmaster at the time was an Eagle Scout. And the Eagle Scout business was really important because it taught me persistence and going--and setting goals and going after them. You asked me about my childhood; one of my memories is going to the beach, going to [Jacob] Riis Park [Queens, New York, New York]--I'm sorry, it was, was Coney Island [Brooklyn, New York, New York]--going to Coney Island with the family, and I was probably six or seven, maybe eight, something like that, and there was a section at beach at Coney Island, which is on a protected area of the ocean, so the waves are not very--not very high there; it's not right on the Atlantic [Ocean]. But in New York, the beaches are typically divided into segments called bays, and between each of the bays on these beaches, there are jetties to protect the shoreline. And there's one particular section of beach at Coney Island where there is an unevenness. The water on one side of the jetty is about two feet deeper than the water on the other side of the jetty. And as a child, I walked out on--in the water and it was perhaps up to my knees or thighs, and then I climbed up on the jetty and jumped off on the other side and was up to my head, and I was terrified, and there was nobody around. I managed to scramble out of the water, but it left me with a recurrent fear of the water, and so I could not swim. I did not learn to swim despite being sent--I went to summer camp for the first time in 1948 when I was eleven, didn't learn to swim there. But I wanted so much to advance in scouting. In order to become a first-class scout, you had to be able to swim fifty yards. And so I started taking swimming lessons at a Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association] nearby with the Boy Scouts and then later in high school. And I learned to swim enough, and you'll see a picture of me over there and I became I lifeguard, and I worked at both Riis Park, that I mentioned, and also at Coney Island. And one of the ironies is, one night, the end of July, I was sitting in my lifeguard chair at Coney Island, some kids came up to me and said there's, there's a dead boy over there, and it was that same jetty. And what I suspect happened is that kid did what I had done as a young person, walked out on the shallow side, climbed up on the jetty, and then jumped off on the deep side and was overcome. And by the time I got to him, he had been floating for a while apparently there, so we couldn't resuscitate him. Speaker 1: That was a tragic--how old-- Speaker 2: It, it-- Speaker 1: --were you you said? Speaker 2: I was about twenty. Speaker 1: Oh, twenty, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was a lifeguard. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, still that's--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's on my head, two dead bodies (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: At Coney Island. Story_ID: 176887 Speaker 1: So are there subjects that you're enjoying in school? Speaker 2: History and literature was my favorite subjects. I did well in most. Math was typically my weakest subject, but I did well. But history and literature, and I continue to favor those now in terms of the reading that I do. Story_ID: 176888 Speaker 1: Now you--you know, I--when you were talking about the--you know, being an Eagle Scout, that's really a big deal and, you know, it's sort of viewed as a badge of--well, it's viewed as a, no pun intended, you know, a badge of honor because you have to be disciplined and you have to collect, you know, and each badge represents-- Speaker 2: Merit badge, right. Speaker 1: Each merit badge-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --represents a new skill or, you know--I don't wanna say skill, but somewhat, you know, skill or-- Speaker 2: Skill, experience. Speaker 1: --experience. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and so how many--when you became an Eagle Scout, do you remember--was there a ceremony or? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there was a ceremony, but what was interesting is I did this as I was finishing high school [Boys High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] and going into college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and also my family moved, and I'll tell you about the move later, so I lost touch with everybody. And I didn't get my Eagle Scout badge until I was an adult. I was in my late twenties, early thirties by the time they caught up to me. I was at a wedding; one of my cousins was getting married. And a man at--who was another guest recognized me, said, "Are you Kenneth Standard?" So I said yes. He said, "You know we have--I thought that's who you were. We have this Eagle Scout badge. We've been trying to get to you for years now and we didn't know where to find you." So then as an adult I had to go through the ceremony, so my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] was there with me. Story_ID: 176889 Speaker 1: So why didn't you get--so where did you move and-- Speaker 2: Well, here's what happened. Speaker 1: And, and it happened when? Speaker 2: We got evicted. Speaker 1: You got--oh-- Speaker 2: We got evicted. Speaker 1: So what year did you get evicted? Speaker 2: We got evicted the week I was graduating from high school [Boys High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 2: And this is related to my sister. Speaker 1: Wait, I thought--now, let me just understand. I thought that in nine--like, 1942 was when your father [Byron Standard] got off welfare. Speaker 2: Right, right. And we moved to this apartment. It wasn't because of nonpayment of rent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were living in that same apartment, 133 MacDonough Street [Brooklyn, New York, New York], which by the way, MacDonough Street was the street Jackie Robinson lived on when he first came up to the Brooklyn Dodgers. But we were living on MacDonough Street and my sister, Muriel [Outlaw], had become divorced and was living with us at the time with her son, and the landlord said this was a violation of the lease. But the landlord wanted to get us out because we had a rent-controlled apartment, and if he got us out, then he could raise the rent substantially. So my sister actually had moved. She had gotten her own apartment, but the landlord brought the proceeding. We had an incompetent lawyer, according to my father, representing us, and he didn't introduce evidence that the landlord himself was in breach of the lease because the apartment was inhabitable, the vermin, the leaks, things of that sort. In any event, the week I'm graduating from high school, we're evicted and our stuff's put out on the street. And my aunt Dellie [ph.] to whom you've heard me make reference took in my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] and father. I had a summer job coming up at a Boy Scout camp, so I was covered for a while for part of the summer. But I was homeless until probably April of, of that year. So when I came home at Christmas, for example, I shuttled between sisters because there was no room at my aunt's house for me as well as my parents. Speaker 1: So this is really pretty traumatic for the family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean in the retelling, it sounds all common-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --matter of fact, but-- Speaker 2: No, no it was--it was pretty stressful. Speaker 1: It was--it was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was--'cause that happens to families-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --today and-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --sometimes they fall apart. Speaker 2: And particularly it's happening the week I'm graduating from high school (laughter) and then I'm going off to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I don't have a place to live. Yeah, it was traumatic. Speaker 1: Right. So you, you said you went with whom then? Speaker 2: I split time between my sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, who had places. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--when are--you said you were getting ready to graduate or you-- Speaker 2: It was my last week of high school. Speaker 1: So--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you graduated. Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated that week. We were evicted on Monday, I graduated on Thursday. Story_ID: 176890 Speaker 1: So where are you thinking you're going to college? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew where I was going. I'd been admitted to a number of colleges, and my plan was to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about--there just seems like a large reach here. Okay, so academic--you told me where you went to elementary school and you told me that-- Speaker 2: Well, I didn't tell you all about elementary school. We stopped at P.S. 47 [Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Okay. Speaker 2: And while I was at P.S. 47, we moved and we moved to Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York] and then I went to P.S. 44 [Marcus Garvey Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], which was a segregated school. It was probably 95 percent black and then the rest were maybe Puerto Rican, so there were no white students in the school, and the education was inferior. So my parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] being advised by my sisters who were school teachers, at least one was at the time, said you gotta get him outta there. He's getting a bad education and it's gonna damage his future. So there was a parochial school a block from our house, and they made a plan to move me to this parochial school in the middle of fifth grade. Fortunately, an intelligence test had been administered to all fourth and fifth graders in a number of the school districts in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and I had scored high enough on that test to qualify for what they called intellectually gifted children classes. So there was an intellectually gifted children's class that was being set up at a public school in Brooklyn for students from two school districts, so I don't know how many thousands of students were in these school districts, but those of us who passed the test were put in this new class, an experimental class. Speaker 1: Do you--do you know what, what the cutoff was for intellectually gifted-- Speaker 2: I don't know, but the range of IQ's [Intelligence Quotient] in my class I would say was from the mid to high 120's to the 160's in that class, so they were very smart-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --students. Speaker 1: And so where are you going when you go to this program of-- Speaker 2: Well, we went to a school called P.S. 45 [Horace E. Greene Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York], and for most of us, we had to take public transit to get there. It was not a neighborhood school. Speaker 1: Okay. So was this--this is junior high-- Speaker 2: This was-- Speaker 1: --and high school? Speaker 2: This was--no, in those days, we had two types of schools. You could go to an elementary school, certain elementary schools through the eighth grade and then go directly to a high school. Other elementary schools, you could only go to through the sixth grade and then you went into junior high for seventh, eight, and ninth, and then you went to high school. So the school that I was going to, we went through the eighth grade, so I stayed there through eighth grade, and upon graduation, then I went to Boys High School [Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Story_ID: 176891 Speaker 1: And Boys High School was located where? Speaker 2: That was located in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. It was probably half black, half white as well as--I don't think we had any Asians, but we had some Hispanics-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in there. Speaker 1: And what was Boys--what was Boys High--what was it known for and-- Speaker 2: It wasn't known for academics then. Speaker 1: It was-- Speaker 2: It had been known earlier, but we did have an honors program there, and I went into the honors program from the beginning because of where I'd come from. Speaker 1: Okay, so how many African Americans in your honors program? Speaker 2: I think there were two others. Yeah, two others and I, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And how did you do? Speaker 2: I did pretty well. I think--well, I'll tell you a story. The New York State used to have a very limited state scholarship program, and there was a competitive exam like a College Board exam. And out of the graduating class, probably we had four hundred or so in the graduating class, and I was the only one from Brooklyn [New York, New York] to win a state scholarship. There was another fellow who had been at Brooklyn but had relocated at Queens [New York, New York], he won a state scholarship. Neither of us it turns out was able to use the scholarship because it's only available if you go to college in New York State. He and I both had applied to Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and been admitted. His father was an--he was white, his father was an M.D. who had lived in Brooklyn but had moved to Queens in the meantime, kept his office in Brooklyn, so he drove his son in every day, and he continued at Boys High School until graduation. And so he and I both won these scholarships, which we couldn't use, but we both got admitted to Harvard College and we both graduated from Harvard College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, how did I think of Harvard College? Because everybody knows about Harvard. Even my parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] knew about Harvard. My sisters, the two older sisters, Muriel [Standard Outlaw] who worked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Phyllis [Standard Johnson], they both encouraged me to aspire high and why not go for the best? Story_ID: 176892 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--you're graduating in-- Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], so this is the landmark case of Brown versus Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954]. Speaker 2: May of that year. Speaker 1: Right. And you--this is also a time, I think, I think, that these institutions, these northern Ivy League institutions have quotas, whether they're unofficial or not. It used to be like two to a class. But what is the Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] that you come into (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well let me tell you another setback I had. I had taken and passed a, a test for [U.S.] Naval ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. The Naval ROTC program was the best ROTC program because it gave you a full four-year scholarship, all of your expenses, your tuition, your room and board, everything was covered. You didn't need a summer job because you had to take a cruise in the summer and you got paid for being on the cruise. So I had passed that test. I scored very well on the college boards also. And so I went for my physical. Well, first of all, when the notice came that I had passed, I noticed it had listed me as Caucasian on the congratulatory letter. So when I went in, the first thing they did is they took the letter from me, crossed that out, and put Negroid on it. So I went, took the physical, and I never heard from the [U.S.] Navy after that. So I'm waiting to get my notification about my appointment to the NROTC program, and I never heard. And I went to my congresswoman to try to find out what was going on, got absolutely no information. So I had to then scramble around to try to find money to go 'cause I had been counting on this, and I was fortunate. I was able to get nine hundred dollars and two scholarships. And my sister, Phyllis [Johnson], the older of the two school teachers, agreed to lend me some other money, maybe five hundred or six hundred dollars a year. My father [Byron Standard] said he'd put up the rest and, of course, I, I always had part-time jobs and, and the like. I worked as an usher. I worked at a--as a porter in a department store. I had a variety of after-school jobs. And so I went off to college. So I was homeless and didn't have any steady source of funding, didn't have the source of funding I thought I would have. Story_ID: 176893 Speaker 1: So how many--when you get to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], how many-- Speaker 2: Blacks? Speaker 1: How many blacks and how many--so you really self-funded this-- Speaker 2: The first year, yeah. Speaker 1: The first year of school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, I had a scholarship from the [National] Urban League-- Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the nine-- Speaker 2: --and from something called the--it, it was about five hundred dollars and a scholarship from something called the Howard Orphanage [Howard Orphanage and Industrial School, later, Howard Memorial Fund, Long Island, New York], and that was about four hundred dollars. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the rest was family funded or my savings from my part-time and--jobs, and summer jobs, and so on. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you go up there. Have you been up there at that point or you go up sight unseen? Speaker 2: Sight unseen. I had seen photographs only. Speaker 1: Okay. Are you really-- Speaker 2: We couldn't afford to go visit (laughter). Speaker 1: I know, same here (unclear) but I was just asking for purposes of--it happened to me (unclear) many years later. I'm sight unseen in my school. So when you get there, are you--so there's literature. Does literature come to you and you're reading about it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so when you get there--I mean, can I ask you about the discussion in the family about this entrance into Harvard? Speaker 2: Well, my, my family obviously is very excited, very proud that they had a son--you know, as I said, my father [Byron Standard] had very limited education and my mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] maybe the equivalent of a high school education, so they were very proud. Speaker 1: So--'cause this is a big deal. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a big deal. Speaker 1: So you go-- Speaker 2: I mean, it's a big deal for any family, but for somebody from our circumstances-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So you go and you've got your little suitcase or trunk? Speaker 1: Well, both. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The trunk had been shipped up and I had a suitcase with me. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My father went with me to Grand Central Terminal [New York, New York] on the subway and then I got on the train and went on up there. Speaker 2: And so that's a whole new world that was on the other side-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of that train station. Speaker 1: That was the longest distance I'd ever been away from home. Previously, my longest trip had been to go to camp, one hundred miles. Speaker 2: So who was your roommate? Who are you assigned-- Speaker 1: Well, they sent me a notice in the summer saying, do you have any objection to rooming with white students? And I said-- Speaker 2: Oh, they did say that? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and I said I had no objection. Harvard had had residential segregation before that. The black students either lived alone or with other--another black student, and in 1954, they ended that practice. There had been demonstrations on campus and so on by black and white students. So when I went there, it was the first year that there was no residential segregation on campus. So I had--we had such a setup in our dormitory, freshman all live in the, the [Harvard] Yard, and you live in dormitories. And there were two, two suites, and we were connected by a common bathroom, so the six of us shared this bathroom. So there were three guys living on the left side of the hall and three of us living on the white--on the right. And I had a white guy from Iowa and a white guy from upstate New York, and the other side--well, everybody's white unless I mention. There was a guy from Ohio, and another guy from upstate New York, and another guy from New Jersey, from southern New Jersey. Speaker 2: So, five whites and yourself? Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Okay, so how did that go? Speaker 1: It went fine. Speaker 2: It did? Speaker 1: Yeah, it went fine. Yeah, we didn't have any problems. Speaker 2: There were no problems? Speaker 1: No, no problems. Yeah, yeah. The white guy from southern New Jersey and I later roomed together sophomore year until he got-- Speaker 2: His name? Speaker 1: Floyd Engel [ph.]. He got thrown out for academic deficiency. He, he had trouble studying. I mean, I was not close to anybody except Floyd, but we, we got along. Speaker 2: Okay. So how many are in your class? Speaker 1: About 1200. Speaker 2: No, no, no-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: I--okay. Speaker 1: Blacks? Speaker 2: Blacks. Speaker 1: Oh, about eleven or so. Speaker 2: Oh, so it was a lot, okay. Speaker 1: That was a record. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, you know, I interviewed someone, but I'm--do you know [HM] George Jones? But I think he came later. He came--I don't know--he, he came later. He came later. He's admitted 1958 and there were nineteen. But see, he-- Speaker 1: So he's admitted the year I'm graduating. Speaker 2: Yes, and see, he said that was the largest number that they had ever admitted at one time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, so--but it's--okay, 'cause, you know, there--earlier, there were--it would almost be at a lot of the Ivy Leagues there were maybe two spots. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was-- Speaker 2: Historically. Speaker 1: Yeah, there were I would say between two and four at Harvard College [sic], yeah. There was a guy by the name of John Monro who later went on to become the president of a black college, I think Spelman [sic, Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama] white man, John Usher Monro. But he was very involved in helping the black students get in and adjust to the college environment. He was my advisor-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --when I was there. Speaker 2: So he was there-- Speaker 1: He-- Speaker 2: --at the time. Speaker 1: --he was there. He was--he might've been dean of admissions, I'm not sure-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at that time. Story_ID: 176894 Speaker 1: So you get there [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but these six, can you tell me their backgrounds particularly? Speaker 2: Which, which six are you referring to? Speaker 1: I mean the five that are your suitemates. Speaker 2: Oh, my roommates? Speaker 1: Yeah, roommates or-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Rick Tawn [ph.], he was the guy from upstate New York, his family is primarily working class, working class whites from the Schenectady [New York] area. Cliff Calhoun [ph.] was from, I think, Burlington, Iowa, or it might've been Iowa City [Iowa], I'm not sure. His father was a lawyer, former district attorney and so on, so he was an upper middle class family. Across the hall, Floyd Engel [ph.], the guy who later became my roommate, his family owned a farm in southern New Jersey. Stewart Hussey [ph.] was from Cincinnati [Ohio]. He was a Christian Scientist and his father was an executive with Procter & Gamble, so upper middle class. John Chaple [ph.] was from Elmira, New York, and lower middle class family. He was in--he had one of those scholarships in the NROTC [Naval Reserve Officers' Training Corps] that I thought I had too, so he got his four years paid for. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And then he served three years in, I think it was the [U.S.] Marine Corps afterwards and then went to graduate school. Story_ID: 176895 Speaker 1: So do you remember your first day there when you're meeting everyone and what actually happened? Speaker 2: Well--yeah, well I remember that was when I started to be called Ken instead of Kenny. I was always Kenny when I was in elementary school and high school [Boys High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], but Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] people called me Ken or the coach of the swim team called me Stan, so some people from the swim team used to call me Stan. It was different. I really can't remember any particular emotions. I'm sure I must've had some apprehensions during that week. Everybody's apprehensive. You're making a big transition like that, but I knew I was smart and I'd, I'd been with smart kids from--for most of my elementary career and then in high school, so I figured I could compete. I knew I did very well on the [U.S.] Navy ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] test obviously, on the college boards obviously, so I figured, I, I could compete here and, and I'll manage. Speaker 1: And so what--so in the classes, I'm talking about also the culture of the place and, and sort of getting used to that. That's one thing being smart, but there--you know, there's a different culture in a--you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --an Ivy League school like that, so what, what are you--what, you know, do you remember any of your professors? Do you remember-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sure. And all the guys I was with on that floor, we were all high school guys, no prep school guys. We had guys living on the other floors below us, a number of them were prep school; most of them probably were prep school down, down below. Because it was half prep school and half public high school in that era. And the prep school people had their own social--for example, they had their own clubs. They have something called Final Clubs there that one is eligible to join as a sophomore, and I didn't get any invitations. They, they called them punches and they'd invite you to a punch, to a cocktail party to see if you're--would be a good fit for the clubs. I didn't get invited but I couldn't have afforded to join one of those clubs anyway even if I had been invited. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the club invitations, wouldn't they--weren't, weren't they more--you said sophomore. Speaker 2: Well, you're--you were able to join as a sophomore so you start getting the invitations as a freshman. Speaker 1: Okay, I see. I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know why I was thinking-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it was junior year--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you might be getting them sophomore year, but anyway-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --as a sophomore, you're eligible to join. Speaker 1: Does Skull--no, no, I think it's at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] that it's Skull and Bones. Speaker 2: The--that's one of the secret societies at Yale. Speaker 1: Right, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 176896 Speaker 1: So how do you do that first year [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I did fine. I was in the middle of my class, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And so what is your--so what are you learning about yourself, though, in the whole sort of-- Speaker 2: I'm learning I can compete at, at this level, that they're not going to--I'm gonna survive this place. Speaker 1: And (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And, and I liked it. I, I formed--well, you can see, I have friendships from-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --back that era still. My best man, my children's godfathers, all friends from-- Speaker 1: From, from that time. Speaker 2: --from, from that era, yeah. People I've been best man to, you know, from that era. Of course, I still have friends from elementary school still, too. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so what, what--so who are some of your teachers? Speaker 2: I can't--really can't remember. Speaker 1: You don't remember, okay. We-- Speaker 2: I can't remember-- Speaker 1: We don't need to-- Speaker 2: --all the--yeah. Speaker 1: We--you know, we don't need to worry about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so where, where-- Speaker 2: Some of them I can, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Summers, are you going back home? Speaker 2: Summers, I'm coming back home. The first summer, I think I worked in Boy Scout camp part of the summer and then my next two summers, I worked as a lifeguard. Second-- Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, and, and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that was the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the incidents were. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 176897 Speaker 1: How are you financing the rest of your college? Speaker 2: Well, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] then started giving me a scholarship and loans, and whatever they didn't--they--'cause it wasn't full, between my earnings in the summers, my sister lending me money, and my father [Byron Standard] giving me my weekly allowance, I was able to get through. So I had debts I had to pay off. I had school loans I had to pay off years later and I also had to pay off my sister years later as well. And that's the same way I got through law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], scholarship, grants, and loans. Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 176898 Speaker 1: So what else do you think was significant about your experience, you know, in undergraduate school? And are there--at this--answer that question and then I'm-- Speaker 2: What--say it again? Speaker 1: What was significant about your experience? Speaker 2: Well, I loved the place. I, I didn't love Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]; I hated Harvard Law School, but I loved Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I made good friends both places, but I made more good friends at Harvard College. Speaker 1: At the college, okay. Speaker 2: And it, it was a wonderful experience and I just wish my children and grandchildren could have-- Speaker 1: Could have that. Speaker 2: --a similarly happy experience. I mean, it didn't mean I didn't have to work. I had to work very hard to keep pace, but that's good for us. We need that. Speaker 1: That's right. And do you think that--you know, 'cause a lot of the college experience is also, I think it's an acculturation process. You know, you're learning a world outside of the world that you grew up in. You're--you know, it's, it's a--I think it's a lovely time in one's life even if you're working hard. So how did you change, though? That's what--because there is a change that happens in those four years. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I developed more self-confidence. I developed more social skills because I was exposed to a wider range of people and to very sophisticated people, both the faculty and, and the students, and people who had experiences very different from mine, people who traveled widely in this country, traveled overseas. You know, I had done very little traveling; all I'd done was read. And these are people who had seen places. And people with lots of money like The Aga Kahn [Prince Shah Karim Al Hussaini, Aga Khan IV] was one of my classmates, John [Jay] Rockefeller, the senator from West Virginia, was one of my classmates, John Winthrop, descendent of the original Plymouth Rock Americans, classmates, so people like that. Yeah, and you, you learn that you can compete with them. Speaker 1: And did you-- Speaker 2: I mean, you can compete with them on one level. They obviously have an advantage 'cause they got-- Speaker 1: They've got-- Speaker 2: --a lot better connections-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and a lot more money. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Story_ID: 176899 Speaker 1: Now is--did you pick up playing squash, you know at undergraduate school? Speaker 2: I started but I didn't play much because I was trying--I'm a very bad athlete but enthusia--I got cut from the crew at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I cut from the basketball team. I was the slowest swimmer on the swim team. But I kept trying. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I didn't really pick up squash 'til I came to New York [City]-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --and joined-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I-- Speaker 2: --joined a--joined the Harvard Club. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I saw that you had-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --been playing and so-- Speaker 2: Joined, joined the Harvard Club. Speaker 1: Okay. I, I-- Speaker 2: So I started playing it in the Harvard Club. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I, I said, well, he must've began back then, you know. Speaker 2: No, because I was doing other things then so-- Speaker 1: Right. No, I understand-- Speaker 2: --I didn't really have squash. Speaker 1: --you were studying. Speaker 2: No, I don't mean studying, but I was trying other sports-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so on. Story_ID: 176900 Speaker 1: When do you meet your wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard]? Speaker 2: Well, it's the luckiest thing ever happened to me. One of my friends, [HM] Charles Hobson--I had just broken up with a girl my--it was my senior year in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I had another disappointment with the seagoing service. I had passed a test for a [U.S.] Coast Guard Reserve Officer's Program. Speaker 1: And this is in your senior year. Speaker 2: In my senior year because we had a draft obligation then. So what--I knew I wanted to go to law school, but I wanted to get my [U.S.] Military out of the way, and this was a great program. It was four months of officer's candidate school, six months of active duty, and then reserve. So I passed this test, went down and passed a physical. And there were three classes that would be started in the year--starting from September '58 [1958] and so I figured I'll get into one of those three classes. I had been admitted to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the meantime, and I told the law school I wanted to defer my registration and get my Military out of the way, so they agreed to defer my admission. And I figured I would go into one of these three classes. So I'm down in New York [City] in June of '58 [1958] and I broke up with this girl I had been dating my senior year in, in college and Charles Hobson knew it, and he said, oh, I know somebody I think you might like and she might like you. So he introduced me to my wife, Valerie. We met one evening. We all went to a party together and then she and I started dating. In the meantime, I didn't get called for the September class and what you had to do is say, do you want to go in the next class? So I said, yes, I want to go in the next class, which I think was starting in January. And I didn't called from the class in January either, and Valerie and I spending more and more time together, and, and then by January I didn't called, so I said, well I'll go in May. And then I guess it must've been April and I didn't get called for the May class, and they said we'll give you an option. If you want to sign up for three years, you can go in September. So I didn't wanna sign up for three years, so I turned that down. Meantime, Valerie and I had fallen in love and decided, well we had wanted to get married to each other. And we were concerned about our families because of the economics, our ages, and so on, and the fact we had only known each other about seven or eight months at that time. So we decided to elope, so that's what we did. We got married secretly. And when I went away to law school in the fall, she then told her mom that we were--had married. Her mom fortunately always had like me, she liked me from the very beginning. And she thought that I would be a good husband for her daughter, so she was upset but she wasn't that upset. So she allowed Valerie to come up to, to--like once a month or so, spend the weekend with me, 'cause she was the power in the family. And then we figured that we would work--remember, I'm getting money from my parents, my father's [Byron Standard] and from my sister and so on, so we had to get all them to buy into this thing because there was no way I could survive without their support. Valerie obviously would get a job and, and work. So that's what we did. We worked on them and got them to agree. And so then we had a church wedding thirteen months after our, our civil ceremony. Speaker 1: Now tell me, were they upset--anyone upset that you-- Speaker 2: They never found out until our fortieth anniversary. Speaker 1: They never found out that you had eloped? Speaker 2: No, no. The only one who knew was my mother-in-law. Nobody else ever knew. We kept that secret from everybody. I mean, a couple of my roommates knew and so on, but it was secret. So at our fortieth wedding anniversary party, I announced it. And what's ironic is, Valerie and my older son had done the same thing. He and his wife had eloped. They got married in Las Vegas [Nevada] and we found out. They didn't know we had done that (laughter), so they were stunned (laughter). Speaker 1: Wait a minute, both, both father and son? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). And both daughter-in-law and mother-in-law (laughter). Story_ID: 176901 Speaker 1: So now how had you--so tell me about your wife, Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard], though-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and her background. Speaker 2: Valerie's family's back--background is very similar to mine. Her parents were immigrants from St. Lucia in the West Indies and they moved to Manhattan [New York, New York] when they came to this country. I don't think they knew each other on the islands but I'm, I'm not sure. Her parents might've known each other there, but they got married in this country from what I understand. And they had two children, and Valerie was the younger of the two. She has a brother who is eighteen months older. And it was really destiny that we met at that time because she would've been too young. She was eighteen, I was twenty-one when we met, so if we had met years later--earlier, I'm saying, it would've--she would've been too young for me probably. But she also lived only a ten or twelve minute walk from my house, so it was easy for me to go and spend time with her, and so--and, as I said, her mother liked me from the very beginning. The parents liked each other when they eventually met and I think maybe because they shared that cultural background of coming from the islands even though they were different islands, that might've been helpful in the process. I don't know, I'm just speculating. But we had a happy, very happy marriage. Speaker 1: That's nice. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause you were married, how many years? Speaker 2: Well, when she died, it was about fifty-two and a half, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 176902 Speaker 1: So you're there as newlyweds and--you know, and you've-- Speaker 2: You mean after law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 1: No--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you've gotten into--now did you--so this whole deferment thing. I--you never explained that. You kept saying it had gotten delayed, so-- Speaker 2: Which are you referring to? Speaker 1: The deferment to get out of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, you mean the [U.S.] Coast Guard, you're talking about? Speaker 1: The Coast Guard, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, well I'm saying, there were three classes that were to start. Each of these classes took four months. These were classes at the Coast Guard--[United States] Coast Guard Academy [New London, Connecticut] for people who wanted to become reserve officers in the Coast Guard. Speaker 1: So, but did that ever materialize? That's what-- Speaker 2: No, well after the, the third time-- Speaker 1: Time. Speaker 2: --they, they didn't call me, then we got married and I said forget it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I'll deal with this. I'll just do my service after law school then. Speaker 1: Oh, so--okay. I got you. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So I was going to do my service after law school. I was going to go in [U.S.] Marine Corps JAG [judge advocate general] once I graduated, but before I signed the papers, the final papers--you know, I'd gone down to inquire and we had an unexpected pregnancy my last year of law school. So then my daughter, Alison, was born, in February of my last year of law school, so that ended the need to deal with the [U.S.] Military service. Speaker 1: Oh, so-- Speaker 2: Fathers, fathers were exempt from the draft. Speaker 1: Oh, that's nice. Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Things just worked out that way. Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 176903 Speaker 1: Where were you living in Cambridge [Massachusetts]? Were--was she-- Speaker 2: Well, my first year I lived in a dormitory because I wasn't officially married. Speaker 1: So what dormitory? Speaker 2: Hastings Hall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hastings Hall, which is on Mass [Massachusetts] Avenue. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then my second and third year, we lived in married student housing, Holden Green, which was about a fifteen or twenty minute walk to, to campus. Speaker 1: So had you--so you said law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was a different experience. Speaker 2: Different experience. It was a gratuitously hostile environment for most students, probably not for [Harvard] Law Review, but for just about everybody else. And the professors, many of them, not all of them, but many of them just felt they had to beat up on the students to toughen us up. I didn't think that was necessary, but that's the way it was. And it was a very competitive, very competitive environment 'cause if you didn't make law review, you know, you really didn't count for much. And there were 550 or 560 students in the class, and out of that group, maybe twenty would make law review, if that much. Speaker 1: You're saying, gosh, by the time I got there, it had grown tremendously. There were only five hundred and-- Speaker 2: Per class. Speaker 1: Per--oh, now that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --probably true-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --because we had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --four sections, 140. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Per class. Speaker 1: It's the same thing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: What year did you graduate? Speaker 1: I graduated in 1980, so I'm-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --coming up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --much later-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --than you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, but so, so what--when you--so who were your professors, like even--do you remember? Speaker 2: [Martha] Field, Field for civil procedure, [Robert] Keeton for torts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Redmack [ph.] for property, bad teacher, [Lon L.] Fuller for contracts. Speaker 1: Fuller, okay. Speaker 2: What else did we have freshman year? Speaker 1: Criminal law? Did you have criminal law? Speaker 2: We had a, a British visiting professor who wasn't particularly good. Did I miss anything? Speaker 1: Torts, did you do torts? Speaker 2: Keeton was torts. Speaker 1: Of course, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, civil-- Speaker 1: Property? You did property? Speaker 2: Property with Redmack. Speaker 1: Okay, Redmack, okay. Speaker 2: Whom I-- Speaker 1: No, that--that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Contracts, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's it. Civil procedure, that's it. Story_ID: 176904 Speaker 1: How many other black students now at this point [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: There were three in the class, so out of the 560, there were three of us, yeah. And after the first year, I was the only one. The other two guys didn't come back, so it was me. Speaker 1: So do you remember the other two? Their names? Speaker 2: John--I think John Harper [ph.] was one. He was--he came from South Carolina. I can't remember the other guy. He came from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. I can't remember his name now. Speaker 1: So they were like, we're out of here. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if they were--decided or if the-- Speaker 1: Or the school decided. Speaker 2: --law school decided. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: But in any event, they didn't come back. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And I was just thinking that my experience at Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: May have-- Speaker 2: --probably made the difference. I mean, I was used to being in a small minority. I was used to the academic competition, which they might not have had, you know, at Howard or whatever his, his college was in South Carolina, I forget, one of the black colleges down there. Speaker 1: It does because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --even, I mean, I--have you been back for the black law school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been back-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a couple times, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you know, there are people--I mean, people I knew-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were like, I never thought I would step foot on this campus-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --again. You know, they found it-- Speaker 2: Well, that's how I first went to a reunion. I never went to a class reunion, and I went to the black alumni-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --reunions. I now--I went back last year for my first law school reunion, that was a general year, and I went back to the fiftieth, 'cause I just hated the place and the environment. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 176905 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, I mean, to share some of your experiences, though, you know, in class or with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --some of the professors, the--would give an indication of some-- Speaker 2: Well, let me just say something, both at the college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I never felt any discriminatory animus from any of the professors. I didn't feel that I was treated differently from the other students because of race or color. I just think they treated us all pretty badly (laughter) in the law school, not all of the professors. I mean, [Robert] Keeton was a very decent guy, [Martha] Field, very decent, [Lon L.] Fuller, very decent guy. Speaker 1: Do you--were, were you ever all--were, were you always identified as black? Do you think people-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure. Speaker 1: --or--there was no confusion. Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think there was any confusion. Speaker 1: Okay. So--just had to ask that because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, now that's an interesting statement because if you talk to women-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --from that period-- Speaker 2: Different issue. Speaker 1: --or even later-- Speaker 2: Different issue. Speaker 1: --they do not say that at all. Speaker 2: Yeah, different issue. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at all. I would say-- Speaker 2: And I would say only certain professors. I don't--I don't recall any of the ones I mentioned ever treating the girls differently from the boys. I think the female and the male students were treated the same by the professors I mentioned. I've heard stories of other professors, for example, having things like ladies day and so--we had, had no ladies day in any of the classes I was in, but I have heard that some of the professors did things like that. Story_ID: 176906 Speaker 1: So tell me, given that those two things didn't happen, you have to then give examples, two or three-- Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: --of the animus, the competitiveness, the hostile--you almost describe it--you didn't--I don't think you used the term, but sort of hostile, competitive environment [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You have to give some-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --examples. Speaker 2: I think some of the professors humiliated students in class and-- Speaker 1: Like how? Speaker 2: Just if they didn't answer appropriately, and I'm not saying all the professors but I, I think they could denigrate the students who weren't prepared, let's put it like that, which may have been good. But I, I, I just think the culture there, and I think it has changed now in recent years, but it was to--that you had to really--it's like the [U.S.] Marine Corps. You gotta get 'em at boot--at boot camp and you gotta toughen them up for the practice of law, and I really don't think there's a need. I think you can be more supportive. And I'll give you an example of gratuitous brutality. Your whole career depends on a four-hour examination at the end of the year. Why don't we give multiple exams during the year? Let people know how they're doing, what they need to address. Why have it all depend on this exam at the end of the year and put so much pressure on people? I don't think it's necessary to put that pressure on people for them to become good lawyers. Speaker 1: Well, you know--well, that still existed-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when I was there. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, I mean-- Speaker 2: And I think that's-- Speaker 1: --because I remember thinking, oh my God, my whole--my whole year is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --gonna go down-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the drain-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --but that's the same thing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the bar exam-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, but the bar exam, at least you only had to take it once (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Okay, that's true. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Or you hope you only have to take it once. Speaker 1: That was--I was like praying. I don't even know how I--anyway, but that just--so but what I'm saying, I don't know--you're talking about--I think what you're saying is that in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you experienced a collegial learning environment, and in law school, the learning became competitive and somewhat hostile and, you know, hard in a way. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Is that what you're-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --talking about? Speaker 2: That, that we gotta toughen these people up. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Because it's a tough world out there and I--and I think other law schools--I think Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], for example, had a very different culture. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Okay. Speaker 2: But and I just think we could've had that, too-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at Harvard and I think it is more like that now-- Speaker 1: I think it-- Speaker 2: --than it used to be. Speaker 1: I think it's more like that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but I didn't--okay, it wasn't--I don't know. Story_ID: 176907 Speaker 1: You were the only one in in your class? Speaker 2: For the last two years, yes. Speaker 1: So who else was in your--at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that is black, in the classes above or below you? I mean-- Speaker 2: There was a guy, Reagan Henry [ph.], I think was a class or two ahead of me. He became a successful entrepreneur down in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And there was a guy, Tex, I think his last name--I think it was Herman ["Tex"] Wilson, Tex Wilson; I think he was a year or two ahead of me. Those were the only two blacks I can remember ahead of me. Julie Wilson I think was a, a year or two behind--no, I think maybe two years behind me into law school. And there were some--in the LL--LL.M. [Master of Laws] program, there were a number of Africans and so on 'cause I-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I used to run into--you know--you know, we'd eat together sometimes-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in Harkness Commons. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So I got to know a few of the graduate-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: -- students. Speaker 1: So do you think that it helped that you were married? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. As my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] would (unclear) say, yes. It really helped me, particularly when she was living with me the last two years. Yeah, to deal with that-- Speaker 1: Because it provided a balance-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was that it? Speaker 2: A social life-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and somebody I could talk to about intimate things. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Share things and I--yes, it, it was a big-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --big help for me. Speaker 1: Because you don't have--I mean, there are no--I mean, you had I think really--you know, we had other black students. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't have a support group. Speaker 1: You know, not to say that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's all your friends-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you--we had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I had female friends and black friends and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --African friends-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, so I'm just, you know-- Speaker 2: No, it was a--it was a big help, particularly since I didn't like my roommate, the roommate I had. He's the only roommate I, I didn't like. Speaker 1: So now, who, who was-- Speaker 2: It was the roommate I had--I don't wanna mention his name. Speaker 1: Okay, I know but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But where was he from? Speaker 2: Oh, he was from Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], too. He was a year or two older than I. His father was a lawyer, so he's a upper middle class, yeah. Speaker 1: So was, was it the way he treated-- Speaker 2: Personality. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was just personality--our personalities didn't-- Speaker 1: Didn't, didn't-- Speaker 2: --mesh with each other. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 176908 Speaker 1: What kind of law are you interested in practicing? Speaker 2: Law--well, I've practiced in so many areas already. My-- Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, but when you're in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Oh, when-- Speaker 1: --what are you thinking-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --you wanted to-- Speaker 2: I didn't have a clue. I didn't have a clue. Speaker 1: But there's a lot of things going on at that time related to the law. I mean, civil rights and Thurgood Marshall and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund. You know, there are a lot of-- Speaker 2: You know what I said when I'm in law school? I said somebody's gonna pay for this pain. Somebody is going to pay for this pain I'm, I'm going through here. I didn't care who it was, but somebody was going to pay for all the suffering that law school entails. I said I deserve to be well paid for this hell (laughter). Speaker 1: So, when, when you (laughter)-- Speaker 2: So I didn't have any grand philosophical dream; I was gonna get out and change the world. I just wanted to inflict some (laughter), some pain on somebody else by making the person pay for what I'd had to suffer for three years (laughter). Speaker 1: So (laughter), so when do--what do--where do--what do you do between your first and second year? Speaker 2: I did odd jobs up there to try to make a living. My wife, Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard], got a job at The Coop [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. She worked in the office at The Coop as--in some kind of clerical capacity. I got something, you know, odd jobs through the Harvard Student Agency, and I think I did some research for some professors, and I worked also in--I think it was between my first and second year, in the office. Mrs. Peggy Quinn [ph.] was it? She was one of the administrators and, and I had a job doing seating charts and other odds and end clerical jobs. Speaker 1: Okay, and then what about between your second and third year? Speaker 2: I think that was more doing the odd jobs for the Harvard Student Agencies, gardening, window washing, things of that sort. Speaker 1: So how is recruitment done at the time that you're there? Speaker 2: When you got back your third year in September, either September or early October, law firms would come up and start interviewing. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So I went to a number of law firm interviews. I didn't get any responses-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --from the law firms. I didn't expect to, really. Speaker 1: So then I went to the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] and they made me an offer for the honors program, so that's what I did. Speaker 2: Oh, for the honors-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: So describe the honors program. Speaker 1: The honors program allowed you if--you know, you had certain grades and certain law school background, you went in at two federal grades higher. You went as a GS-7 [General Schedule] instead of a GS-5 from my recollection, so you got maybe one thousand dollars more a year extra as opposed to a regular hire. But a number of federal agencies had this honors program. Story_ID: 176909 Speaker 1: You know, another one of things before I wanna ask you, because you received your LL.B. [Bachelor of Laws] and I was reading an interesting thing about--'cause I was like, LL.B.? No, the LL.M [Master of Laws]. You know, and then I read this interesting thing about J.D. [Doctor of Law] versus LL.B.-- Speaker 2: Same thing. Speaker 1: Right, it's the same thing, but around this time, it was changing. Speaker 2: Yeah, it changed in the '70s [1970s] I would say because people were--some people were saying that it's really a graduate degree; it should be a doctorate not a bachelor's degree and in certain civil service settings, people who have an LL.B. are at a disadvantage to people who have no more education or even less education-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --but they may have a doctorate. And so some schools started giving a J.D. and then Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], finally--you know, they're always the most conservative--it decided to switch to the J.D. I got a letter saying do you want to change your degree from an LL.B. to J.D., we'll send you a new--I said forget it. I don't need it. I know what I went through for it and people don't understand the difference, that's their problem. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 176910 Speaker 1: Now, Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] gets pregnant. Your daughter is born your last-- Speaker 2: Right, February 26th, my senior year. Speaker 1: You got a newborn and you're-- Speaker 2: Yep. Yep. Speaker 1: And you have the sitting for the bar exam too? Speaker 2: Yep, and the newborn was born with a birth defect also. She had something called pyloric stenosis, which is a--the pylorus connects the stomachs to the--the stomach to the intestines, and some children are born with that being too narrow, so the food cannot pass from the stomach into the intestines and out the body, so they have something called projectile vomiting. So we noticed our little girl is vomiting and fortunately, we have a Dr. Spock. Because after we took her to the pediatrician, the pediatrician did not diagnose what was wrong with her. So we consulted Dr. Spock, which my--I think my sister, Muriel [Outlaw], had given us as a present for her birth, and so we diagnosed what she had and we went and told the doctor and then he examined and he said, yes you're right, and she's gotta be operated on, but we have to wait until she's six weeks old because we cannot give her anesthesia until then. She needs anesthesia; it's a major surgery. So we had this stress on us. And so after six weeks, we took her down to Floating Hospital [for Children]; that's the Tufts Medical School Hospital in Boston [Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. She was in there for about five days. She got her surgery and made a full recovery. Story_ID: 176911 Speaker 1: I mean, it's going from one thing to the other so that--and so--and then graduation. Do you remember your day of graduation? Speaker 2: I didn't go to graduation from law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Now you graduated in 1958-- Speaker 2: Eight from the college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I went to graduation from the college. I didn't hang around for the graduation from the law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One's the economic situation, I would have to pay rent for another two weeks up there. My parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] had already been to my college graduation. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I figured they--they're not gonna complain. So we just drove back to New York [City]. [HM] Charles Hobson--yeah, he helped us move, move some-- Speaker 1: Oh, so you, you have a good-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --friendship. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: A long-term-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --friendship. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did you meet him? Speaker 2: High school. We met in high school [Boys High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: High school, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. We, we lived--I lived at MacDonough Street [Brooklyn, New York, New York]; he lived in Hancock Street [Brooklyn, New York, New York] that--two blocks north and south and then he was about a block and a half west of me. Speaker 1: And was he always a creative person back then, not then so much? Speaker 2: He was imaginative-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I would say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was always imaginative, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So you--so you start at the, the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange and Commission] in New York, right? Speaker 2: Yes, in August of '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. After you-- Speaker 2: I didn't start work until I finished the bar exam, so I was just studying for the bar exam; that's all I did, just study for the bar exam. In fact, Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] and I lived apart during the week then. She stayed with her family, I stayed with my family so I could devote my time to, to studying. Speaker 1: That, that was smart. But let me ask you this, what was the New York bar back then? Was it the same or--because the--you know, it has a very low passage rate. Speaker 2: Passage. Yeah, I knew it was an intimidating experience, so I figured if I can get through Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I can get this bar exam and I don't want it to be known that I didn't pass it the first time, so I'm going to do whatever it takes, and so I really was thoroughly prepared. When I got there, I found it very easy. Speaker 1: You-- Speaker 2: I found it very easy. Speaker 1: No was, was your bar exam, was it essays only or did you have the-- Speaker 2: We had everything. We didn't have the multiple--the multistate. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There was no multistate then. We had a-- Speaker 1: Oh, that was-- Speaker 2: It was eight hours the first day I think and five hours the second day, and we got it at--Fordham Law School [Fordham University School of Law, New York, New York] was a new facility then up at Lincoln Center [Metro stop], and that's where I took mine, at Fordham. And I took a bar review course six days a week, and I just studied. I didn't socialize at all. No socializing for me. That's just-- Speaker 1: And then when, when you got notice, did the notice come in the mail or did you-- Speaker 2: No, we were told that we could call, I think, the day that the results were out. Because I was working at the SEC and I remember somebody said, call this number. And I remember there was one guy who didn't pass. There was a group of maybe five or six of us who had started at the SEC, and everybody passed except this one guy, John [ph.], who I won't mention his last name. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176912 Speaker 1: So you actually--with the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], what are the--what's your position there and what are the issues that you are dealing with? Speaker 2: Enforcement attorney, and I hadn't been admitted to the bar, so what I could do was limited. I got admitted December 26 of that year [1962] and I went to the swearing in ceremony by myself. The reason I went by myself was Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] was working in the post office for Christmas. The post office used to hire people on a temporary basis in, in those years to work with--help with the Christmas mail load, and so she had gotten a job for about two weeks in the post office, and she had to work on December 26, so we--and she was working downtown Brooklyn [New York, New York] where I was getting sworn in, so we rode down on the train together and she went to the post office to work, I went to get sworn in (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. You mean, the day after Christmas they were swearing people in? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That seems odd to me. So what was--you worked there how long? Speaker 2: And I wanna get sworn in right away because once I got sworn in, I got a promotion at the SEC, and I got about one thousand dollar raise, so I wasn't going to delay that happening. Speaker 1: So what was your salary starting out? Speaker 2: So, I think I went from about 5500 to about 6500 [dollars] (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and what--you worked there for five years? Speaker 2: At the SEC? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No, very brief period of time. Speaker 1: Very brief period. Speaker 2: Very brief time. I was there less than a year. Speaker 1: Oh, no, that's right. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: Very--less than a year. Speaker 1: And did you like the work that you did there? Speaker 2: I was a little bored with some of the work I was doing. The work started to get more interesting during the period of time that I decided to leave. And the reason I decided to leave was I thought the offer that had been made to me had greater career enhancing possibilities than the SEC 'cause I didn't envision myself being a career employee of the SEC. I figured I'd spend a few years there and then go into the private sector. Story_ID: 176913 Speaker 1: So you went to work for New York State Moreland Act Commission. Speaker 2: Exactly right because someone I met--I was working on a scam involving something called Black Watch--I think it was Black Watch Farms. It was a cattle feeding scam and the CEO of a big company was a victim of the scam, and I was interviewing him in my job as enforcement attorney [for the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission]. And he came in represented by counsel, and counsel was impressed by the way I handled the interview. And so he subsequently contacted me when he was changing jobs. We were having a Moreland Act Commission created by Governor [Nelson] Rockefeller because of his scandal in the alcoholic beverage control industry, and he was to be executive director and counsel. And I thought this would be an opportunity to meet some politically and help--my hope, professionally helpful people, and so I should probably take the chance. I asked for a leave of absence; they wouldn't give me a leave of absence, so I talked with Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard]. I said what should we do? Should I quit or, or take a chance or stay for the security? She said take a chance, so I quit. When--I knew it was going to be a temporary job 'cause these are just special commissions that are created maybe every thirty or forty years or something at this point. Speaker 1: But a lot of times, commissions like that, one, it's exciting work and you'll meet people at, at high levels. And this is Nelson Rockefeller, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head yes). Speaker 1: Okay, and is governor at the time. So what are you--so how long did that commission--how long did the-- Speaker 2: A year. Speaker 1: A year, okay. Speaker 2: Less than a year. Speaker 1: So, so now you're two years out. Then, what, what do you learn in that--in that position? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I met people. I did a lot of investigation work, got to travel around the state interviewing people, and so on. And I actually wrote the governor's message--I did the first draft at least, I don't know how much they change it--the governor's message introducing the legislation, got to work on the legislation. I got to write reports. I interviewed a lot of people in different parts of the state. Speaker 1: And what was the finding or the determination of the commission? Speaker 2: Well, it's--we recommended certain changes to the laws that would reduce the opportunities for the graft that had been prevalent in the industry. Story_ID: 176914 Speaker 1: How do you get the job at New York Telephone [Company, later Verizon Communications, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well what happened is, we got notice that the legislature was eliminating all of our funding in two weeks (laughter), so we all had to scramble. You know, we had done essentially--the legislation concluded we'd [New York State Moreland Act Commission] done our work and so we had to scramble to find employment. So I contacted the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] placement office, you know, at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they gave me a number of leads, and so I started going out on interviews. And I remember I went to Winthrop Stimson [Putnam & Roberts, later, Pillsbury, Winthrop, Shaw, Pittman, New York, New York], I went to the New York Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey], I went to the U.S. Attorney's Office for the southern district, I went to New York Telephone Company, I went to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]. And I got offers from IBM, from the New York Telephone Company, from the U.S. Attorney's Office, and from the Port Authority also. And I couldn't afford to take the U.S. Attorney's Office, which would've been my preference. I can remember, they, they offered me 8500 [dollars]. I had--was making 9100 [dollars] at the time and Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] was pregnant with our second child who was going to be born in six or seven months. So it then came down to Port Authority was offering less than IBM and New York Telephone. IBM, I would not have been doing litigation; telephone company I would be doing litigation. I wanted to have a lifetime skill so that I could always make a living no matter what happened, and I thought litigation would be that lifetime skill, so that's how I decided on the telephone company. Speaker 1: Now this is a time before I had read about some of the changes that were occurring. You know, this is the--you're there--wait a minute. Speaker 2: Nineteen--this was 1964, May of 1964. Speaker 1: I see, 1964. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176915 Speaker 1: But what are some of the issues that you're dealing with and what are some of the cases you're working on, and also how large is the legal department [at New York Telephone Company, later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, well one thing, wherever I was, the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], I was the only black lawyer, the [New York State] Moreland Act Commission, the only black, New York Telephone Company, the only black lawyer once I got there, the first they'd ever hired, and I was doing general litigation, which was tort and commercial. I hadn't had any courtroom experience. I had gone with others at the SEC, but I hadn't done anything myself, and they were just gonna throw me in the court. I had had a, a trial practice course with, I think it was [Robert] Keeton and [Martha] Field-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that was my only prep. And they didn't even send me to court with anybody else. So the first case they gave me, I think it was a small claims case at, at night. I had done a lot of depositions at the SEC and also I had done some at the Moreland Act Commission, so I did have experience questioning witnesses. So I tried the small claims court case. The telephone company insisted that all its cases in small claims court be tried by the judge, not handled by the mediators, so you had--it was like a regular trial. So I tried it and I--and I think that was my only trial experience before I got my first jury trial. And then they sent me in to do a tort case, automobile accident with injuries and, and damages, and it was in New York civil court, and I was up against one of these old time court guys that hangs around the court all day. And I got in there and I see the judge is givin' me the business. He's making every ruling in favor of, of this, this guy and giving me the shaft. So I talked to my sister, Muriel [Outlaw], and told her what was going on because we may have been just chatting, but, but she said, you know, you should contact this judge, [Jawn] Sandifer, he's a court--he's a judge in that same court. It was in New York civil, which was the--in those days, the jurisdiction was limited to ten thousand dollars per cause of action. And so I--she, she gave me the contact information, so I called and he agreed to see me, so I went in to see him and I told him what was happening, and he said I'll talk to the judge for you. Meantime, I met his law clerk. His law clerk was George Bundy Smith, so that's when I first met George Bundy Smith. And Judge Sandifer kept his word; he did talk to Leon Forte [ph.] and I got a much fairer shake thereafter. And after the case, Leon Forte complimented me on my trial skills and said he wished he had been as accomplished a trial lawyer at my age as I was. And I just continued to try cases. I loved to try cases and at the telephone company, you got to evaluate your own cases, so any new case that came in, I could put a value on it. And if you couldn't settle it for that value or less, then it went to trial, so I always put a low value on my cases; I got to try a lot of cases. Story_ID: 176916 Speaker 1: So I had a trial about once a month in those days, mostly-- Speaker 2: So you're getting significant-- Speaker 1: Yeah, mostly jury. Speaker 2: --trial experience. Speaker 1: And then my final case before I left [New York Telephone Company, later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York] was a--they gave me a death case. A woman was suing because her husband fell in a phone booth and allegedly hit his head and died as a result of the fall, and there was apparently some glass missing in the booth, so she was saying it was the telephone company's fault that he fell. So this was the biggest case they, they had given me, and this was in New York [State] Supreme [Court]. But what I did was, I got her to acknowledge on the record that she was the support of the family. He was an itinerant minister. She was the one with the steady job and she brought in all the income. And also, his death was instant, so there was no pain and suffering and there was no economic loss. So after I left, I found out that the case was knocked down to civil court because the damages were so small, so I left on a high note. Speaker 2: That's great. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 176917 Speaker 1: Now you didn't answer my question about how large the-- Speaker 2: Department was [at New York Telephone Company, later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: --the department. Speaker 2: I would estimate about forty lawyers I would say. We had six in the trial group that I worked in. I was the youngest of the lawyers. We had a supervisor, Ken, I can't remember his last name--Ken Lucy [ph.] was our supervisor. There's one--well, it's interesting, there's one lawyer I'm still in touch with, Sol Scheyer [ph.]. He, he stayed on there and, and eventually retired from there. But there was another fellow there by the name of Ed Watson. It was Ed Watson, Bob Donohue [ph.], and Jack Sammers [ph.]; those were my colleagues. When I had been at the telephone company for about two and a half, three years, I decided I'm not gonna have a really good future here. Again, I was the only black; I was the highest ranking black. I'm making fifteen thousand dollars maybe, yeah. I'm not going to have a, a real future here, so I need to look around for something else 'cause I don't wanna be like these guys who are in their fifties and sixties and this is all they're doing still. So I started writing to different general counsel of corporations, forget about the law firms, I don't think any law firm is going to take me the way those things were in those days. And I got interviews at a number of companies. One of them was Bristol-Myers Company [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], and Bristol-Myers was a really progressive company in those days, was the biggest advertiser in the United States, very prominent. I met the guy who ran the claims department; they had a lawyer who ran the claims department, and he made me an offer. But they were just a claims management department. The lawyers never went into court or anything, and I figured I'm getting into another (unclear), I'm not even gonna get into court, so I turned it down. But he had told the general counsel about me and I think the general counsel wanted to bring in his first black lawyer, so the general counsel contacted me and set up an interview, so I went in and I told him the reason I declined that offer. And he said, well, he understood and thought I was making a mistake, but he understood. But then he called me back and he said, we've created a position for you and come in and talk to me about it. So what they had done is, they had a division counsel, division of labor there. Bristol-Myers was a conglomerate; it had a lot of divisions. It had Drackett, which was Windex and Drano and things like that. It had Clairol, which was typical Clairol line. It had Bristol Labs, which was antibiotics. It had Bristol-Myers Products, which it was consumer goods, things like Ban, Dri Ban, Excedrin, Bufferin, things like that, so a lot of advertising. And he said we're gonna make you an assistant--we'll make you a staff attorney into the products division. There was already one and a half lawyers there. There was a counsel who was responsible for products in an another division and then there was a guy working for that counsel, the staff attorney, so I would--I would assist him, so I agreed and I talked to Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] and decided to take it. So I came in and took it, and that turned out to be the best thing I'd ever done. Story_ID: 176918 Speaker 1: You know what is interesting about, you know, your description of your career to this point was that you are more on the business side, you know, and that was still a little atypical of this time period that we're talking about, which is--now we're in the mid, you know, mid moving into the later '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Moving into the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: And so--and it's atypical because blacks are not--you know, they're coming into corporate America, but they're, they're sort of on low levels. There's some people that have jobs in government, you know, in the White--you know, the White House administration, but it's still very--you know, those are celebrated, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when people do. I want--you know, I did wanna ask one thing about New York Telephone Company [later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York], 'cause I had--I was wondering 'cause I had read that there were a lot of issues around, they just didn't have capacity back then--you know, they-- Speaker 2: What do you mean capacity? Speaker 1: They said that there were--that they underestimated capacity and so it was taking people, you know, like to get their phone service-- Speaker 2: Oh, to, to get service--oh, so they-- Speaker 1: You know, they had to sort of be in line with the-- Speaker 2: Their engineering, their infrastructure. Speaker 1: --their infrastructure-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that they--so you were there at a time when there was not a lot of, you know, infrastructure. I didn't know what, you know, what the manner of cases except for the one, you know, you described that you were handling. But as we go into Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], you know, I had read about that they had purchased Clairol and that they also acquired Mead Johnson [Nutrition Company], I think-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: --that, you know--and they actually got into what I was sort of fascinated with, they had their own motion picture-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) pictures-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --that they got into sort of briefly. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 176919 Speaker 1: So I want you to discuss the organization, the legal organization there [at Bristol-Myers, later Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]. Because, you know, you were saying there were forty lawyers at, you know, at New, New York Telephone Company [later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York]. But what is the size of the--of the legal department and--'cause you have a, a, a good career here actually, right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Um-hum. Speaker 1: And so can you--can you discuss that? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. I, I, I don't recall the exact size, probably in the range of thirty to thirty-five lawyers because the company was made up of multiple divisions. Bristol-Myers Company started out as a proprietary drug company in the late 1880s, I believe the exact date was 1887, in Clinton, New York. And then during World War II [WWII], many of the companies that had some kind of drug experience were encouraged by the government to start making antibiotics to aid the war effort, so that's how Bristol-Myers got into the ethical or the prescription drug business and expanded beyond what they call over-the-counter or patent drug medications. And that later became a very important part of the business, so that was Bristol Labs. Bristol-Myers was a very aggressive company in the era when I joined it. It was making a lot of acquisitions; you mentioned some of them. Clairol was one, Mead Johnson [Nutrition Company] was one, Drackett was another, so that's how it expanded beyond Bristol-Myers into all these other companies, which then became subsidiaries of Bristol-Myers. When I came in, I was assigned to the products division of Bristol-Myers, Bristol Products, which was what had been the original core Bristol-Myers, the over-the-counter business. And even that had grown because Bristol-Myers had made acquisitions of other companies who were in that over-the-counter drug business. And it was a very dynamic time because of these acquisitions and because of the rapid growth of the company. Bufferin was a big brand; Excedrin was a big brand; Ban and Dry Ban became big brands, NoDoz, a lot of very well-known brands. A lot of advertising, so it meant that the legal department had to review all of the ads, the print ads, the television ads, the radio ads to make sure that they did not violate, particularly the federal laws. Occasionally, state laws were an issue too, but it was primarily the federal laws. All of the radio and television networks, particularly the television because that's where most of the advertising was, had what they call continuity clearance offices, and before commercial could be broadcast, it had to meet the approval of that office. And they looked for things like taste, but they primarily were focusing on fraud. Were the claims that were being made supportable? Was there scientific evidence to support these claims? And we also had to be concerned about the Federal Trade Commission. The Federal Trade Commission prosecuted companies for making false and misleading advertising claims, and Bristol-Myers had a number of those issues with the Federal Trade Commission during my time. But it looked like an interesting opportunity. I liked the people I met. I particularly liked the general counsel, Frank Sprole. He was a wonderful person and he was the man who created this opportunity, so I took the offer. Story_ID: 176920 Speaker 1: I started [at Bristol-Myers, later Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York] in August and I had by that time three children. I had my daughter who was born in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and two boys born after that. Speaker 2: And your daughter's name is Alison? Speaker 1: Alison. So I have Alison, I have Devin, and I have Trevor. And when I went to Bristol-Myers Company, and we've got some photos over there, Trevor was about six weeks old or so when I started there. And Bristol-Myers was a wonderful company for families. My family has very warm memories there. I think you may even see some pictures over there of my kids flying on the company jet back in--back in that era, which was something that would be simply unbelievable to me coming from my background to have had that kind of experience, and these kids had it and it was nothing out of the ordinary for them, which may be good and may be bad. But it turned out to be a wonderful opportunity. Story_ID: 176921 Speaker 1: I would say within six, probably six months of my arrival [at Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: And you joined in nineteen sixty-- Speaker 1: I--August of '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: Seven, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yes, and it was a far more generous company than New York Telephone Company [later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York]. They--Bristol-Myers paid much, much better, and keep--there were a lot of other fringe benefits that were not available at the Telephone Company, available at Bristol. So I joined--they also had a policy that all the new lawyers would be sent to law school to learn the kinds of--to deal with the kinds of issues that the company was facing. So I enrolled at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] at the firm's expense. I went down a couple nights a week and I took food, drug, and cosmetic law. I think that was probably the first course I, I took there, and, and I took a number of other courses over the years. And I, like some of the--my predecessors, elected to stay long enough to get an LL.M. [Master of Laws], so that's how I happened to get an LL--LL.M. degree in trade regulation. And so I was preparing myself to do the work as, as I went along and the company was very supportive. We had a change relatively quickly. The man who had been counsel for the division as well as for another division lost the Bristol-Myers Products division and was counsel for just one division, and the lawyer who had been in between me and him was promoted to be counsel of the division, so there was just the two of us then doing that work. Around the same time, I was also asked to help set up a new [U.S.] Military sales organization of all of the products, not simply Bristol-Myers but the Clairol products and Drackett products to Military installations. And a man who had been vice president of sales for products division by the name of [F.] Harry Fletcher, he was the man who was then made the president of this new division, which was called--or a subsidiary--Monarch Crown Corporation, so I helped him to organize that division. He became a lifelong friend of me and his family and my family also became lifelong friends. Speaker 2: So let me understand something, so you come in 1967. What division are you assigned--I mean you said that-- Speaker 1: I'm--I worked for Bristol-Myers company-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I'm on the Bristol-Myers company payroll, but I'm assigned to the Bristol-Myers Products division as their lawyer. Speaker 2: Okay, so you stayed with it, so-- Speaker 1: I stayed with that division during my entire career. Speaker 2: Okay. And then so, Mr. Flet--you said-- Speaker 1: Fletcher. Speaker 2: Fletcher. Speaker 1: Fletcher had been a vice president of sales of Bristol-Myers Products and because of political issues and so on, he lost that position, and then he was given the opportunity to create this new business, which he did very successfully called Monarch Crown Corporation. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 176922 Speaker 1: What were the activities of Monarch Crown Corporation [subsidiary, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: This was a corporation that sold products that would be sold to troops, [U.S.] Military personnel in commissaries and PX's [post exchange]. Speaker 1: So they have a separate company just to sell-- Speaker 2: To-- Speaker 1: --to troops. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: To the Military. Speaker 1: So then you're dealing with [U.S.] Department of Defense? Speaker 2: Right, government contracting. Speaker 1: Okay, government contracting. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, doesn't government contracting--now, at this point in time, the EOC [sic, EEOC, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] is not--is it-- Speaker 2: I think--I think they were already in existence. I think they might've come into existence in '64 [1964], I'm not-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So do you-- Speaker 2: I think with the Civil Rights Act, I think they-- Speaker 1: Right. So did you find--well it took some years for things-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 1: --to take--get some (unclear) to it. But did you find over time then you were having to deal with those types of regulations (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes, I had to deal with that too because I was responsible-Charlie [Charles] Heimbold [Jr.] was the man I was reporting to at this time. He was the counsel for the division. He and I were responsible for all the legal issues of Bristol-Myers Products and Monarch Crown, the two of us. So whatever legal issues they had, we had to deal with them. If we didn't have the competence among ourselves to deal with them, we were able to use outside counsel to advise us. Speaker 1: And you dealt with a lot of labor employment matters. Speaker 2: We didn't have many labor-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --employment matters then-- Speaker 1: You didn't. Speaker 2: --because we were nonunion. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: We were a nonunion company. And the antidiscrimination laws were not that big an issue-- Speaker 1: True, at that point-- Speaker 2: --then. Speaker 1: --in time. Speaker 2: We did have on occasion, issues with the [New York] State Division of Human Rights, which one or the other of us had to deal with. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176923 Speaker 1: So are you--in terms of numbers, are you the only one [at Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: The only black? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. I was--I think at that time, I might've been the highest ranking black in the-- Speaker 1: In the company. Speaker 2: --company. The--Clairol did have a minority business. They had a specialty products business, and they did have a black guy who was doing that. He might've been at a comparable level. But later when I rose, he would not have been. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you--so how, how many people--do you have people reporting to you? Speaker 2: Just a secretary then. Speaker 1: Just--okay. Speaker 2: Just a secretary. Speaker 1: So this is really a sort of unique group, you know, a group--this company becomes--because it has a specific target area and you're dealing with all the legal issues. Speaker 2: Of-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well we had two. Speaker 1: --the federal government. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the Bristol-Myers Products, remember, which is selling all across the country to general consumers, and then we had a separate division, Monarch--a separate subsidiary, Monarch Crown Corporation, which was selling the products of Clairol, the products of Drackett, the products of Bristol-Myers Products division, selling those to PX's [post exchange] and commissaries, and the troops buy. Speaker 1: But you're saying you were dealing with both-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, both. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: But didn't--so wouldn't--what were the other lawyers doing then? They-- Speaker 2: Oh, well you had lawyers for Clairol-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and they were dealing with Clairol's-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --issues except with Clairol being sold to-- Speaker 1: To the, the PX's, right. Speaker 2: PX's and commissaries. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And you had the lawyers for Drackett. And later when we bought Mead Johnson [Nutrition Company], you had the lawyers for Mead Johnson-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --dealing with their issues, and-- Speaker 1: Now who were your outside counsel? Speaker 2: We had a variety. We had a corporate counsel, Winthrop, Stimson [Putnam & Roberts, later, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman, New York, New York]. We had a trade regulation counsel, Weil or--Weil, Guttman, & Davis dealing with FTC [Federal Trade Commission] issues and so on because we had litigation with the Federal Trade Commission at that time. And we had a separate patent and trademark department in Bristol-Myers Company, and they had their own lawyers, and they on occasion might use outside counsel as well. And we had tax lawyers in the company. And we had lawyers--remember, the--my initial entre to the company was the lawyers who dealt with the tort claims, so we had that group of, of lawyers. Story_ID: 176924 Speaker 1: So what--tell me what you feel significant about the work that you did there [Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York] in the time? 'Cause you were there from 1967 to-- Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 1: --eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 2: It--the work was always interesting. The company obviously was growing. They gave me a wonderful opportunity and circumstances just worked out very well in my favor. It was the best job I've had in my career for about the first ten years I was--I was there. The man who was my supervisor, who became my supervisor around--from around December of 1967, very ambitious, very talented guy, and-- Speaker 1: Are you talking about [F. Harry] Fletcher? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, this is somebody I haven't mentioned. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mentioned him briefly, Charles, Charles Heimbold [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Charlie Heimbold. He-a year after he got promoted to become division counsel and succeed Mr. Franchell [ph.] who had had that job before, he got the opportunity to go into the business, to leave the legal department and, and he wanted to go into the business. That was his ambition. Turned out to be a very good move for him because he later became CEO of the company after a couple of decades. But in any event, he decided to leave and go into the business when this new opportunity presented itself. So I figured that Mr. Franchell was going to come back and I'll be reporting to him, but he didn't come back. What Mr. Heimbold did was he recommended to the general counsel, [Frank] Sprole, and to the president of the--of the Bristol-Myers Products division, a man by the name of Mayers [ph.]--not Meyers, Mayers--he recommended to him that I be promoted to succeed him. So I was overwhelmed. I was overwhelmed. I couldn't believe--I'm there a year and a half and they're promoting me like this. Two, I'm overwhelmed because how am I gonna do this? I'm just learning, I'm going to school [at New York University School of Law, New York, New York] (laughter) nights trying to learn what I'm doing here, and they're asking me to take on all this responsibility, so I was pleased but I was terrified also. But I figured I've got--I can't turn it down. I gotta try it and I'll succeed or I'll fail. And the company was very generous to me. The general counsel said to me, look, I know you've only been here a year and a half, but we got outside counsel. If at any point you feel you're getting in over your head, just call in outside counsel to help you, but I think you can do it, so let's try it and see. So I did, it worked out, I did well with it. And about a--that was '69 [1969]--about a year and a half later, the president of the division said I'm gonna make you a vice president. You've done very well, so I'm making you vice president. I was thirty-three years old or something and I'd been with the company two and a half years, and they made me a vice president. And, again, I, I was stunned 'cause I was the youngest vice president and I'm the only black any--remotely at this level in the company. Speaker 1: And this is a major corporation. Speaker 2: And this is a major corporation. Speaker 1: Pharmaceutical corporation. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they're making--not of the Bristol-Myers company, a vice president-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --of Bristol-Myers Products-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --division. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: And so I took it. It was wonderful and everything worked out well until we had a big reorganization in 1976, and the company was completely restructured, and my career plateaued. The man who had been general counsel was no longer general counsel. He was made vice chairman or something; somebody else was made general counsel. I didn't get along with that person ever, and so my career was then stymied forever. And eventually probably about six years after he took over, I was fired, outplaced as they called it--they called it. Story_ID: 176925 Speaker 1: So let's talk about the company [Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York] that you came into because you said it was very family-oriented-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and I wanna hear about this. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because this is a time, though, on the business side I'm talking-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --not the legal side, okay, that--and this continues, that people are--if you're in corporate jobs, you know, there's a certain way you have to conduct yourself. You know, you're--and I think people are moving--you know, you have to move where the company puts you, I think-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to go up the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --corporate ladder. So what is--what is the environment that you talked about that was such a wonderful environment? Speaker 2: The company was very entrepreneurial. It was very growth oriented. It was very adventurous, always exciting, new things happening, so that's on the business side. On the personal side, the people I was reporting to, the, the president of the products division and I were, were good friends. We became good friends. Our wives became good friends. We continued to socialize many years after we both--he got outplaced from the company also around the same time I did; we continued to socialize afterwards. Mr. [F. Harry] Fletcher, the man who was the president of Monarch Crown [Corporation], same thing. I'm still in contact with his, his family, and this is some forty years later. Now the--we would go to their homes, they would come to our home. The same thing with Mayers. We'd go to Mayers' home; he would come to our home, him and his wife. And we used to travel together, Mr. Fletcher and I, and occasionally there would be events that the spouses would be invited. And my wife, Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard], loved to go because they just made her feel so welcome. And the same thing--well, with Bristol-Myers--I got--made my first trip to Paris [France] because of them. The company was so entrepreneurial and so freewheeling that we were always looking for acquisitions and new development opportunities, and so it was just exciting and you went to exciting places, you met exciting people doing exciting things, and there was no opportunity to get bored. You're always doing interesting things. I worked very hard always, but I didn't mind it, and I had people who worked alongside me who worked hard. And I was allowed to manage my group as long as I took care of the problems. I hired the first female lawyer for the legal department at Bristol-Myers. There had been one female lawyer who came into the patent and trademark department a few months before I hired this woman for the products division. I hired either the first or second the black lawyer in the company besides, besides myself. Speaker 1: So you were given free reign. It was--and the company was doing well, so you're--you even spoke earlier about, you know, flying on the corporate jet-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, and those types of things. Speaker 2: Yes, we started, I think it was before I became a vice president either--even, going to meetings and that was the only thing. The, the spouses had to attend a number of events and that sometimes caused a little problem with Valerie. She might not want to go to all the events. But we went to certain events, and some events maybe it would be she and I and our kids. Like, we used to go to--I always had felt comfortable with the people in the plants and so on, perhaps because my father [Byron Standard] was, you know, a working man, and I would visit our plants regularly. But in addition to visiting the plants, I used to go to picnics. Each of the plants had an annual picnic and I would always take my family. So one of the picnics would be in New Jersey where we had a plant, but another was in St. Louis [Missouri] where we had a plant, and another was in North Carolina where we had a plant, so when we went to the out-of-town picnics, the kids would go with us, and they would fly in the, the company plane. We have a photo of our younger child--youngest child when he was four sitting in the co-pilot's lap on the company plane, so it was that kind of environment. And it was just interesting that as minorities, we had those kinds of opportunities at that company, and the kids were growing up in an environment where they could see that anything was possible. Story_ID: 176926 Speaker 1: So what do you think caused that to be the case? And there's no indication--I mean, at a time when there's a lot of racial upheaval and the [National] Urban League is very active, and OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] is very active, and opening doors, and you've got Black Enterprise, you know, promoting or talking about issues, but promoting, people who are rising. I mean, I know that--I don't know if you knew--he was in the New York area but--for a while, but also went to Africa, [Thomas] Tom Shropshire, who was-- Speaker 2: Don't, don't know him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, he was a very senior in tobacco, Philip Morris, around the, you know-- Speaker 2: The same era. Speaker 1: --the time, time period that you're talking about and had risen up high. But these are exceptions, I mean, as much on the legal side as in the business side. These are clearly exceptions. Speaker 2: Yes, well I used to go to, and Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] would go with me, we'd go to meetings of a group called the Proprietary Association [later, Consumer Healthcare Products Association]. It was all the big companies who sold proprietary drugs, Ex-Lax, Anacin, Bayer Aspirin, scores of, of companies in those businesses. It's a trade association, Proprietary Association, and I was on the lawyers' groups. We would meet maybe every two or three months. There'd be twenty or thirty lawyers; I would always be the only person of color there and the same thing when we went to these meetings; we were always the only persons of color. 'Cause we had a meeting every year at The Greenbrier [White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia], always on Mother's Day weekend, so Valerie and I would go. We fly in the company plane down to Greenbrier and, and go and spend four or five days. We took our daughter with us a couple of times. Later, we started alternating and we'd meet at The Breakers in Palm Beach [Florida], so they always went first class. We always had first class entertainment. We had people like Ella Fitzgerald or Anna Moffo or Sarah Vaughan entertaining us at, at these meetings. So it was a, a side of life, you know, I could've never have dreamed of living in that tenement, you know, on, on Warren Street [Brooklyn, New York, New York], that would be open to me. And of course as I said, Valerie and, and the kids were able to share in many of these opportunities. We also had a lot of tickets to sporting events. I would be lucky to go to maybe one or two baseball games a year growing up as, as a child, and sitting in the bleachers with my father or with my Boy Scout troop. I was able to take my kids to basketball and hockey games probably two or three times a month and baseball and, and football games, and things of that sort because the company would give, give us tickets. So they had a completely different exposure to life. I don't know if it was good or bad for them from, from what Valerie and I had growing up, particularly I had. Speaker 1: But--okay, so you're not feeling any glass ceiling at all until 19-- Speaker 2: Not, not then. Speaker 1: Not until 1970s. Speaker 2: Yes, until there was a change. Story_ID: 176927 Speaker 1: Well, can you--before you do that, what are you most proud of over those ten years legally [at Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]? Things maybe--you know, issues that you worked on or things that you--you know, you accomplished. Can you talk about that before we leave? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things. I was able to enhance the diversity. I, I created an opportunity for women and many women; there's now a female general counsel of, of Bristol-Myers, by the way, an Asian American woman who's the general counsel. And I think I--I like to think that I opened the door by making that first hire of a female back in 1969 or '70 [1970], whenever it was; I, I hired her. And I think I paved the way for other minority lawyers after me to come into Bristol-Myers, and there had been a number since then obviously who were talking about at, at general counsel. I improved the functioning of the legal department while I was there; I made it more effective, and I think I averted a lot problems that could have occurred if I, I hadn't been there. I created the opportunities for other lawyers to come in and grow and thrive in, in the, the company. And-- Speaker 1: In what way? Speaker 2: Because I gave people the opportunity to grow as far as their legal skills. Speaker 1: So professionally, a lot of-- Speaker 2: Would grow. Speaker 1: --professional development, support or? Speaker 2: Yes. And they all had the opportunity to go and--go to school at night, too, if they wish. But I am not a micromanager, so I gave people enough discretion to demonstrate what they could do and be creative and solve problems. And as long as they could take care of a problem, they didn't have to involve me. Only come to me if there's, there's an issue. Speaker 1: So how many did you have reporting to you? Speaker 2: Well, at different times, I never had more than two lawyers reporting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to me directly and three dotted line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a patent, a trademark, and a tax lawyer, but they were just dotted line. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just on my business did they report to me. Story_ID: 176928 Speaker 1: Now, the thing that--so what happens in nineteen-seventy-- Speaker 2: You mean when my career plateaued? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: There was a reorganization of the company [Bristol-Myers, later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Explain to me the reorganization. Speaker 2: Well, we had been reporting to Mr. Bristol [William McLaren Bristol III], the last of the Bristols, and that changed, and he was more or less shunned to the side, and so he ended up resigning or retiring from the company, retiring from the board of directors, and the person we were reporting to was a different kind of manager. And once those changes occurred, a lot of people in the products division got fired who had been there for years. Speaker 1: So what, what was that person changing? What were they-- Speaker 2: It was just that, that type of personality and that person was not really a good manager in, in the view of many of us. He was not a good leader, but was given that responsibility because of a personal situation that existed in the company. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: How long did that person last? Speaker 2: Several years. It was--remember, there were a lot of family groups here, a lot of family dynamics involved and the company changed drastically, let's put it like that. Speaker 1: Okay. When you say this, are you saying that the--were there cost-cutting measures? Were there more accountability measures? Speaker 2: No, none of that. No, it was more, more personal issues. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, personal issues. Speaker 1: About who--they put their maybe team-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in place and they were gonna change things, and whoever was before was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --not on the right-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --side of the, the place. So you, you lasted as long as you could. Speaker 2: Yes, there was a massive exodus of vice presidents that occurred in this timeframe, so from '82 [1982], '83 [1983], in that era, yeah. Speaker 1: Can I ask--now how is Bristol-Myers doing in this period of time where there's a change? Speaker 2: It's, it's--oh, it was still-- Speaker 1: Is--are there more competition? Speaker 2: It was still--it was still doing well. It, it hasn't been doing as well recently. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: But it was doing--it's all growth during this time period that you're talking about. Speaker 2: Well, I would say, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There was--there was rapid growth, yeah. Speaker 1: Even past the ten-year point? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It continued to grow. Speaker 1: Okay. Just-- Speaker 2: Not that particular business, but other businesses-- Speaker 1: Were growing. Speaker 2: --were growing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there have been problems since then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The company's had some ups and downs. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176929 Speaker 1: --Okay, so you find yourself without a job. Speaker 2: Yes, so I was--I got a call one day to come up to meet with, I guess it was an HR [human resources] person [at Bristol-Myers, later Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], so I knew what it was when I got the call because others--other vice presidents in the division had gotten similar of the calls in the course of the previous several months, so I had an idea what it was. And so I went up and there were two people there, and I was told--one was the--one--well, after that plateau happened, there were three positions over mine that opened--the--or the position over mine, what they call associate general counsel opened. And each time, everybody including myself, thought that I would be the one promoted to that position. Instead, somebody who had come in after me in each case was promoted to that position, including one of my law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] classmates. And so I began to get the message that the man making this--these decisions who was the new general counsel is never gonna promote me, and that turned out to be the case. And then we got to the point when the president of my division was terminated. And once he was terminated--I had gotten great reviews during his fifteen-year tenure from him, and the, the review that the legal department prepared on me was based upon what my clients said. So I had these two clients, and they were both giving me terrific reviews. But once they were both gone and the new person came in, then I no longer had that history of getting a terrific review each year. So a new person came and, and had been there two or three months, and then I got the call to go upstairs to meet with the personnel department. But as I said, about four or five other vice presidents from the division had gotten similar calls-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --so I wasn't totally surprised. So they told me they were--there was no place for me in the company anymore and that I would be given twelve months to locate new employment. I'd be given in-office secretarial support and my salary, not my bonus or my stock options, but my salary would be continued for a year. Story_ID: 176930 Speaker 1: So I called my wife [Valerie Ann Salmon Standard] and said that, well the call has come. And she knew about the others who had been outplaced [from Bristol-Myers, later Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], so she wasn't totally surprised. So I went through the outplacement process and tried to find another job in the industry, preferably comparable to mine. I was unable to. I don't know whether race was a factor or what, but I was unable to for whatever reason. And eventually, I was able to get a job in city government as the director of legal services for the New York City school system [New York City Department of Education]. I had to take a big pay cut and a big cut in benefits, and go work in the public sector, and I did that, and I had a legal department of about forty-five people that was not functioning well, and I was able to get that reorganized and functioning well. And then after I had been there three years, the chancellor was fired. Speaker 2: Now who was the chancellor? The, the mayor--was Ed Koch, right? Speaker 1: The mayor was Koch and the chancellor was [Nathan] Quinones, and Quinones was fired, and so I started-- Speaker 2: For, for what reason? Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: One doesn't know. One doesn't know. I mean, no chancellor has survived more than three or four years in that position, so. They no longer have a chancellor; they have some other title, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, they, they called her [Cathie Black] chancellor the other day. Story_ID: 176931 Speaker 1: But in any event, [Nathan] Quinones was gone, so I started looking around because I figured I'd be next. Speaker 2: Tell me, though, before we-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Before you do that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know you're taking a big pay cut, but are there things that you did like about this position? Are there-- Speaker 1: The Board of Ed [New York City Department of Education]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, I liked the opportunity to rebuild an organization and it gave me a greater management challenge, having to manage forty people instead of six people, so that was interesting. Speaker 2: What shape--what shape were things in, though? Can you talk about what you found there? Speaker 1: The, the department didn't have good leadership and I didn't think it was--all of the lawyers were up to their jobs. I had to get rid of some of the lawyers once I got there and I had to get other people shaped up to doing a good day's work. Speaker 2: So you put in standards. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what about work flows and, and how, how cases were handled? Speaker 1: I made some reorganizations, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. I did some reorganizing. As I said, I had to get rid of maybe four or five people, both professional and, and support staff. And I brought some more diversity to the office. I made changes in the hiring process in terms of insisting that there be diversity among the applicant pool, and that I wanted to interview the people the--who were seen by the subordinates because I had about four subordinate leaders in the office. So we, we hired more women and minorities after I got there. I don't know if it's continued. And the legal department has much--grown much larger. I think they have more like seventy-five or eighty people now. In fact, some--one of the people who--whom I hired and I remain in touch with is now one of the supervisors, and she has about twenty lawyers working for her-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --and she's not the head lawyer. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: I'm trying to help her son who's just graduating from law school get a job. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 176932 Speaker 1: You worked there [New York City Department of Education], you say for-- Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: --years. Speaker 2: Approximately. Speaker 1: So in 1988, then, you're going with Con-- Speaker 2: I went to Con Ed [Con Edison, New York, New York] in '89 [1989], so I started looking in '88 [1988] because that's when the chancellor, [Nathan] Quinones, got fired, Quinones. And so I started looking for a new job, letting friends know I was looking and I got contacted about a few possible positions at Con Edison. I had hoped to get the general counsel's position, though I didn't get it, but I got an assistant general counsel's position. I figured I gotta take something, earn a living, and it was doing employment and labor law, which I hadn't done. So I had to--and also was doing trial work again, which I hadn't done for a long time. So I took a trial refresher course and I took some courses on labor and employment law, and I went in there and I did labor and employment law for eleven years, and I did it successfully. And then I got the opportunity-- Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask, I had read something that--I mean, first of all, what did you like or not like about employment and labor law? 'Cause you still do a lot of that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --now, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This was introduction to--so you--you're no longer dealing with--say with FTC [Federal Trade Commission] or issues-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --about that. Speaker 2: Or Food and Drug Administration [FDA]. Speaker 1: Food and Drug--yes. Now, you're looking at employment and labor. Story_ID: 176933 Speaker 1: Is this true that the class action lawsuit was brought against the black employees against--during, you know, during-- Speaker 2: At Con Ed [Con Edison, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: At Con Ed. Speaker 2: Yes. And I think that may have been a reason that Con Ed hired me because they knew that they were facing the possibility of that class action. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, because there was disgruntlement among the black employees about promotional opportunities. Speaker 1: Opportunities. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're back in a utility. You had been at a utility-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --New York Telephone [Company, later, Verizon Communications, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they tend to be--you know, 'cause you have this--the entrepreneurial, you know, Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and now you're back in utilities of the-- Speaker 2: In a regulated industry. Speaker 1: They're totally different. Speaker 2: Very different. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: No more company jet. Speaker 1: That's right. So what do you--what are the--so how did that lawsuit--how did it-- Speaker 2: We resolved it to which I had thought we could defeat it. The company wanted to resolve it, and--but I spent several years working on that, and I worked on it there. I retired from there because I got an offer from Morgan, Lewis and Bockius, which also was defending a class action law suit involving some of the same individuals, and so they asked me if I would consider coming with them, of counsel, because of that experience. Speaker 1: So was Morgan, Lewis & Bockius [New York, New York], were they--they were Con Ed? Speaker 2: No, no. They were defending another law suit, but the same plaintiff's law firms. Speaker 1: The same plaintiff's--oh, same plaintiff's law firm. Speaker 2: Law firm, right. Speaker 1: But not the same-- Speaker 2: The same plaintiffs. Speaker 1: The same plaintiffs? Speaker 2: No, not the same plaintiffs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same plaintiff's law firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So they saw the work that you had done. Speaker 2: Well, we ran into each other in court and so on-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so that's how it happened, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176934 Speaker 1: So this is--you're joining [Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, New York, New York] as special counsel. Speaker 2: No, I went in as of counsel-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I later became special counsel. Speaker 1: I see. So what is the difference then? What are they offering you 'cause this is nineteen-ninety-- Speaker 2: I was doing general work when I was of counsel. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so is this 19--what is this, though? Speaker 2: That was around 2000, I think. Speaker 1: I have it 1999. That's what I have. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let me check the date. Let me see. Speaker 1: But, you know, but--now what about-- Speaker 2: I think it was 2000. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 176935 Speaker 1: The visiting nurse's service-- Speaker 2: That's a voluntary position. Speaker 1: That was volunteer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how is--that's what I wanna understand. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: When is your volunteer work? I mean, can we talk about that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --like, when is that starting? When did that start picking up? Speaker 2: The Visiting Nurse Service [of New York]-- Speaker 1: Or I mean what did it kick in before the visiting-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --nurse service? Speaker 2: Well, I was doing some work with--probably, it started with the Black Executive Exchange Program [BEEP] because I started doing that at Bristol-Myers Company [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], and that's where I would go to a black college, HBCU institution to teach for two or three days a year. I started doing that at Bristol [Myers] and I stopped doing that when I was at the Board of Ed [New York City Department of Education] because they didn't do it, and then I resumed doing it at Con Ed [Con Edison], so I've been to maybe fifteen or twenty different black colleges during the years that I did it. Speaker 1: Teaching and then-- Speaker 2: And teaching and counseling and so on. Speaker 1: With students. Speaker 2: With students, right. Speaker 1: And teachers. Speaker 2: Right. So that was volunteer efforts. Story_ID: 176936 Speaker 1: Then the Harvard Club, don't you get involved-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --with that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got involved with the Harvard Club in the mid '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: When-- Speaker 2: And I started out doing interviewing of high school applicants for Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], something called the Schools Committee. And you may recall, I told you about the [New York State] Moreland Act Commission and how I always thought that would lead to contacts. Well, it was a contact that got me involved. I met one of the guys who had worked at the Moreland Act Commission, a more senior lawyer. I just bumped into him in the Harvard Club one night; I was going to play squash and he was sitting having a drink with somebody, and he introduced me to this guy. His name was John Schuler, and John was active on the Schools Committee. So John followed up that meeting by asking me if I'd be willing to go on the Schools Committee and interview these high school students, so I agreed. So that was my first activity at the Harvard Club, and I did that for about fifteen years. But because of that activity, I then got asked to go on the Admissions Committee at the Harvard Club. The Admissions Committee interviews applicants for, for the club member--for club membership. In those days, the membership process was very difficult and a person needed to have four people support his, and I say his deliberately, application. And then that person also had to have four interviews with four different members of the--of the Admission Committee and had to be accompanied to each of those interviews by either his proposer or his seconder. So it was an onerous process, but that's the way it was in the old days. Speaker 1: This was for admission? Speaker 2: To the club. Speaker 1: To the club. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Now, it was different for new graduates. New graduates could get admitted in Cambridge [Massachusetts], which was how I got admitted because the Admissions Committee makes an annual trip to Cambridge in the early spring and interviews those who are about to graduate and any faculty members who wish to apply to the club, and they get interviewed on the spot at the Lampoon [Harvard Lampoon Building, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or someplace more central and--or the Hasty Pudding [Hasty Pudding Institute of 1770, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I think it was the Hasty [Pudding] where they had the interviews on the Cambridge side of the [Charles] River, and on the Boston [Massachusetts] side over at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] someplace, so that's how I got in. One of my law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] classmates said, oh, I'm gonna go for this interview at the Harvard Club, why don't you come and join me? This was our last year at law school. And I remember that at the time, I think the law--the Harvard Club had one black member, Cliff Alexander [Clifford Alexander, Jr.], 'cause I remember he was written up. So I said, okay, I'll go with you. So I went and got admitted. In any event, that's how I had happened to be a member of the club and then I met this guy, John Schuler, he asked me to go on the Schools Committee, I did. Then, I got on the Admissions Committee. I did good work there, so then my last year, I was made secretary of the Admissions Committee, and then the-- Speaker 1: And these are in the 1980s, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so obviously I was the first black on the Admissions Committee-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the first black officer of the Admissions Committee, and then I got invited to go on the board of managers of the club, the first black on the board of managers, first minority of any kind except maybe Jews. And so I went on the board of managers, and I served three years on the admissions committee, then three years on the board of managers. And then after I went off the board of managers, I was asked by the incoming president to take over the athletics committee, which had become more (unclear) and invigorated and resurrected, so I did that. I took over the athletics committee, got it functioning well, having regular meetings, creating programs. I bought the first modern equipment for the gym that the club had had in probably thirty years. I put the first women on the athletics committee. And then after that athletics committee, I think I later went on the board again and, and I became chairman of the trustees for the pension, the club's pension committee. And then I later organized a HR [human resources] committee, created the club's first-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --HR committee and I chaired that. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And subsequently, I became a vice president-- Speaker 1: Of the--of the club. Speaker 2: --of, of the club, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause I have that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in 1996-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I think-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that you're vice president. So you--so when you joined Morgan, Lewis & Bockius [New York, New York], I was just trying to understand, did you find--but you found that your role in--at--you know, with volunteer service, it helped business. Did you find that? Or were you doing-- Speaker 2: I didn't--I don't think it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it, it helped me attract business to either Morgan, Lewis & Bockius or to Epstein, Becker & Green [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I don't--I haven't found any business as a result of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of that. Speaker 1: Okay. But your personal belief is to become, become active. Speaker 2: And I know I've made a difference. I think I made the club more hospitable for women and for minorities-- Speaker 1: Minorities, right. Speaker 2: --as a result of some of my efforts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, 'cause I, I appointed a number of women to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I appointed the first female chair of the athletics committee-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --for example. When I was chair of the athletics committee, I also was responsible for building the first locker room for women; we didn't have a locker room for women. So I made a difference, I think. And then when I became president of the club, I was able to build the expansion. The club had plans to expand since 1970, and it could never get the expansion done. There was always one excuse after the other as to why it couldn't be done. Speaker 1: Yeah. I--well, I wanna-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --talk about that part. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Story_ID: 176937 Speaker 1: Let me ask, with Morgan, Lewis & Bockius [New York, New York], you were there how long then? Speaker 2: About four years. Speaker 1: Four years. Speaker 2: But what happened when I was there is the guy who hired me, who asked me to come, with whom I got along well, left-- Speaker 1: And who was he? Speaker 2: Well, I don't wanna mention names, but he left, went out of state, and I was working for somebody else with whom I didn't get along, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the difference in their description of counsel and special counsel? Speaker 2: When I became special counsel, I was working just Con Ed [Con Edison] business. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I wasn't--when I was of counsel, I was doing a variety of things, not just Con Ed. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So they had--were they--were they one of Con Ed's law-- Speaker 2: Not until I came there. Speaker 1: So you brought them? Speaker 2: I brought--yeah, I, I brought Con Ed. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Now how large were they? Speaker 2: How large was what? Speaker 1: Morgan, Lewis & Bockius? Speaker 2: Oh, probably 1000 lawyers, 1100 lawyers. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: It might've been 1200 (unclear). Speaker 1: See, this is--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen-ninety [1990]. Yeah, see the law firm, it started to change because then you started having these mega law firms. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, before, two--three hundred was a lot. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 176938 Speaker 1: You know, you had started to talk about--but you--so you're the first minority president of the club [Harvard Club of New York, New York, New York]. Now, I would like you to give context for the Harvard Club of New York. We have one--do we have a club? We have a--well, we have a club. Speaker 2: You have a club but you don't have a clubhouse-- Speaker 1: We don't have a clubhouse. Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Only, only Boston [Massachusetts] and New York [City] have clubhouses. Speaker 1: Right. So-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Can you talk about the club here and its role and who its membership is? I've been in there a couple times, you know, but it-- Speaker 2: You--you're eligible to join. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. But I, I don't know why--but anyway--'cause I could stay there, right? Speaker 2: Yes, exactly right. Speaker 1: Right, for housing. I mean, I've-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: You should consider it. Speaker 1: Okay, I should consider it. Okay, I need to talk to you about that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: But anyway, so--that may not be a bad idea. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know why the--but I've been there a couple times, you know, just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a convenient location. Speaker 1: It's very convenient. Speaker 2: And the staff is very gracious. Speaker 1: So what--tell me the history of the club, the role of the club, the role of the club in New York, its membership, so-- Speaker 2: Well, the club was started in 1865 and it's had a number of clubhouses in the city and it's been on West 44th Street for probably one hundred years now. And McKim, Mead & White designed the clubhouse in the original expansion. And because the club has grown so large, it didn't have adequate facilities, didn't have enough squash course, didn't have enough gym space. I bought the first modern gym equipment as I might've mentioned earlier for the club when I was chair of the athletics committee, and it didn't have enough program space, didn't have enough bedrooms. And there had been plans since the '70s [1970s] to expand and the club had bought adjacent land or had an option on adjacent land under my immediate predecessor, a man by the name of Peter Heller [ph.]. Club exercised that option actually, bought the land which was occupied. There was a--there were some tenants over there. But the concern had been how can we finance it? How can we finance it? We don't want to straddle the club with another mortgage. We're free of mortgages now, why should we go into debt? And the others were saying, well, we need the space. We had to turn people away for rooms. We don't have enough program rooms. We don't have enough banquet space. We don't have enough athletic space, space. How are we gonna continue to attract young members? So we were casting around my first week in office. I got installed I think in January '99 [1999]. I got together a meeting of all the movers and shakers in the club, past presidents, past committee chairs, et cetera, and made sure we had adequate female representation as well, and--for a two-day conference, and we discussed issues and opportunities. And we decided we need to figure out a way to get this expansion done, so I appointed a group to work on that. And we were also casting on the ground for ways to finance it. Story_ID: 176939 Speaker 1: I discovered that we had a painting in the clubhouse [Harvard Club of New York, New York, New York] that was worth in the--in the seven figures. We, we got a--we had talked to some agents, art agents about the possibility of selling it. We found that, that they would sell it for us and then their commission would be--it was 10 or 15 percent; I, I can't recall. Then we--and this is all within the first six months of my taking office. We had retained a lawyer who specialized in representing people who have valuable works of art, and he said that he had been contacted by a gallery that had a client who might want to buy the painting, which was called The Chess Game by [John Singer] Sargent, and that the person wanted to see the painting. Speaker 2: By John Singer Sargent? Speaker 1: Yes, wanted to see the painting in his home to see how it went with the decor. So we worked out an agreement for him to get the painting on approval. We didn't know who it was; it was an anonymous person, and the painting was shipped out. A day or two after the painting was shipped out, we started getting calls from some members who said I've seen your painting in the Bellagio in Las Vegas [Nevada]. Why is The Chess Game hanging in the Bellagio in Las Vegas? So we didn't respond right away, but we made inquiries; we had our lawyer make inquiries. And it turned out that the person was Steve Wynn, but he didn't want to see it in his home, he wanted to display it in the Bellagio, which was contrary to the agreement that he had signed with us or that had been signed with us on his behalf because he was on disclose. So we directed them to send it back immediately, so the painting was sent back immediately. But this turned out to be a happy aberrational act because our lawyer then said to us, you know, this reminds me that I have a client I think who might be interested and can afford to buy this painting. Let me approach him and see if he is interested. And this client has a foundation, so he did approach the client, the client was interested. The client agreed to buy the painting, $13,500,000 dollars, no 10 percent commission, so we netted $13,500,000 on this painting, which had been given to us about forty or fifty years earlier. It was hanging in our stairway in the front entrance, very accessible to a thief or thieves, no great security. We had a lot of insurance; we were paying about fifteen to twenty thousand dollars a year in insurance on it, but it was underappreciated. So I said to the board, I think we need to sell it. I got them to agree, so we sold it, $13,500,000 less $20,000 dollars in legal fees for everything the lawyer had done for us. And so that gave us about 40 percent of the cost of the expansions, which meant that the mortgage could be much smaller. Through prudent management, we also had built up reserve funds, so we had a couple million dollars in cash available to us, so I said, well, let's go ahead and explore with architects the expansion, so we did that. Story_ID: 176940 Speaker 1: We came up finally with a design that the board approved and then we had to go to the membership [of Harvard Club of New York, New York, New York]. The design was one I initially opposed because it's modern, as did many people just reflexively. We were persuaded by our architects that--to go with the Georgian design, would result in making the original clubhouse unattractive, and also this addition will not be attractive, it's gonna be too much, and so we think you ought to go with a contrast and have the modern look. So after my initial reservations, I was persuaded that the architects were right. So then we said, well, we've gotta present this to the membership and discuss it. So we presented it to the membership. We had a big open meeting. I knew we had some members who oppose anything one does just for the sake of being contrary, and then you have others who oppose for a variety of reasons, so I expected a raucous meeting. So I had arranged to have the microphones rigged so that we could shut them off if people got out of order, and we did have some people who got out of order, who wanted to speak out of turn, that kind of stuff, and other guys making barnyard noises. I had to tell him that I was removing him from the room if he made one more squeak or oink, and that kind of stuff, you know, immature behavior. But finally, they saw they weren't gonna be able to be disrespectful of other speakers and we had an orderly meeting. It went on for maybe four or five hours. And so then we ended the meeting, went back to the board, the board took a vote, and voted to go ahead with the project. Story_ID: 176941 Speaker 1: Then this group of people who were opposed, small group, total maybe of one hundred out of the twelve or thirteen thousand members [of Harvard Club of New York, New York, New York], they decided to bring a lawsuit and say that the board had not followed its procedures; that was not true, case was dismissed, and so they were out of luck in terms of court. Then, they decided they would run an opposition slate against the, the official nominees that the nominating committee came up with. This was at the end of my term by then, so I'd served my three years, and it was my successor, a fellow by the name of Joe Hanlon [ph.], another lawyer, whom they wanted to defeat for president, so they ran some guy against him, and they ran people for the other board seats. And then we had another meeting, disorderly again, and we exercised the same kind of calming techniques to keep the crowd under control. And they got about one hundred votes in support of their position and the candidates got many hundreds of votes, so the--they were defeated, the construction went ahead, was completed on time and on budget, and the mortgage has since been retired. Speaker 2: That's a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --success. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So you're saying the whole--that they fought during your whole tenure--I mean-- Speaker 1: Well, once-- Speaker 2: --service. Speaker 1: Once this--once the plan to go ahead was announced and the actual plans for the building were announced as what we were going to do, then this group-- Speaker 2: So these--this--so the plans, the, the, the way of financing through the art-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --all of that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that all took three years. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we let people know that we had sold the painting [The Chess Game by John Singer Sargent], so some people were upset about selling the painting, some were upset about taking out a mortgage, some were upset about the design, but as I said, it was a very small group in the aggregate, one hundred or thereabouts. Speaker 2: So did, did those--'cause I--you know, I had read there was a lot like--you know, people like--let's see, who were--Robert--well, I think their lawyer was Robert[o] Unger, right? Or-- Speaker 1: I--could've been, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean--yeah, I read--there was a lot here about-- Speaker 1: On the Internet, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, a lot about the fight-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and, you know, how could-- Speaker 1: But there was-- Speaker 2: --they do this? Speaker 1: There was more noise than substance there. Speaker 2: Right. And they were called the Committee for HCNY [Harvard Club of New York] Choice, and I mean it went on and on. I was like, oh my God. Story_ID: 176942 Speaker 1: Oh, you got another entrance [at Harvard Club of New York, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we have two entrances, so people who want to go to the hotel portion have their own entrance which they may enter if they wish. But, you know, they all connect up and so-- Speaker 1: How many hotel rooms totally now? Speaker 2: Oh, about seventy-five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's--is it actively used still? 'Cause that's the thing-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we usually sell out still. We had fifty-nine before. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And I've stayed here a number of times. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] has stayed here with me-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a number of times, too. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I should actually look into that. So anyway-- Speaker 2: You should join. It's a very convenient location. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Okay, but do you have to have the four--the--what about joining? The membership-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay, it doesn't-- Speaker 2: Now, it's just a little cocktail party. People are, are interviewed en masse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's similar to what happened in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and very rarely is anybody rejected. You might have one or two people a year who are turned down, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They're real jerks, though, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. (Laughter). Okay. Speaker 2: On occasion, and one or two people a year are-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --removed from the club. Speaker 1: But what if you live in another city? Is that--you still can join? Speaker 2: It's cheaper, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You have--you're a nonresident member. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're not allowed to vote-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the elections, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I'll have to look into that. Speaker 2: Okay. So anyway, so you--okay, Right. So that whole thing happened in 2002 when they tried to overturn the current board and so-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --you're saying that your successor successfully--and the successive slate. Speaker 1: Yeah, and what's interesting is since my term in office, we have had a second black president and we've also had our first female president. Speaker 2: So who was the second black president? Speaker 1: A fellow by the name of Lewis Jones. He's a lawyer but he, he works as a business man. Speaker 2: I've heard of him, okay. So was he in the pipeline during this-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --time period. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So he was-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. He was-- Speaker 2: --he was also-- Speaker 1: He was active in the club as well, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Typically, people--[Joseph] Joe Hanlon was active. Speaker 2: Right. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you don't get up to president unless you-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --played the different roles. Speaker 1: Yes, you've gotta develop a track record. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Story_ID: 176943 Speaker 1: How does it happen about the New York State Bar Association [Albany, New York], that you--so are you actively still at this-- Speaker 2: I'm still active. They still call on me for a lot of things. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I'm saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In 2004-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was still active then. Speaker 1: So you were active the whole--when did you become active in the New York Bar? You didn't-- Speaker 2: Well, I-- Speaker 1: --mention that. Speaker 2: I joined in New York State--I joined the New York City Bar Association--well, I joined the American Bar Association [ABA] when I was at the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] because my officemate there said you should join. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's cheap insurance, life insurance, so I joined that, but I wasn't active. When I got to Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York], I started going to the ABA meetings probably two or three years after I joined Bristol-Myers for the continuing legal education. So I would go to the annual meeting, I'd take my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] and children, and I would go to the COE sessions and they would enjoy themselves, and then we'd all be together in the evenings. And then, when I was at Bristol-Myers, somebody suggested I join the--well, as soon as I got to Bristol-Myers, they suggested I join the [New York] City Bar Association, and so I joined. And I used to use to the library often, particularly when I was going to NYU [New York University, New York, New YOrk] at night, used to use the library over there for studying. 'Cause they said, you, you need to join because--join before you make enemies, because sometimes people object to, to becoming--and the city bar used to be almost like the Harvard Club. You had to have four people supporting your application and things of that sort. It wasn't just like the way you join the ABA, sent in application. It was a different process. And then a woman I had worked with--I'm not sure, I can't remember now what actually motivated me to join the state bar initially, but a woman I had worked with on the [New York State] Moreland Act Commission asked me to serve on a committee at the state bar. I think it was federal legislation. She's a federal judge now herself. And so I served on that committee, and that was my only activity for a number of years. But I had become active at the city bar, serving on a number of committees there and then they asked me to become a representative to the House of Delegates of the New York State Bar Association, so I agreed, and in my final year, I was chair of the delegation. Speaker 1: So what year was this? Speaker 2: This would be somewhere in the '90s [1990s]. We can--we can get the dates-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --if, if-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --it becomes relevant. But I chaired the state bar's delegation--the city bar's delegation to the New York State Bar House of Delegates. It would be in the late '90s [1990s] by the time I chaired the delegate--mid to late '90s [1990s] by the time I chaired the delegation. Then from there, I went on what they call an at large seat on the executive committee of the state bar association, and later I became vice president from New York City to the first--what they call the first department, and the vice presidents serve on the executive committee along with the at large delegates serve on the executive committee. And so I got asked to do different things at the state bar, and I showed that I was competent and, and effective. And then I decided to run for treasurer. I ran for treasurer and I was elected. I changed the financial reporting because it had been very boring, a very boring, low-tech process, and I changed the way we did the financial reporting at each of the House of Delegates meetings and that was well received. And then I decided, well I'm gonna run for-- Speaker 1: You changed it from what to--low tech to what? Speaker 2: Just using visual imagery in a more effective way because people were falling asleep during the financial presentation, and I invigorated it, and that has continued. And then I decided to run for president and I ran for president. I had two people opposing me and I won on the second ballot, and then I became president of the state bar, and they continue to call me. I've chaired a number of committees since then. I now co-chair the committee on diversity and inclusion and I'm chair of the committee on judicial selection. Story_ID: 176944 Speaker 1: You were the second African American-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to hold that position [president of New York State Bar Association, Albany, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So who was the first? Speaker 2: Archibald [R.] Murray. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Funny coincidence. I told you my family's from Barbados. Archibald Murray was-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --not just his family, but he was born in Barbados and came--immigrated to this country. And he was the head of the Legal Aid Society of New York for many years, wonderful person. And interestingly enough, we're both Episcopalians. I grew up in a church called St. Philip's [Episcopal/Anglican Church] in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and he went to St. Philip's, there's a St. Philip's [Church] in Harlem [New York, New York] also. I guess there is something about St. Philip's and the black community or whatever, but it's ironic. Speaker 1: So, you know, this--to be head of state bar, is there not a lot of African Americans even around the country? Speaker 2: More so now than-- Speaker 1: There-- Speaker 2: --before. He may have been the first in the country, but there have been several others. I know Michigan has had one and Pennsylvania has had, had one, and--yeah. Speaker 1: And I just met--I was in, in, in Houston [Texas] late last year, and there was someone, and I think he was the second also, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there--they haven't been--I mean, largely, largely, you know--I mean, because--I think, my personal opinion is that, you know, African Americans had their own separate bars-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with their black bars. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Now, you never joined a black bar. Speaker 2: I'm a life member of the NBA [National Bar Association]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, then my-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: My--okay. Speaker 2: National Bar Association. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: National Bar Association. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But we had--you know, locally in Chicago [Illinois], we had the Cook County Bar [Association], you know, and so, so I think people getting involved in the majority bars in a senior level, that's still-- Speaker 2: Not that common. Speaker 1: --required, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's not that common. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: One of my former partners, Marty Wickliff [Aloysius Martin Wickliff, Sr.], who was from Houston, had been asked to run for president of the state bar and he's a, a black man. He didn't feel his professional duties allowed him to do it, so he never did, so there's a possibility he would've won if he had. Story_ID: 176945 Speaker 1: What are you--I mean, in that position [president of New York State Bar Association, Albany, New York], what are you proud of that you accomplished? Now, your term was how long? Because-- Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You succeeded [Thomas] Tom Levin, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And was followed by Vince [Vincent] Buzard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: One of the things that--one of the lasting things I suppose and one of my legacies is I started something called law school day. And what this program does is it brings kids from inner city high schools to a law school, one of the fifteen law schools in New York State to spend the day there and they get some mock law school classes, they see some videos, they have some interactive exercises, and they also were getting a mock college class, and they got the opportunity to hear from minority lawyers from their community, district attorneys, people of, of, of that sort talking to them, and that continues now. It goes on--we've been, I think in all fifteen law schools now in New York State. We try to go to four or five law schools each year at least with these, these kids. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: So, so that was something I started on a very small scale and it's continuing-- Speaker 1: And it's, it's continuing to grow. Speaker 2: --continuing, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, because those--that type of exposure's important. If you don't see it, you can't really-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --believe it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And my life just demonstrates that-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --I think. Speaker 1: Now the, the other thing is, though you--I don't know if your life demonstrates that. I think your-- Speaker 2: I beg your pardon? Speaker 1: I think you read and you envisioned yourself and you got there, but a lot of people don't have even the exposure, remember to even think in, you know, in those terms. They're not even aware even though maybe-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was fortunate. I had family members with expectations. I had the example, my sisters going to college. I talked about the cousin who wrote that fictionalized family history, her mother [Winifred Sealy Standard] went to college. Her father was a lawyer and he later became a judge also; he's now deceased. So there were--there were some role models. And I had the lawyer who did such a poor job, according to my father [Byron Standard], on our eviction situation (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). So he was, like, I wanna get a lawyer in the family so we will never experience that again. Story_ID: 176946 Speaker 1: I saw some write-ups of issues that you were--and this may be, you know, not right, but, you know, there was concern about the attack on the, you know, by politicians on the judiciary. This was one of the issues. Can you talk about that? You know, 'cause they don't agree. You know, politicians may not agree with the decisions-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that judges made and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Right. Yes. And the fact that--well, we just have it now in New York. I--do I dare say in spades? We have it in spades in New York with the stop-and-frisk where Judge [Shira] Scheindlin, whom, whom I know has been said that she was prejudice in this decision, and I think anybody who has any experience with the black community know that pretextual stops go on all the time. I would like to cite an, an instance. I was coming back from a banquet a couple years ago with a black judge and Puerto Rican associate of this firm, and we were in a--in a black car. I don't know, what do they call the livery service in Chicago [Illinois]? Do they call them black cars there too? Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. So--yeah, so we're in a black car, we were dressed in black tie, and we drove up to Harlem [New York, New York] where the, the retired judge who was a former partner of mine had parked his car, and we drove up 3rd Avenue and made a left from 3rd Avenue onto 126th Street and, and then drove over to 126th Street to let him out in the parking lot. So we pulled up, let him get his car, waited for him until he got his car, and then we pulled out from the parking lot into the street. The flashing lights come on behind us, we pull over. Police say you made a left turn against a red light. There was no red light from the parking lot (laughter). You know, we'd been on the street for a minute or two before they come up, and they pull us over. So I said to the associate, don't make any sudden moves, just keep your hands in sight. Don't even let him see you're looking at their name tags; we don't want any trouble. And I don't know if they stopped us because the driver was black, and most of these black cars don't have black drivers, but they stopped us and it was complete boloney. We were on the street, there was no red light violation, and we're coming from a parking lot, but they pulled us over. So, so it happens. Speaker 1: How did that--but how--you didn't tell the end of that story. So you got off and-- Speaker 2: I filed a complaint. Nothing ever happened. Finally, after following up, I spoke to a police officer at the precinct. There was no recollection. The officers denied anything. There was--there were no records. Speaker 1: There was no records. Speaker 2: There was--there was no--there was no satisfaction. Speaker 1: Maybe they realized-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what they had done-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then maybe they-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did they know you were lawyers by the end? Speaker 2: Yeah, no-- Speaker 1: I often say that I am-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --but that gets me-- Speaker 2: We didn't even interact with him. We just let him interact with the driver. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 176947 Speaker 1: Now you also talked about the one issue that's a priority for the bar [New York State Bar Association, Albany, New York], and that was custodial interrogation, sorry. Speaker 2: Yes, custodial interrogations, right. We know how many false confessions are induced. We know about police abuse of people during the interrogation process, and there is a simple aid here, and that's the videotaping of the entire interrogation from start to finish. It's not that expensive to videotape and it keeps everybody on best behavior. It helps prevent false confessions. It helps reduce the chicanery that goes on during interrogations. It would eliminate any physical abuse that occurs. And I think further, I think police who are in the street on foot patrol, police who are in cars should have videotape devices on them and also audio recording, so that whenever they have any interaction with any person on the street, there should be a recording of it. It's cheap enough to do and we know there are so many people who are beaten by the police or shot by the police without justification, and this is a way to reduce the incidence of that, and it's a low cost, low tech device that should be employed. I mean, we know that there are some patrol cars that already have these devices; make sure all patrol cars have them, but the devices are small enough now people on foot patrol can have them too. And we have instances like the situation in White Plains [New York] where this retired correction officer who was a veteran of the [U.S.] Marine Corps had a health issue, his, his monitor went off by accident, police responded supposedly to help him. They end up calling him a nigger and breaking down his door and shooting him. We also have the situation, another Westchester [County, New York] situation where a college student from Pace University [New York, New York], it was homecoming weekend, he and other students were out celebrating, perhaps had too much to drink. Police come from Pleasantville [New York] and Mount Pleasant [New York], and they shoot the nineteen-year-old, Danroy Henry, fatally. No videotape record of what happened. Cop says he was threatened, he was hit by the car, and the grand jury refuses to indict. There is civil litigation now ongoing. The policeman who shot that kid was elected policeman of the year by the Pleasantville Police Force the following year. Again, videotaping, audiotaping, combination of those. Speaker 1: Have those been implemented? I mean I know that-- Speaker 2: Some places, as I said, have them in the cars. I don't think any place-- Speaker 1: Has-- Speaker 2: --has them on the body of the-- Speaker 1: Has them on-- Speaker 2: --police officers. Speaker 1: Right. So do you think that Trayvon Martin would've had a different conclusion? It's hard to even tell-- Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't any policeman, remember? Speaker 1: There was--right. Speaker 2: It was a vigilante. Speaker 1: It was a vigilante. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that would not have helped that situation at all. Speaker 1: Situation at all. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you--do you think that, that there will be major changes in laws like this as it relates to--I mean, DNA testing has helped, you know, but do you think there'll be other laws that, that-- Speaker 2: I think so. I--but I think only if we continue to press for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Because politically speaking, it's not always--it's--that, that movement has been somewhat counter to-- Speaker 2: Yes, but-- Speaker 1: --to protect--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --this of course, remember, it will mostly benefit minorities, but it benefits everybody, and the custodial interrogations benefit not simply the suspect, but they benefit the prosecution as well. Speaker 1: Right. Right. So now in--I just worry about if things could be taken out of context still, but-- Speaker 2: Well, as long as you, you can demonstrate--it seems to me you can demonstrate whether the tape has been edited. Speaker 1: That's true. Story_ID: 176948 Speaker 1: So now how did you come to work at Epstein Becker [& Green, P.C., New York, New York] then? Speaker 2: Through a friend. I was special counsel at Morgan Lewis [& Bockius], so I was working part-time there and I was president of the [New York State] Bar Association, which obviously didn't give me a lot of free time because that's a full-time job, and my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] said, you're doing all this volunteer work, you ought to get paid for some of your work, so why don't you go back in the workforce full-time? And I have a friend who's a headhunter, and she knows him as well, and I said that Valerie is, is bugging me to see about getting some full-time employment. I wasn't happy at Morgan Lewis. The guy, I think I told you who brought me in had gone to San--to Los Angeles [California]. And she said maybe I should try another law firm or something. I said why don't you try, see if you can get me something on the board of directors first; that one might be easier. So he did without success and he said, well, let me take you to some law firms. So he ended up taking me to several law firms, and the chemistry worked out with Epstein, Becker, & Green, and they asked me to come on part-time, you know, of, of, of counsel. And then later, I think I was still president of the bar association--they had a couple of situations they asked me to, to help them with involving personnel problems. And I think as a result of those, 'cause they originally were interested in me only for diversity issues. They asked me to become the firm's first general counsel, so I became general counsel of the firm and started dealing with, with its legal problems and created that office and built it up. So, and, and now I've had two successors, so I'm now emeritus, but that's how I ended up here. It was just happenstance and-- Speaker 1: So is this new, that firms would have their own general counsel? 'Cause I never-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: It's relatively new. I would say it was-- Speaker 1: I've never heard-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of that before. Speaker 2: Yeah, within the last ten, twelve years. Speaker 1: Is that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to keep issues internal so they don't go-- Speaker 2: Well, it's because firms have gotten larger and they have a lot more issues and they need a formal way of dealing with the issues, and it also was a way of trying to get attorney-client privilege, and that is being recognized now by more and more courts, that this does not benefit simply the law firm, it also benefits the clients because the firms are more likely to seek advice early and head off problems before they get out of hand if they are--will be deemed entitled to attorney-client privilege even when it's adverse to the client, you know, which is a big issue. Story_ID: 176949 Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: So, you'll see many of the larger firms, perhaps most of them now have internal general counsel. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's--that's a fascinating role, so in that role, are you--can you tell me how it works? Are you working with the management, executive committee and the managing partner? Speaker 2: Right, for example, I attended--when I was general counsel [at Epstein Becker & Green, P.C., New York, New York], I attended all the board meetings. I attended, as well as the two senior management people of the firms; one was a lawyer, one was not. So we were the only ones who were not members of the board who attended all the board meetings and executive committee meetings and things of that sort. Speaker 1: So did you--have you liked that role with that-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was an interesting role, yes, and I was able to create the position and I was able to improve a lot of the procedures, you know, working from that position, create--improve a lot of the firm's procedures or create procedures for the firm that are now in place and help to ensure a smoother management process-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and a better quality control, you know, client complaints and litigation with clients have, have declined, yeah. Speaker 1: I see because it was even affecting outside client relationships in-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in a lot of cases. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, that makes sense. I guess you don't always think of that. I also know that lawyers are not the best managers. Speaker 2: And--exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And lawyers now know within the firm, there's somebody to go to if I wanna discuss an ethics issue or conflicts issue; there's somebody I can go to. Speaker 1: So how, how does the--how does the general counsel work in tandem with, with HR [human resources] then? Speaker 2: Well, if we have, for example, a complaint of discrimination, sex, age, race, harassment, any of those issues, HR would work with the general counsel's office-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, under the supervision so there could be some legal privileges asserted, but those were among the issues that I had to deal with, were discrimination complaints or harassment complaints. Story_ID: 176950 Speaker 1: Where are you in your life right now? Speaker 2: Me? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: In between deciding what I wanna do with the rest of my life. I wanna stay active. I think I would like to stay with the firm [at Epstein Becker & Green, P.C., New York, New York] another couple of years. My kids are after me to retire and smell the roses some more. Speaker 1: (Unclear), right? Speaker 2: Yes. I'm not sure what my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard] would say if she was still alive. Speaker 1: What do you think she would say? 'Cause she passed away now-- Speaker 2: A little more--a little more than two years ago. Speaker 1: Two years ago. Speaker 2: A little more than two years ago. I think she realized I needed to--better than I, that I needed some of the intellectual stimulation that comes from the workplace and, and not simply from volunteer activities, but I'm, I'm seventy-seven now, so-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --I don't know if she would--she would agree that, you know, I, I should continue. Speaker 1: But you're in good shape for seventy-seven. I think-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, people don't have to retire. Speaker 2: Well, we'll see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because the--in the firms, as you know, there's always pressure to make-- Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: --make room for the younger ones coming along, so I don't know how much longer I can hold out. I think it's important for our physical and mental health to stay engaged in something. Story_ID: 176951 Speaker 1: My question is, what haven't you done that you would like to do in your life? Speaker 2: I haven't really thought about anything that I haven't done that I would like to do. I think I have done so many things that I never dreamed I would do and have been so many places I never dreamed I would get to see, that I feel pretty fulfilled in that sense. I would like to see my grandchildren progress in their lives and have happy, productive lives. Speaker 1: How old are they now? Speaker 2: They range from one year to eighteen years, so I have one in college, one in high school, one in elementary school, one in preschool, and one in infancy still, and I have only one granddaughter; she's in high school. Speaker 1: So four grandsons. Speaker 2: Yep. Yep. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, you're, you're, you're-- Speaker 2: The name will continue for a while, presumably. Speaker 1: That--that's--that feels good. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yeah, my father [Byron Standard] probably would be happy. Speaker 1: He'd be very happy. Speaker 2: So there's--so you feel like if you had to live your life again, would you change anything about it? Speaker 1: I think I would've spent more time with my wife [Valerie Anne Salmon Standard]; that is probably the only change I would've made. I would've spent more time with, with her. But aside from that, I, I think I've made good use of my time here on earth and I don't think I've caused problems for others to any significant degree and I think I've helped other people in a significant degree, and continue to do so. And, for example, one of my nephews emailed me to thank me for a meeting I set up for him with somebody. He's going through an outplacement or he has experienced an outplacement, so he's looking for new employment, and I've been able to introduce him to a--to a number of people. And his sister also credits me with having influenced her decision to become a lawyer, so I can say I've had impact, a positive impact on a number of people who have acknowledged it to me. And I've been able to help a lot of people along the way. I'm trying to help, as I mentioned, that law student now, find some employment. Speaker 2: Right. So you--did any of your kids wanna follow in the legal profession? Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. None of them expressed any interest. They all had been to the office with me many times when I was at Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]. Nobody--and I didn't push anybody in that direction. Their mom was a psychiatric social worker and nobody went into that field either. Speaker 2: So what fields have they--did-- Speaker 1: All in business of one kind or another. Speaker 2: I see, okay. Speaker 1: All in business. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Well that's not a bad profession. It's in style these days. Story_ID: 176952 Speaker 1: So leading comes very easy to me. I don't mind the responsibility, and as a matter of fact, I enjoy the responsibility and the opportunity to make a difference. I have given dozens of speeches over the years, so I'm very comfortable talking to an audience. I still give a number of speeches each year, and, and a lot of that comes from elementary school in particular where we were in plays and we had to make presentations, and that's one of the illustrations of how important giving kids a quality education is, giving them the opportunities to learn these skills, same thing with the writing. I've been told I write well and, again, I've, I've had the opportunity to do a lot of writing and improve my writing. And if we don't give kids the ability to do that, they're gonna be handicapped and limited for the rest of their lives. I have to write all the time, and I'm--I feel comfortable. There are other people who are not comfortable because they haven't been trained and they haven't been given the opportunity to practice those skills. Speaker 2: That's right. So it's all really about exposure is what you're talking about and maybe some goal setting along the way, right? Speaker 1: Goal setting by others for you and goal setting by yourself. Probably the goal setting we do for ourselves is more important, but if we don't get some guidance, we don't learn how to set goals for ourselves, and we also need encouragement because as you know, it's difficult to achieve certain goals, and one can get discouraged along the way. Story_ID: 176953 Speaker 1: Where did race come in and play a role where it was a limiting factor? Where? Speaker 2: Oh many-- Speaker 1: And at what-- Speaker 2: --many, many, many places. I can remember the first time I was called a nigger. It was when I was in school, in first grade, and a boy came up to me and punched me in the stomach, said, you know, you're a nigger and I can't play with you anymore. And I also remember, and this was in first grade, that teachers asked a question, what is an agreement? So, I'm remember this seventy plus years ago, what is an agreement? So I raised my hand to answer, what is an agreement? And she ignored me a while and then said with irritation, "All right, Kenneth, go to the bathroom." She thought I couldn't possibly be answering the question, but I was raising my hand because I wanted to go to the bathroom. So those were indications, oh, well people do see me differently. They see me as inferior. And then of course, there were other incidents through the years where that became apparent. So I recognized that there is this burden that minorities have in any society where they are in the minority. They're always gonna have a harder way to go. And they're gonna be denied equal opportunity, and I've seen that. I, I believe that might've been a factor with both the [U.S.] Navy and the [U.S.] Coast Guard. I don't know, but that's one of the problems with discrimination and prejudice. You don't know when a decision is made on the merits or when it's made because of racial prejudice and discrimination, so you always have this uncertainty. Am I good and just being denied these things? Or do I need to do something to improve so I will not be denied these things? And we can't improve by changing our skin color or the texture of our hair or our facial structures, but if it's something intellectual and it's not a question of intellectual gifts, but it means I just need to study more, then I can do it. But if it's something that's a, a fact purely of prejudice, there's nothing I can do about it and that's such a frustrating feeling that the world is so unfair and yet we know there's a lot of that that continues to exist in the world and we're--many of us who are working to try to change that, but that's gonna be a long, slow process. But in the meantime, what we can do is make sure that people have equal educational opportunities. Story_ID: 176954 Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the black community, you know, as you sit here today? Speaker 2: That people will take advantage of the opportunities that they have, but we need to recognize that not all this can be done by the community itself, and by that, I mean by black people. Because self-help is important but there are certain barriers that self-help can't overcome, and those barriers have to be overcome. For example, when we have gerrymandering of districts on racial lines and we have efforts to prevent people from voting, self-help won't deal with that adequately. We need to get at the source of those problems, which are in the political system, and we have a lot of hypocrisy among our politicians. There are many politicians who appear to want to deny equal voting rights to minorities for whatever reason, but that, that seems to be a fact. And we talked about the Voting Rights Act, and new burdens that the [U.S.] Supreme Court now has imposed on us if we are going to demonstrate that the Voting Rights Act was violated. Why? Speaker 1: Okay. Were you ever considered for a judicial position? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. I know somebody did approach me about whether I wanted to be a judge some years ago, but I really don't have any desire. I've never had any desire to be a judge. I know some people have a strong desire to be a judge, but I've never really aspired-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to be a judge. I am content being a lawyer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --rather than being a judge. Story_ID: 176955 Speaker 1: Do you think that a lot of your peers have done equally when you look at the--your generation? Your generation that came--your generation is ahead of my generation. Speaker 2: Yep. What do you mean done equally? Done what equally? Speaker 1: Done--been equally committed to that, to the-- Speaker 2: To creating opportunities for others? Speaker 1: --the umbrella, the umbrella, the umbrella. Speaker 2: To-- Speaker 1: For-- Speaker 2: Creating opportunities for others who come behind? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I really can't say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I know there are many people who are; I work with many of them in my volunteer activities, and not simply minorities. There are many people in the majority population with whom I, I share this, this vision of equal opportunity and with whom I try to address the lack of equal opportunity, so I don't know what's in people's hearts, but I do know that I'm not alone; there are many other people. And I see this in my efforts at the various bar associations and I've seen it in things like when I was visiting these HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] institutions. I certainly was not the only one doing that. And I, I can't imagine that I'm the only one who's--tries to help other people still or has been willing to do things for women or for other minorities. I, I--no, I wouldn't--that, that would be arrogant of me to say that I believe I'm the--I think there are many others who are doing it. And there are some perhaps who are doing it quietly and we don't know that they're doing it and there are others who are more public-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I will tell you an example I-- Speaker 1: I meant--I meant from the generational standpoint. Speaker 2: I'm not following from the generation. Do you mean to help people in the younger generation? Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, no, I'm talking about, do you see that replicated in, in-- Speaker 2: In the younger generation? Speaker 1: --in the younger generation, yeah. Speaker 2: I know people who are younger than I who share some of the same views that I have and are not forgetful of people who need help and who appreciate that they may have advantages that others do not have. There are--I'm sure there are other people who don't, who maybe are so self-absorbed that they think whatever they accomplish, they accomplished on their own and it's every tub on its own bottom; they don't have to help others. But something about scouting, I think people who get into scouting and stay with it, believe in doing a good deed. Story_ID: 176956 Speaker 1: Just two more questions. I think of you-- Speaker 2: I have a lot of stamina, you don't-- Speaker 1: I know. I know. Speaker 2: --have to worry about me. Speaker 1: When I think of your story, I'm thinking of the quintessential American, you know, from rags to riches, you know, story. Because, you know, that's the hopeful part of the American dream that you have actualized. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have lived the American dream and this is a great country despite the shortcomings because one can overcome many of these obstacles with persistence and because there's always somebody willing to help, always somebody willing to help. You may have to search a while, but there's always somebody willing to help. Not everybody believes in suppressing others. Speaker 1: And what do you think about the importance of the legal profession. I mean, as a--'cause nowadays, you know, there were people questioning about the structure of law firms and they have to have new structures going forward, you know, planned--a lot of times a planned turnover, you know, that was sort of in the past. Even law, if that's the right--you know, why go and have that debt? And, you know, maybe you don't wanna work as hard, you know, so what, what do you--the law profession going forward in the future, the need for it, the, the value of it as a career--as a career. Speaker 2: There, there is an un--there's a great unmet need for lawyers now. There is the work to do, a lot of opportunity out there. There are a lot of unmet legal needs. The problem is, we don't have a method of assuring there is the funding to pay lawyers to meet these unmet needs. There's a lot of discussion going on now about we need new models and we need to figure a way to make law school affordable. I doubt we can find a way to make law school much more affordable than it is because the professors now have gotten accustomed to getting what may--they may perceive and perhaps with justification as pay well-earned for their positions. We have to find a way to fund that 80 percent perhaps of the population who does not benefit from legal representation and could well benefit. And I know there are efforts afoot in the various bar associations, trying to find a way. I doubt we can, as I say, reduce the cost of legal education at this point; I may be wrong. There may be opportunities for more use of computers and less live interaction, but I do think the live interaction is essential. I think law professors deserve to be adequately compensated for their teaching. But there may be a way to discover what it is costing society to have all these unmet legal needs, and it may turn out if you meet these legal needs, that cost would be enough to offset the cost of the additional lawyers. Maybe I'm dreaming, but that's the hope. And I know there are people who are working, trying to figure out if that in fact is the case. For example, what is the cost of people not being represented and going to prison? Two things when people go to prison, they can no longer contribute to society in a productive way and you have the cost of the institutionalization. The bricks--the bricks and mortar, the utilities, the people who are overseeing them in prison. If those people could be shifted to productive--for example, can the prison guards make some products? Produce some services? Can the incarcerated people make some products? Produce some services? If we can find a way to get them out of this cycle? And one of the ways obviously is education and acculturation, not simply education. I think you need acculturation in addition to the education so that people grow up with role models who demonstrate, I don't have to be a criminal. I can make a living doing honest productive labor, and I can benefit society. I can contribute to the gross domestic product. But there's a lot of work needs to be done to bring about that reality. Story_ID: 176957 Speaker 1: --Why were you good at what you did? Speaker 2: I grew up with a strong work ethic. I was blessed with a certain level of intelligence and that's something we don't have any control over. I--similarly, the work ethic, I don't think that's something that I had any control over. I think that's something that I either inherited or was infected by somebody else with it. And life is really very much a lottery, so I think most of it was the gifts I was given, and these gifts that I was given allowed me--certain of the gifts that I was given allowed me to use other gifts that I was given in a productive way, and not everybody has those gifts, and we've gotta take that into account. In our society, not everybody is going to accomplish what you or I accomplish, no matter how much we hope they will and how much we encourage them, because we are all limited by the gifts we're given. Story_ID: 176958 Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be, Mr. Standard? Speaker 2: That I maximized my gifts and I tried to use them in a productive and positive way, and that I have made a difference in the lives of many people as a result. And that I'm paying back all those people who made a difference in my life and are responsible for helping me get to where I was, my family members, my teachers, my coaches, my advisors, my boosters, and people I may not even know the existence of who in some way helped me. Story_ID: 176959 Speaker 1: This is a photo reproduction of a portrait that was painted of me by a woman by the name of Laurel Stern Boeck. And the Harvard Club [of New York, New York, New York] has a tradition of commissioning a portrait of its presidents at the conclusion of the term of that president's time in office, and so this portrait was done in the year 2002. Speaker 2: Great, next. So all you gotta do is keep putting them up there and keep telling us about 'em. I think there's one other large one to your right. Speaker 1: Oh this? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then we'll go to that pile in black and white. There we go. Speaker 1: Here, do this one next. Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, tell us about this one? Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] class of 1958 during its twenty-fifth reunion and the photograph shows us in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on the steps of what I believe is Widener Library. Speaker 2: And I think you have enough cable, can you just point out--use this as a pointer and point out where you are in the-- Speaker 1: Oh, I don't-- Speaker 2: --and it's not--if you can find it. Speaker 1: If I can find myself in here. Speaker 2: Maybe stand just a little bit more to the side, yeah there. Speaker 1: Do we have another over there? The black and white of this? I was just wondering--I can't see myself in this crowd. Speaker 2: Is this the same one as this? Speaker 1: No, that's a different one. I should really have brought my glasses. Speaker 2: I wouldn't even worry about it. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm somewhere in that-- Speaker 1: Don't worry about it. Speaker 2: I'm somewhere in that crowd. Speaker 1: Okay, here, let's get the next--okay. Speaker 2: Okay, that one I can find myself. This is another, another photograph taken at that twenty-fifth reunion, and I think this is in front of Sever Hall [Harvard University], though I'm not sure. And this shows the group of what they called in those days aides. I'm not sure if they call them that anymore since the disease's incident. But I'm over here in the left-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the row and that's--the reason we are dressed this way is because that's how the aides dressed, the Harvard men in top hat and tails, and the Radcliffe [College, later, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachuestts] women in those white dresses with sashes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and this one? Speaker 2: Oh, I lost my mic. Speaker 1: So should I be worrying about positioning these, centering--'cause I'm-- Speaker 2: No, we can center 'em. It does--it does help, though. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: There we go, okay. Speaker 2: This is one of the photographs of Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] and my church wedding, which was our second wedding to each other, and this photograph was taken at I believe St. Theresa's church in Brooklyn [New York, New York], and the date was July 9 of 1960. And I believe this is Valerie's friend, Judy [ph.], here, and this is her cousin, Elsa [ph.], I believe, and then there's Valerie, and I guess I'm in there. I don't see myself at the moment. My brother is there, and this is one of my college roommates, Bill Hillicker [ph.], and looks like another college roommate, Jason Andrews [ph.], next to him. I can't make out the other faces. I think I am standing next to Valerie, there to Valerie's right. Speaker 1: Okay, very good, thank you. Speaker 2: Years--you didn't--it helps to say year. Your year. Speaker 1: My year? Speaker 2: The year that this was taken at your wedding. Speaker 1: Okay, and this is a photograph from that same twenty-fifth reunion in June of 1983, and at the twenty-fifth reunion, many of the reunioners bring their children with 'em. And in the right foreground, the third person in from the right is my oldest son, Devin Standard. I don't know the names of the other children of my fellow reunioners there. Speaker 2: Okay. That's fine, thank you. Speaker 1: This is another photo from that reunion, and it shows children and some of the reunioners as well, and to the left is a friend that my daughter made at the reunion, and she is the second person, my daughter, Alison [Standard], the second person from the left in that photo. Speaker 2: We need years. Speaker 1: That was in--that was in June of 1983. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: Everything from the twenty-fifth reunion is June of '83 [1983]. Speaker 2: This is a photo of my wife, Valerie, with her father entering the limousine, and I believe this is before the wedding ceremony rather than after it, and this was July 9 of 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. So we know all the wedding photos are July 9, 1960. Speaker 2: And this is a photo from the wedding reception and there's a face partially obscured by the--again, I believe that's one of Valerie's cousins. The woman standing and smiling down at Valerie, I don't know her identity. That is Valerie who is looking up and smiling, and she's smiling at one of my cousins, (unclear), and I am directly to (unclear) left and that is (unclear) hand on my shoulder, and she's got her left hand on my shoulder and her right hand on Valerie's back. And to my left is one of my college roommates, Bill Hillicker, who was my best man, and to his left is my brother, Byron [Standard, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this is a photo of Valerie and me leaving the church after the wedding and headed to the reception and the--again, it's July 9 of 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is Valerie and me at the reception looking at a photo, it appears, and the people sitting to our left are Bill Lider [ph.], a friend from college, he was the class ahead of me, and we both lived in Dunster House during our undergrad--our upper class years at Harvard. And that's his wife, Emily [ph.], to his left. Again, that's July 9, 1960. Speaker 1: This is a photo of Valerie and me dancing at our wedding reception on July 9, 1963. Speaker 2: Great, next. Speaker 1: Do you want the location of the photos too or just the dates or? Speaker 2: Well, what location-- Speaker 1: Well, that was at another church. That was at St. Gregory's where we had the reception. Speaker 2: Okay, that's good. No it's--that would be good (unclear). You don't have to take them out. Speaker 1: Oh, fix it. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photo taken on the steps of St. Theresa's on July 9, 1963. Going from left to right, that is my mother, Winifred [Sealy Standard]; to her left is my mother-in-law, Ena, E-N-A; and then there is Valerie; and then there is me. And then to my left is my father, Byron [Standard], and to my father's left is Valerie's father, Weed, W-E-E-D. Speaker 2: Great. Next. Speaker 1: And that is Weed Salmon, S-A-L-M-O-N, and Ena Salmon, S-A-L-M-O-N. Speaker 2: That's pretty. They're beautiful pictures. Speaker 1: And this is the wedding party at the altar. Do you want me to give people's names from the backs of their heads if-- Speaker 2: No, that's okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. 'Cause I can identify some of them. Speaker 2: No, that's okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is the bridal party and it looks like we are coming out of the church, though I'm not sure. Speaker 1: You can keep talking. Speaker 2: And I think the bridesmaid on the far left is Valerie's friend, Judy, but I'm not sure, and then there's her cousin, Elsa, and I don't remember the name of the flower girl. And I'm not sure about the lady in the back bending down. And then we have Valerie, and then we have Valerie's cousin, Dorothy [ph.], to her--Valerie's left. And then we have another former college roommate, Jason Andrews [ph.], who is to Dorothy's left. And we have looking into the church next to Jason, Ronald Whittaker [ph.], a friend from elementary school and high school [Boys High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York]. Next to Ronald Whittaker is my other college roommate, Bill Hillicker, my best man, and then I am the last person in the photo. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: All right, this is a photo from my twenty-fifth reunion and it's friends from the Harvard swimming team. To my left is a diver from the team by the name of Dwyane Merner [ph.]; to his left is a person who is still a close friend of mine, Ronald Mishner [ph.], who is also the godfather of my son, Devin; and to his left is Peter Buffington who was a slow backstroker on the team; to his left is a guy by the name of David Fork [ph.] who was a breaststroker; to David's left is a guy by the name of Greg Stone [ph.] who was the diver. I was the slowest member of the team and Peter Buffington was the next slowest member of the team. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Very good. Speaker 2: This is a photo of the, the team that was taken in May of 1956. And I'll start with the back row and I'll identify those I can remember. This is [Harold] Hal Ulen, the coach, the man in the suit to the left. I can't remember the name of the guy, the swimmer to his left. The next swimmer is a guy by the name of Gus Johnson [ph.]. Next swimmer-- Speaker 1: You can sit there if you want. Speaker 2: Griff, Griff, Griff Winthrop [ph.], next swimmer, Abby Caston [ph.]. Can't remember the next two. Then there is me, then there's the diving coach whose name I can't remember, and then there's the manager whose name I can't remember at the moment; I think it was Merchant [ph.]. Then, below him is Rex Dupont [ph.], backstroker, can't remember the one next to him's name. Then, there's Ron Mishner, then there's Shuto Dyer [ph.], and then I think [James] Jim Jorgenson, and then Greg Hawkins [ph.]. I can't remember the next two, and then that's David Fork. Up in front is Peter Buffington, Dwayne Merner, Greg Stone, and I think this may be Segal Fork [ph.] to the left. I'm not--I can't recall for sure. Speaker 1: Did you say year? Did you say the year? Speaker 2: That was--yes, I said the year of that. That was in the spring of 1956. Speaker 1: Okay, great. Speaker 2: Okay this photograph was taken on the occasion of the unveiling of the portrait of me that was painted to commemorate my presidency at the Harvard Club, and in between the portrait and me is the artist, Laurel Stern Boeck, and then I am next to her. Speaker 1: Is that the, the architect's model of you? Speaker 2: Yes, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: I used that as my prop for the-- Speaker 1: Right, good. Speaker 2: Portrait. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: Oh, this was a photo clipped from the local newspaper in Northampton, Massachusetts, which shows my daughter, Alison, on her moving in day, her freshman year at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], and that would have been in September of 1979. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: Did it give--it might give the name of the other girl in the photo. Speaker 1: Ann Feifeield. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: F-E-I-F-E-I-E-L-D. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Turn it sideways if you would? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. I forget. Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: I completely forget. Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: That's, that's a photo from about 1950 of me and one of my boyhood friends horse playing on MacDonough Street in Brooklyn with a Schwinn bicycle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This says 1960. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's the wedding, so that's gotta be. Speaker 2: That's a photo of my roommate and best man, Bill Hillicker, and me and Valerie leaving the church. And there's the flower girl whose name I cannot remember. And I think we're--let me just see if we're leaving the church. Yeah, I think we're leaving the church rather than the reception. Story_ID: 176960 Speaker 1: Oh, that photograph was taken at The Otesaga [Resort] Hotel in Cooperstown, New York, in June 2004. It was my first speech as president of the New York State Bar Association. Speaker 2: Great. Next. Speaker 1: Now do you have anything from, from your bar association, from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the Harvard--you know, from Myers-- Speaker 2: Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: Bristol-Myers. Speaker 2: Do I have any photographs from Bristol-Myers? There--I think there's some photographs in there-- Speaker 1: Okay, good. Speaker 2: --from Bristol-Myers, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and this one? Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken at the Harvard Club [of New York, New York, New York] and it shows a celebration in 2002, given me by the employees of the Harvard Club to commemorate my three years in office as president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they're presenting me with a Tiffany clock. And the man to my left is the general manager of the club, [Robert] Bob Arnold, and the man to my right is one of the banquet managers at the Harvard Club whose name I can't remember and I don't recognize the bartender. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is another photo from that event and I don't recognize anybody in the photo except for, for Bob Arnold, the general manager of the club at the time. Speaker 1: Good, next. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is a farewell dinner given me by the members of the legal department at the Board of Education [New York City Department of Education]when I was leaving to go to Con Edison. And I recognize the man standing to the left at the back; his name is Everett Hughes. He was one of the lawyers who worked for me. I don't recognize the man standing in front of him. The woman sitting down, I--is another lawyer who worked for me and I believe her name is Adele Wayne [ph.], and the man standing up holding the cane, his first name is Jim and I can't remember his last name, but he worked in employee relations at the board of education. Speaker 2: And that, that was around August of 1989. Speaker 1: Okay, very good. Speaker 2: This is another photograph from the Harvard twenty-fifth reunion in June of 1983, and that's my fellow slow swimmer, Peter Buffington, to my right. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: This is another photograph from the twenty-fifth reunion, June 1983. I can't identify any of the people in the photo other than myself. Speaker 1: Hold on one second. Okay, good. Next. Speaker 2: Susan, didn't you know what you were letting yourself in for? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: This hand has been in (unclear) China, so-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, okay. It's another photo-- Speaker 1: I'm not an amateur. Speaker 2: Okay, it's another photo from the twenty-fifth reunion in June 1983, and I can't identify anyone in the photo other than myself. Speaker 1: Can you maybe just-- Speaker 2: Straighten it out a little? Speaker 1: Yeah, it needs a little reverse curl there, yeah. Speaker 2: Better? Speaker 1: Looks like it, yeah, that's good, but hold while I get a shot. Speaker 2: I was wondering how you were gonna use these photos. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: Oh, I can give you the date on this photo. It's on the back. Speaker 1: June--June 9th-- Speaker 2: June 9th '83[1983]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that was the previous photo for people who are viewing this. Speaker 2: Right, whenever you see me in the top hat, that would be June 9th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is another photo from the twenty-fifth reunion in 1983, and this was taken on graduation day, June 9th, 1983, and we're in Harvard Yard, and I can't see anyone in that photo well enough to identify anybody besides myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this was the--one of the first photographs taken of my daughter, Alison [Standard]. She was about six weeks old. No, actually I think she was about eight weeks old when this photo was taken because this was taken at the end of--nope, she was about twelve weeks old. I'm sorry. She was about twelve weeks old in this photograph 'cause this was taken in May, at the end of May, and she was born at the end of February, and so that is Alison. And that was taken by [HM] Charles Hobson. Speaker 1: Oh, it was? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's nice. Speaker 2: And this is a photo of a family outing to Riis--Jacob Riis Park [Queens, New York, New York], which is now part of the Federal Gateway Park [Gateway National Recreation Area] and it shows me to the left, Alison--I'm sorry, me to the, yes, to the far left, Alison to my right, and behind and to the left of Alison is a childhood friend by the name of Ronald Whittaker [ph.], and in front of him is his son, Ronald Whittaker, Jr. [ph.], and Valerie [Anne Salmon Standard] must've been taking this photograph. Speaker 1: Try something here. Let's see. Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a photograph that Valerie made on the Mall in Washington, D.C. Valerie attended the March on Washington and I had been working at the [New York State] Moreland Act Commission about two and a half months by now, and what we worked out that day was that I went to work, Valerie took the bus down to D.C. to the march, I took Alison over to my parents, and my parents [Winifred Sealy Standard and Byron Standard] babysat with Alison that day, and then Valerie and I picked up Alison after Valerie returned from D.C. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't--whatever the date the march was. Speaker 1: It was 1963. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that, but I, I don't know what the day of the week-- Speaker 1: It's-- Speaker 2: July what? Speaker 1: It just says August. Speaker 2: It was August [August 28, 1963]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's, that's a date that's verifiable. Speaker 1: Oh, and this is another photograph Valerie took while she was participating in the March on Washington in August of 1983 [sic]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 1: Sixth-three [1963]. Speaker 2: I assume that's me. I can't see in this photo, but I think that's me. Is that me in there, Susan? I didn't bring my glasses in. Speaker 1: I think it is you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the three children. Speaker 2: Okay. This is at Gilbert Lake [State] Park [New York] in July of '69 [1969], and this was a place that we went on summer vacation for about three summers, and that's me with the, the kids. That's Alison and to Alison's right is Devin, and in front of Alison is Trevor. Speaker 1: And this looks like another photograph taken at Gilbert Lake, and that looks like me with the three kids again, Trevor by my right hand and Devin and Alison in front of me. We were probably catching frogs. We used to catch a lot of frogs. Alison was a particularly good frog-catcher. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: It's an important skill (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I wonder if it serves her well now. Speaker 1: Yeah, and we have the same group now except that I'm taking the photo and Valerie is watching the kids as they go frogging. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay now, I wanna do these but more discretely. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Like, I see one on here, up here on the corner, and maybe this one here. But let's get things that haven't been covered. Speaker 2: So this one and this one. Speaker 1: Okay. This-- Speaker 2: You can start with (unclear) the upper left. Speaker 1: This--the upper left hand, this is my son, Devin's [Standard], graduation from Colorado College [Colorado Springs, Colorado], and to his right is my former swim teammate, Ron Mishner [ph.], who is Devin's godfather, and then there's Devin, and then there's me, and then there's my sister, Phyllis, and this would have been in June-- Speaker 2: For these, Susan, if you could just use the pencil to indicate which photo we're focusing on, yeah. And you can just do it once. You don't have to hold it there, just, you know, just point to it one time. Okay, and then the next one is what, the center one? Speaker 1: Okay, let me give you the date, let's see. I believe that's June '67 [1967]. Not, not '67 [1967], I'm sorry, '87 [1987], yeah. Speaker 2: And then just--yes, that's it--okay and then remove the pencil. Okay. Speaker 1: And that's just a photo of Devin, graduation day. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: This--and this was taking place in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Speaker 2: Okay is that it for this montage or this, this collection? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then (unclear). Oh, we got the cover on here. Speaker 2: And which one of those for this? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I--that I'm not as-- Speaker 1: Put it up there and we'll figure it out. Speaker 2: You know, there, there may be other things that I'm not sure of. Speaker 1: Okay. This, this is-- Speaker 2: Are there some-- Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I think maybe at the bottom, the second from--the third from the-- Speaker 1: This, this is in Northampton, Massachusetts, and this is Alison's graduation from Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts]. I think we already had the date. Speaker 2: Is that it? Is that it? Is that the one? Speaker 1: Yeah, that--no, no, no, this--the one over. No, no. Speaker 2: This one? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, that's-- Speaker 1: I thought maybe-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I picked those-- Speaker 2: Okay, that--the--that's a photograph of my wife, Valerie, at the left, her mother, Ena [Salmon], at the back, and my daughter, Alison, and this was taken on the occasion of Alison's graduation from Smith College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And is there anything else on there you think you want? Speaker 1: Anything would--that would get something we haven't already-- Speaker 2: Okay, well you--okay, you have in this one, that is Dr. Louise Pattick [ph.] in the far left and in the middle is Alison and that's Dr. David Pattick in the right. David Pattick [ph.] is one of my classmates and Alison's godfather, and Louise is David Pattick's wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Oh, now the big board. Speaker 2: That sounds like the New York Stock Exchange. Speaker 1: (Laughter). All right. Speaker 2: Anything on there? Speaker 1: That's a variety of, of scenes. Speaker 2: No, but anything that hasn't been covered. I think those look like mainly vacations. Speaker 1: Well, here you can get a photo of us in the company jet if you wanna get that. Speaker 2: Okay, that's this one. Speaker 1: This one, yep. Speaker 2: This one here? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Speaker 1: Yeah, we were traveling to St. Louis [Missouri] on the Bristol-Myers [later, Bristol-Myers Squibb, New York, New York] jet. Speaker 2: Okay, good, and remove the pencil. Speaker 1: And that's Alison sitting opposite Valerie on the left and there's Trevor facing the camera in front of me. Speaker 2: Susan, could you take your hand off of it for just a second? Will--it won't fall, will it? You think so? Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: No, it's okay. Speaker 1: I think we're-- Speaker 2: Well, let me get one shot of the whole thing just for its own sake, not that we have to identify everything, just to record what it is. And then, Mr. Standard, any other photos you think we wanna add to supplement what we've gotten? Speaker 1: Is that a Boy Scout photo in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, they were in--when they were in scouting. That's Devin and Trevor. And this--I'll tell you a story of that photo. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the next one? Speaker 2: The, the photo in the center, a stranger took that photo. Speaker 1: This one here? Speaker 2: No, right below that. Speaker 1: This one. Speaker 2: Yep. That was taken Thanksgiving Day, 1964, and I had taken Alison to see the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. It was a very warm day as you can see; I don't have an overcoat on. And some man was just taking photos of the parade and he took a photo of Alison and me 'cause he thought it was a cute photo I guess, and came over later and told me he had taken a photo and that he would like to send it. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So I--so I gave him a card and he sent me the photo. I was there with her alone because Valerie was so pregnant at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And down here is a photo of-- Speaker 1: Of which one? Speaker 2: --Valerie, Valerie getting one of her degrees. That's her, her bachelor's degree. Speaker 1: Second from the right in the bottom row? Speaker 2: Yes, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Here's a photo of--in our home with our dog. I think Hogan [ph.] is there with us. Speaker 1: Fireplace--the one with the fireplace? So the-- Speaker 2: Yep, yeah it's the one with the fireplace. Speaker 1: The second row, far left. Speaker 2: Right. Second row from the top, far left. Speaker 1: I think we're pretty good. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Guys, any others? Last, last requests? Speaker 2: Oh, this is my son, Devin's graduation from high school, and-- Speaker 1: Point to it one more time. Speaker 2: This one. That's June 1982. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: He gave the commencement address. He was president of the student body. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to his right is his grandmother, Ena Salmon. There's his mom and then his aunt Elizabeth [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his sister, Alison, his brother, Trevor, and I think that's his cousin, Jason, though I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay...