 Story_ID: 13763 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, as interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer and Samuel Adams is the observer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us? Speaker 2: Right, I'm Dr. Louis W. Sullivan. Louis, is L-O-U-I-S, Sullivan, S-U-L-L-I-V-A-N, President of the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Can you also give us your middle name, sir? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my middle name is Wade, W-A-D-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth and today's date? Speaker 2: Yes, my date of birth was November 3rd, 1933. Today's date is March 21, 19 -- sorry, March 21st, 2002. Sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay, and your profession? Speaker 2: I'm a physician. Story_ID: 13764 Speaker 1: What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I guess I will have to say fish. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: We can do it. Story_ID: 13765 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother. I'd like you to give her name and what you know about her background and her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's maiden name was Lubirda Elizabeth Priester. She was born in Aiken, South Carolina, but grew up in Savannah, Georgia. She became a school teacher and met my father while teaching school in High Point, North Carolina. After they were married, they moved to Atlanta, and that's where I was born. And my mother was a school teacher all of her life, became actually, a school superintendent in the--perhaps the later twenty years of her career here in Georgia and in Florida. Speaker 1: Sir, I want you to--can you just, did she share any stories with you about her growing up, whether it was in Aiken or Savannah? Speaker 2: Yes, primarily in Savannah because she was really quite young. I believe only two or three years old when the family moved to Savannah. But her father was a minister and also was a farmer. So she grew up in Savannah in quite a strict household. Her mother had died when she was quite young. And her father had remarried, and so had a stepmother from whom, with whom she really did not have a very good relationship. So she and her five siblings really had some difficulties in, in growing up. She had an older brother, then she was the second child. And the other three were sisters. So as the oldest sister in the house, she had a lot of responsibilities that fell on to her. Of course, this was during the years of segregation. And, of course, all over the South, including Savannah was rigidly segregated. And that was not a happy experience for my mother either. But in spite of all of that, she was a very hard worker. She was God fearing. She had an optimistic outlook on everything. She was a strict disciplinarian and had great expectations of her two children. I have an older brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.], a year and a half older, and myself. So she was a very important figure for me and really the center of the family. So she was a very loving person, in spite of her strict disciplinarian tendencies. And I give her a lot of credit for a lot of things that I've been able to achieve because that orientation that I received from her has stood me in good stead throughout my life. Story_ID: 13766 Speaker 1: And your father, can you give his name and tell us about his background, sir? Speaker 2: Yes, my father was Walter Wade Sullivan, Sr. He was born in Alachua, Florida and went to college, to Claflin College [now Claflin University] in South Carolina. He was the tenth of eleven children in the small community of Alachua. His father died when he was in college, in his second year. And he had to leave college to go back and take care of the family farm in Alachua because the other siblings were married with their own families, whereas my father was, was not. After his mother died, he then moved to Atlanta and was trained as a mortuary scientist, as an embalmer. And he, of course, met my mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan], and they were married. They lived here in Atlanta. And when we were born, that is my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] and myself, during the Depression. He was born in 1932, and I was in '33 [1933], my father tried all kinds of jobs to try to earn money for his young family, including selling life insurance. But moved from Atlanta when I was less than a year old, and we ended up in Albany, Georgia, where he went into a partnership in a funeral home there, which lasted about two years, where that partnership dissolved because of conflict between him and the other partner. He moved to Blakely [Georgia], a small, rural community, sixty miles west of Albany, near the Alabama border, established his own funeral home there in 1937, and from 1937 until 1957, was the owner and operator of Sullivan Funeral Home there. And my father was also quite an activist. He started a chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Blakely, for which the whites in the community were very upset. They considered him to be a troublemaker 'cause he also was working to get the impediments that faced blacks in voting, to getting them removed, such as the poll tax, literacy tests and other things that had been designed to discourage blacks from, from voting. He was actually shot by a person, a black person, who he later learned had been hired by some whites to do this. He survived that, but had an injury to the brachial plexus of his left arm--I'm sorry, of his right arm. So that he had to learn to write with his left hand because of that. And also, because of his activities on the political sphere of trying to get blacks to vote, we frequently--I shouldn't say frequently, but commonly, perhaps two or three times a year, had episodes where we were told that the Klan, the Ku Klux Klan would be riding through the black section of town that evening to intimidate my father and others. And with his friends, they would send word back that they would be waiting. And they would wait with their rifles and shot guns. And, fortunately, that never, that ride never occurred. But that was part of the environment that existed in that small town. And I do recall, as a small boy, that there were lynchings that did occur from time to time in that small community or around that area. My father was a short man. He was only five [feet] five [inches] tall, but he was very determined. And really the combination of his determination, his fearlessness, his courage, and my mother's optimism, and both of their commitment to high standards, and their refusal to accept the segregated environment in which we lived, those values were incorporated by me and, and my brother. My folks were so committed to an education that when I was in fifth grade, and my brother in sixth grade, they sent us back to Savannah to live with relatives, my mother's sisters, to attend school there because the schools in Blakely for blacks were so poor. The next year, they sent us to live with friends in Atlanta. And so we attended high school here in Atlanta, and I graduated from Booker [T.] Washington High School here in Atlanta and then, of course, came to Morehouse College. So those are some of the things about my parents that their vision, their determination, their refusal to accept the status quo of those years, really were a great inspiration to me and to my brother. Speaker 1: Great, thanks. Sir, how did your parents meet? You said they met in Atlanta. Speaker 2: No, in High Point, North Carolina. Speaker 1: In North Carolina. Okay, do you know how that--what was that story 'cause I don't remember your father going to High Point. Speaker 2: I frankly don't know. All I know is they met there. My mother had been previously engaged to someone else. And when--I do know that when my father met my mother, they became engaged. He went to Savannah to ask permission from my mother's father, my grandfather, to marry my mother. And my grandfather's response was that he had already given her permission to marry someone else. And she had chosen not to do so. So she was free to do whatever she wanted. So my mother and my father were married. But the circumstances around their, their meeting, I really don't know. Story_ID: 13767 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Is it in Blakely [Georgia] or is it before-- Speaker 2: It was in Albany [Georgia]. Speaker 1: It's in Albany. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: We lived in a brick house on South Jefferson Street in Albany. My father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] had a car, I think it was a 1935 Ford. It was a two-door car with a rumble seat, you know, the seat in the trunk on the outside of the car. And my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] and I loved to ride in the rumble seat. And my father, being short, also my father was completely bald and wore glasses, he really was kind of sight. He liked to wear very light colored suits, white suits or creme-colored suits, black and white--I mean brown and white shoes. So he was quite a dapper person. I was really, as a young, a very young boy, a home body. I would stay home. I was not very social, whereas my brother was very outgoing and was always, quote running to the neighbors, running away to do other things. And so there was quite a contrast between, between the two of us. But I remember that house. It was a very pleasant memory. But I do remember when my brother went off to attend first grade in the school, which was really only a half block away, I would also go over to the school. And so the teachers there told my mother that since I was so interested in attending, since my brother was coming, that it was all right for me to come over also. So I really started out a year earlier than I should have because I wanted to be part of, of those activities. Speaker 1: Now, what year--what age were you when you moved from Albany to Blakely? Speaker 2: Yes, I was four years old. That was 1937. Speaker 1: And what was the difference? Were they both just rural -- are they both rural Georgia or was there a difference really in the communities? Speaker 2: There was a difference. Albany is significantly larger. I think at that time Albany may have been a town of perhaps thrity-five or forty thousand people, which Blakely was only three or four thousand. So there really was quite a difference. Albany was quote the big city. The people from Blakely would often go to it, and certainly for shopping on weekends, etc. And I think blacks in Blakely were more readily exposed to the raw reality of segregation and oppression than was the case in Albany, though certainly, Albany, like virtually all southern cities of that time, certainly experienced it. But it was really more of a social network in Albany that I believe provided supported, as well as social clubs, etc. within the black community. So there's really quite a difference. Story_ID: 13768 Speaker 1: Do you think your--I know your father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] moved there so he could--he had a chance to have his own funeral home at that point. A lot of times, you know, you heard in those days that, you know, either be a preacher, teacher or funeral--you know, or doctor, no doctor, but, you know, also funeral director was, you know, up there. And I just was interested in why he, you know, he had a hard time cause I was thinking, you know, and it's, plus it's in a pretty small community? Speaker 2: Well, I think he had a hard time for a couple of reasons. First of all, there was no funeral home for blacks in Blakely [Georgia]. He went there, and established a funeral home. So you really needed to have the capital for, you know, buying the land and constructing the facilities and then getting inventory, which is not only, you know, the materials in the funeral, but his rolling stock, such as his ambulance and funeral cars, etc. So it was really that. And that was coupled with the fact that since he turned out to be what, I guess in retrospect, one would call an activist in the community, he had--and my mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan] had a hard time because of that. For example, my mother, being a school teacher, could not get a job teaching school in Blakely. She had to get a job in Bluffton [Georgia], an even smaller, rural community, fourteen miles north of, of Blakely. And my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] and I--she would take my brother and I--and me with her to school, to attend school in Bluffton. So we never attended school in Blakely. And my mother never taught school in Blakely either. She had over--they lived there for twenty years from 1937 to 1957, during which time she taught school in many other communities, Cuthbert, Georgia, which is thirty miles north, Donalsonville [Georgia], which is, I think twenty-one miles south and a couple of other communities. And she, I think, by the early '50s [1950s] had--had enough experience that she became a superintendent. So she served as superintendent in a number of places, but never in Blakely. This was the way that the powers establishment sought to suppress and to punish them for being quote activists. Speaker 1: And so your father, your parents move there, and he establishes, he starts a funeral home, and he's starting from scratch-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --now, how large is the black community there if the whole town is three or four thousand. Speaker 2: Well, I'd say that about half of the population is black. And, of course, while the town itself is three thousand, really you drew from quite a wide radius, perhaps, fifteen, twenty miles away. So, there I would--I'm only guessing, but I would say that the black community probably, maybe as much as ten or twelve thousand in that area. For example, one the towns northwest of Blakely called Fort Gaines [Georgia]. He would often go to Fort Gaines to really provide funeral services, you know, there. And then a small community such as Arlington [Georgia] and Leary [Georgia]. I mentioned Donalsonville, etc. So while they're in Blakely, which was a small community, he really served the whole rural community. Speaker 1: Now, did you have exposure to your, to the funeral home yourself growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And would you just talk to share a little bit of that? Speaker 2: Well, my brother and I would help my father. And that meant going with him where he would go to pick up someone who died and bring them to the funeral home. We would help in lifting the body on to the embalming table. He taught us how to embalm, etcetra. So we learned, and we would also be in attendants with him, you know, at the funeral home. So he, we were regular workers and laborers with him. He also, of course, operated an ambulance service to take people to the hospital or to the doctor's office. And we would do that and as my brother and I got older and were able to drive, we would frequently provide those services our self. And if our father was away, we'd be the responsible people doing that. So we had full exposure to, to the funeral home. We had to clean and dust the office, unload supplies. And so, so we really had to do everything. Again, my--I mentioned that my mother was a disciplinarian. So was my father in a very different way. His discipline was putting us to work. And, of course, he would derive the benefit from our work, from that. And he would give us a weekly allowance of something like twenty-five cents or fifty cents, which in those years was quite significant. But, oh, yes, we, we were a fairly close family. My parents had many friends, but, but my parents and my brother and I really did operate as a close unit in all activities, including supporting my father's business. Speaker 1: And there was no skittishness that you had at the beginning, you and your brother around -- Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no). Speaker 1: No. That's interesting. Okay. Speaker 2: No, you know, it's very-- Speaker 1: It came natural. Speaker 2: Yes, we would amused at people who would be afraid or intimidated by, you know, someone who was dead, but, no, you know, we would--if this was someone we knew, we would feel sad, but this didn't inhibit us at all, you know, in that because, of course, my father's attitude was that there's nothing to be afraid. He said, the--he's afraid of you if you're alive, not if you're dead. So he's afraid--'cause you can't harm him if you're dead. And, of course, he took great pride in his work, in really doing an excellent job embalming someone so they really had as natural a look as possible; having a funeral that came off in an orderly, a beautiful way with music and on schedule, etcetera, etcetera. He, he was a real professional. He really took, took great pride in that. One of the ironies, of course, would be him embalming, I can remember he would be humming to himself as he was embalming this person. And so, I guess for who someone who would happen--if someone happened to come in, it would be kind of an incongruous sight. Here's my father, busy working away, happy as a clam, and here's this unfortunate dead person who is there. But he didn't look at it that way because he certainly, in public, did everything to respect them, you know, as, you know, as individuals. Speaker 1: Do you--the other thing that I find interesting is your father's activism in life, that he had a business. And sometimes people in business are not necessarily activists. And I'm just wondering where did that come from? Do you know? I mean did he ever talk about that later or that was-- Speaker 2: Not really. I, I--no, I can't remember us talking about it. We took it for granted. Now, his clientele was the black community. So in a sense, that's very different from someone whose perhaps working for someone in the white community. And, as you know, black ministers have a similar kind of, kind of role. But, no, my, my parents both really resented and resisted the, the segregated environment and the indignities associated with that. And that's, that was always the case. I--they were never any different. So really, my brother and I grew up, you know, this was automatic that we didn't accept that. Our personal physician was Dr. Joseph Griffin, the black physician in Bainbridge, Georgia, which was forty-one miles south of Blakely. He is the only black physician in that area. And he is our physician because my folks, rather than going to a white physician in Blakely and having to suffer the indignity of going in a separate door or a back door, and also being called by their first name, rather than Mr. Sullivan or Mrs. Sullivan, they refused to accept that. So we would drive almost an hour to go to see Dr. Griffin, rather than to, to accept that. So that was, that was always that way. Story_ID: 13769 Speaker 1: What were you like as a young boy? Were you--I mean you said that my brother was very gregarious and I was more withdrawn and well mannered, right? Speaker 2: Sure, yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, were you the type of person who sort of lived within yourself? Did you sort of imagine, have a great imagination or were you a thinker or what? Speaker 2: Well, I guess I would say I was fairly self contained. Yes, thinker, I loved reading. I was a good student. I, of course, would enjoy going to the library. I was shy and, yes, the contrast--in those years, and I emphasize in those years because things did change. But my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] was a social one. He was the one that always had girlfriends, who and pretty, very pretty girlfriends, very popular. Instead, I was always kind of quiet and withdrawn. I, I wasn't the social center or the social leader or anything like that. I think I was respected by my friends and classmates because I was a good student. But, but, no, I would say that I was always someone who was quiet and withdrawn in those years. And, but, as I grew up, things changed. By the time I got to high school, I, while still not a social butterfly, I certainly had developed a circle of friends and became involved in a number of things, such as the high school band. I played a little--played trumpet and became president of the band. And also served as class president in my junior and senior years in high school and graduated as class salutatorian and was active in a number of, of things. So, so the quiet, kind of withdrawn self I had when I was growing up, perhaps, you'd say in the first eight or nine years of my life, that, that changed. And--. Speaker 1: What brought you out? What do you think pulled--you know, 'cause sometimes it's certain incidences or exposures that bring us out. Speaker 2: I don't really know. I guess it's hard to say. I, I guess I--looking back on it, I think it was probably a natural evolution 'cause by the time, I guess I was certainly twelve or thirteen, I started being interested in girls. So, you know, I think--and I can remember, you know, my first, first love life that ended tragically (laughter). Well, not that tragic, actually, it was someone I became totally infatuated with, but she not with me. And so my competition lived not too far away and so it was really painful to see that I was losing out to this other fellow. So, so I think that it was really a, a natural process of growth and of evolution. And I never really became what you would call a real social, you know, butterfly. And meanwhile, it's interesting that my brother who had been quite that way growing up, became somewhat more settled too. So, here, now, in my senior years, I'm much more outgoing and open, and my brother is much more, much quieter. So--but, but I can't say it was any one incident. I think it was simply a series of events. I, of course, had, did have a number of friends. And, of course, I was part of the usual organizations that young boys are involved in, the Boy Scouts and the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and those. So, I think all of those thing contributed to my, you know, growth and, and development. Story_ID: 13770 Speaker 1: Among other things, of course, my mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan] decided to get a master's degree in teaching. So she came to Atlanta University to get her master's degree. And my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] and I came with her that summer. She did this over two, the course of two summers. And during that time, my mother was exploring the possibilities of finding a place for my brother and myself to stay and go--and to attend school. So she met a Mrs. Maude Brown who is a friend of a friend, who was willing to board my brother and myself. So, so that was arranged. And so from the time I was in the sixth grade on, we lived with Mrs. Brown, who herself was a strict disciplinarian. That was the curse of my life, always having strict disciplinarians. But, but we lived with her until, when my brother finished high school, a year before I did in 1949, and he went to Clark College [now Clark-Atlanta University]. He lived on campus. The following year, I finished high school, and then went to Morehouse [College] and lived on campus. So that period of time, I guess around six years, and so we lived with Mrs. Brown during the school year. We'd go home to Blakely during summer vacations and at Christmastime and Thanksgiving. But we were in Atlanta because of the fierce determination of my parents for my brother and myself to get the best education that we could get. Speaker 2: And do you think your parents would have stayed in Atlanta had it not been--you know, if your father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] had been able to find--you, okay. With the move out there-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, it really was, this is during the Depression. Jobs were scare, and so he really--it was economic necessity that drove him to first go to Albany [Georgia] and then subsequently to Blakely [Georgia]. Story_ID: 13771 Speaker 1: When you think back on your childhood, and I was just wondering if you would take yourself back and think about any sights, smells or sounds that remind you of your childhood growing up? If you can think--. Speaker 2: Well, our sights would really be driving through the countryside during the time that cotton is matured, when the cotton has burst. And so you have these fields of cotton plants with the white cotton balls there because Blakely [Georgia] was an area where there was much cotton that was grown. And also peanuts were grown. So it seems like that would remind me of, of Blakely. And then I guess the, one other would be driving through any number of small towns where you would have those typical courthouse square, the small courthouse sitting in the middle of the square. And really it's kind of a red brick building, maybe with white appointments, so the--you know, white stones on the corners. And then a dome on the top. That was small town. So if I go through a community and see that, that would remind me of that. So it's primarily, primarily that. Story_ID: 13772 Speaker 1: I want to ask you, you went to school where your mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan] was teaching, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you went to Savannah [Georgia] for the year and was there anything significant about the Savannah year experience, except you were away from your--. Speaker 2: Right, no. Of course, we were living with relatives, my mother's sisters at the time. And really that's the reason we went to Savannah, it was the idea of going to a larger city because even though Atlanta and Savannah were segregated, blacks were less exposed to the direct oppression of segregation because there was a large enough black community with mutual support and social activities there. My school experience was a very pleasant one. I remember it was still the Paulson Street School was the school that I attended. The principal was another strict disciplinarian, which I guess that was my curse or maybe my advantage in retrospect, in growing up, because the principal was Dr. A. G. Gaston, who was quite well known in Savannah as a strict disciplinarian; lived many years. I think he died at age ninety-one. And, but he was really a highly respected principal. And I can remember--well, being sent down to his office because I had done something in class. I think I had--they would put the girls' pigtails into an inkwell on my desk, and which I thought was the cutest thing and the smartest thing in the world until the teacher sent me down to Dr. Gaston's office. And the result of that was that I got a spanking with the back of a hairbrush in the principal's office, and then sent back to class. And after that pain, I was suffering the embarrassment of my classmates knowing exactly what had happened, and trying to pretend that everything was fine, when I was, you know, quite embarrassed. And then going home that evening and getting another spanking. So that was, that was, made a big impression because that was the last time that happened. And, of course, when my--and going back to Bluffton [Georgia], I had an equally embarrassing situation because I was in my mother's class my first year in Bluffton. And again, I can't remember what it was, but I did something that I wasn't supposed to do so. And my mother had me come up to the front of the class, and she put me over her knee and spanked me there. And you're talking about real embarrassment but--and she was very serious. So here I had been embarrassed by my mother in front of all of my classmates. So, again, that wasn't so happy then, but again, maybe in these later years, I can say that had a net positive impact. Story_ID: 13773 Speaker 1: When did you start showing an interest in the, you know, math or sciences or the sciences? I mean was that starting very early or did it--. Speaker 2: It was early, and, in fact, I told my mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan] on our way to school one day--I think I was five or six years old, she asked, she was asking me and my brother what we wanted to be when we grew up. And I said I wanted to be a doctor. And my mother was very positive. She says, "Oh, that's great. You'd be a great doctor." And so, and my role model also was Dr. Griffin, our family doctor down in Bainbridge [Georgia] here. I wanted to be like him. He was very important. He was providing important services to the people in the community. He was highly thought of, and he was also well paid. So, and, of course, walking into his hospital, which he had build--he had built a forty-bed hospital himself, there'd be the smell of ether, which gave the place a little mystery. And it was different. And all of that, all of that appealed to me. So, so, really from the beginning, after going through the usual fireman, policeman, kind of thing perhaps in earlier years, when I really seriously thought about what I wanted to do, it was a doctor. And the other thing, just to jump ahead a little bit, the day I graduated from medical school, my father told me had always wanted to be a doctor. He had not told me before. But he had to leave school after two years of college because of his family circumstances. So it turned out, I was the realization of his dream. Speaker 1: And he did any subtle messaging along the way--I mean about him having--. Speaker 2: Not that I recall. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. Speaker 2: No, no, because again, I think perhaps because I decided on my own, at least I think it was on my own. Now, of course, I was always going down to Dr. Griffin's either if I was not going with my parents for a medical check, I was taking someone down there as part of my father's, you know, ambulance service. So, so I think that was his role model, someone who was doing something very important that was certainly based in science, but really more than that. So, so if there were some messages, they were so subtle that I was not aware of it, but, but, no, I think the main thing was that my parents supported me in my decisions fully and never gave voice to any doubts or reservations about the fact that I had said I was gonna be a doctor. Speaker 1: And, so you did have a natural proclivity towards the math and sciences? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: You did well with them in school? Speaker 2: Yes, right, I enjoyed it, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and were there--so you're in high school, and were there other people that you were observing or looked up to besides, you know, Dr. Griffin? You know, the-- Speaker 2: Yes, of course, when I was in high school, I was living in Atlanta. And I got to know other black doctors. Mrs. Brown introduced me to a number of them. And again, I was always impressed by them. They were those very important figures in the community. They were highly respected. They lived well, you know, had nice homes and cars and so forth. But I think that to me was more a sign of their importance as opposed to the opulent lifestyle, you know, for its own sake, but rather that as a statement of how important they were in the communities. So, so there were those role models that reinforced things, you know, as, as we went along. Speaker 1: And these were role models that you knew you could become too? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: I mean it wasn't out of reach because they were part of the community. Speaker 2: No, again, I think it's because of the reinforcement of my parents, and I was a good student. And there was never any doubt that I could do this. Story_ID: 13774 Speaker 1: The decision of where to go to school, I mean to college, how was that decision made? You know, your brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] went. Why didn't you follow your brother? I mean, I'm just wondering what--. Speaker 2: Yes, no. My brother attending Clark [College, now Clark-Atlanta University] was a natural because my mother had attended Clark. And I suspect that my folks had expected me to go to Clark. As a matter of fact, I know that they had expected me to go to Clark, but I wanted to go to Morehouse because my friends, my classmates in high school, my closest friends were going to Morehouse. And they were telling me all of these great things about Morehouse College. And, of course, I went and visited it myself, and I was impressed. And so when I told my folks I was going to Morehouse, this caused a family discussion because my parents were Methodists. And, of course, Clark College was a Methodist-affiliated institution. And over the dinner table, my father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] said there'd never been a Baptist in the Sullivan family. And my response was my intention was to go to school, not join the church. So they, they, they relented because they saw that I was determined. I was determined to go. But the initial process that led me to choose Morehouse was the fact that my best friends were all going to--going to Morehouse and hearing from them about what a great school Morehouse College was. And then visiting myself, and being convinced that this was the case, I decided that this was where I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Who were your close friends at that time? Speaker 2: There was an Edward B. Williams, who is now a dentist here in Atlanta. And his father was a professor of economics at Morehouse. Then Nashawn Garrison (ph.), whose father also was a Morehouse graduate. I think those were the two main ones. There were others, but these were, these were my friends that we did all kinds of things together. So I wanted to, to be with them. And I was convinced that this was also a better choice academically too because of all of the great things that Morehouse men were supposed to have, you know, done, etcetera. Story_ID: 13775 Speaker 1: Can you describe the Morehouse [College] you came to? This is 1950, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe the place that you entered? Speaker 2: Well, it was everything that I had hoped. First of all, I lived on campus. So although I'd been living in Atlanta [Georgia] before, this was really the first time I was independent, on my own. And so I enjoyed that. And the, the Morehouse environment was really a very strong environment. I lived in Graves Hall which was really the famous freshman dormitory there. And that was itself quite an experience there. And then being on campus and hearing the college songs and the college hymn and the fraternity songs, all of that was really very exciting; meeting new professors and learning this professor had written three books; this professor was a member of the National Academy of Sciences, etcetera. And on top of all of this was Dr. Benjamin [Elijah] Mays. He was, himself, a great scholar. Of course, being a preacher, he was quite articulate, very thoughtful, a very good mind. And someone who was always challenging us as Morehouse students. And so really, this, this was a community of scholars. This was a fraternity of strong-willed, high--people with high aspirations, and coming to an institution had produced many people who already were leaders in, in their fields. That, that was a very, a very stimulating environment. And, of course, the academic competitiveness to the institution really stimulated me to do my best work, to work as hard as I could to prove that I was as good as anybody else there. So, so it was really a very, very important time in my life; first time really on my own and in a place that I knew had a history of excellence, and making--working to be sure that I would be successful in that environment. And again, with Dr. Mays and others on the faculty like him, and an environment also with a very strong moral compass because we were inculcated with the idea that we were achieve academically, but we were also to be gentlemen, to be leaders in our community, to--in the sense of sharing our talents with the community, and that our goal in life should be to make a real impact--no simply becoming successful in our professor, but successful in being important to the community. So those were very formative years. Speaker 1: Was that always the tradition of Morehouse or do you think that had more to do with Dr. Mays' leadership? Speaker 2: No, always, the tradition because we were inculcated with John Hope, who became president in 1906 and served until 1931 and Presidents [Samuel] Archer--Willie, William Jefferson White, the founder of the college, who himself was white because Morehouse was founded by white mission--Baptist missionaries from, from the North. So, no, we were taught that this was a tradition of the college. We were, during my student years, we were the beneficiaries of the Mays era, but the view that we were given, both in terms of oral presentation and in the history, the written history of the college, which is titled 'Candle in the Dark', written by Professor Jones, a Professor of French, was that this was the true legacy of the, of the school. Speaker 1: At the time that you were there, isn't that also a particularly rich period in the, in Morehouse's tradition in terms of it, you know, when you look at the graduates who have come out of there during that time? Am I wrong or-- Speaker 2: Well, I think to a degree you're right. And perhaps the class that is often cited is the Class of 1948. That was Martin Luther King, Jr.'s class, and there were others around that time. But that was, those classes '47 [1947], '48, '49 [1949] and '50 [1950], those were classes of people who were returning from World War II. So the classes were large, and people who had deferred their education, but there's no question that a number of the members of the Class of '48 were outstanding individuals. And, of course, Morehouse taught us really a very positive competitiveness because being a member of the Class of '54 [1954], see, I always say that's the greatest class to ever graduate from Morehouse and then enter into immediate debate with another Morehouse alumnus, that says, no, it was the Class of '57 [1957] or, or what have you. But, to give you an example of what I would cite because Morehouse College then was much smaller than it is today. There were fifty-seven in my graduating class. I think there were perhaps 180 of us who entered Morehouse. Of those fifty-seven, there were nineteen pre-medical students, eighteen of us went to medical school that year after graduating. The nineteenth student went to dental school the following year. So virtually a100 percent of the pre-medical students went to medical or dental school after finishing Morehouse. So we were a small class, but tremendous achievements and also others who went on to law school and who became very successful. You know, Howard Moore, the attorney in California who defended Angela Davis, who's a very famous criminal lawyer, was a classmate and so forth. So, so really every class will debate that with you. But frankly that, to me, is a sign of how proud we are of the institution and being alumni of the institution. And, of course, we have saying among the Morehouse alumni, and that is, "it ain't bragging if it's true." Story_ID: 13776 Speaker 1: Dr. Sylvia Manley, she talked about you during her interview. I think, wasn't she a-- Speaker 2: Audrey Manley? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: She was at Spelman [College]-- Speaker 2: Yes, she was. Speaker 1: And came over, right--and took, cause they didn't have the chemistry-- Speaker 2: Chemistry, organic chemistry, or inorganic chemistry, yes. Speaker 1: Now, you know, talk about some of your teachers. There's [Henry] McBay who was, you know, notorious, or whatever, or well know. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. Right. Speaker 1: Did he frighten you like he frightened the others? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I was determined--no, no, McBay represented a challenge. Because he had such an awesome reputation, I wanted, indeed, to be one of his students to really show how well I could do. And, unfortunately, I could never--because of conflicts in my schedule, I could never be in his class. I had chemistry by another professor who was really quite good. But I really wanted to be in McBay's class, and--but he, excellent teacher, high standards. For example, there was one famous incident that occurred I think the year before my freshman year. He, there was something going on, and he went to his class, and there was only one student there, rather than twenty-five or thirty students. And he gave the whole lecture, wrote his equations on the blackboard, erased, etcetera. And when he finished his lecture, he turned around and said, "Are there any questions?" So, indeed, there were things like that about him. But then there were other people, as I mentioned, Professor E. A. Jones in French, excellent French teacher. They each had their own idiosyncrasies and styles. Dr. Jones would ask you to translate something, and he'd walk over to the window and open the window, and says, "Would you please translate because if you don't I'm going to jump." And, of course, he was always leaning and he never did. But there were things. Then there was Frau Hannah, from whom I took German. And she was, and she was a native German herself, so she always didn't understand how we had such great difficulty conjugating German verbs, you know, or pronouncing umlauts, etcetera. There was Dr. Brisbane, professor of political science who had graduated from Harvard [University] himself and came down to teach at Morehouse. And we always kidded him because he always wore crimson red socks and his pants were always too short. So, but he was a brilliant teacher. And there were really a whole series of personalities. I mentioned Dr. Edward B. Williams, the professor of economics. I was a biology major. But I decided I wanted to take a course in economics because Dr. Williams also had an equally formidable reputation in terms of the rigor of his class. And I took his class, and on the first examination, I got eighty-eighty out of eighty-nine questions correct. And he gave me an A minus. And as he explained this to the class when he was correcting, he said there was one student who got an A minus, it wasn't an A, 'cause it wasn't perfect. So, and, of course, the next time I aced it, got all right questions. But, frankly, there was--that was, that was a positive challenge. So, in a sense, it was rigorous academic environment. The faculty encouraged you and would work with you. There was Dr. Julius Chandler, my English professor. He would invite students to come out to his home on the weekend if they were having difficulty. And he would spend time with them, etc. So that was really the atmosphere of the college, a very demanding, but very supportive and challenging environment. You were told that they expected you to do well. They expected you to succeed. And their role, as faculty members, was to help you remove any impediments between you and that success. So that was really a very positive environment. Speaker 1: Now, you know, what strikes me about the education there and your description of it, is that it's a very strong, liberal arts education. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 13777 Speaker 1: What other things were you influenced by, you think, or things that have molded you during that time period at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georiga]? Speaker 2: Well, there are things in the community. Of course, Friendship Baptist Church was affiliated with Morehouse College. And, of course, we would frequently attend there, and their community leaders are there. There was also the Butler Street YMCA [Young Mens Christian Association], which was a very important institution in the black community where they had, not only their physical education and health activities, but they also hosted a talk club called the Hungry Club. The Hungry Club was in the black community what Rotary [International] was in the white community in those years because blacks were not admitted to membership in the Rotary. The Hungry Club would be a luncheon club with speakers and discussions and debates, etc. And I remember there was strong political leadership in the city led, at that time--this is now back in the early '50s [1950s], by John Wesley Dobbs, who was the grandfather of Maynard Jackson. And John Wesley Dobbs was a Republican, and Warren Cochran, an attorney, was the other leader. And he was a Democrat. And the two of them would work together to help register blacks to vote. And they really provided great leadership in the black community advising the black community about the candidates who were running for office. And Mayor William Hartsfield, who was the mayor of Atlanta at the time, would come and visit the Hungry Club and would visit with John Wesley Dobbs and Warren Cochran, and make commitment to them as to what he would do if he were elected mayor. And it was because of the support of the black community, exercised through the leadership of John Wesley Dobbs and Warren Cochran, that Hartsfield served four terms as mayor and was a very progressive mayor for those years in Atlanta. So that was the kind outside environment here in, in Atlanta. So you could see there were role models around, signs of success around. There was T. M. Alexander, a millionaire real estate man. I'd never seen a millionaire before in my life. But his son was a year ahead of me at Morehouse College. And then other leaders, Bill Calloway, who was actually a partner with T. M. Alexander in real estate and insurance. Of course, there was Atlanta Life Insurance Company that existed, you know, you know, at that time. There was Yates and Milton Drug Stores. There were four drugs stores they had around the city. There's Pascal's Restaurant. Businessmen would--just gotten started in the late '40s [1940s], so this was a young restaurant during my student years. And then Mr. [Lorimer] Milton, of Yates and Milton, founded the black bank, the first black bank here in Atlanta. There's also a black, a black savings and loans association. And in those years, housing for blacks was really being developed--very good housing, out on the west side of town, financed by the Mutual Savings and Loan Association and the Citizens Bank that [Clayton] Yates and Milton had founded. And so, there was a very strong sense of social support and cohesiveness. And those were the signs of that success. So all of those things really served to reinforce us at Morehouse that we could succeed. We could extend those kinds of things here. Story_ID: 13778 Speaker 1: You were talking about 'Brown vs. Board of Education'. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, you asked me how I went to, ended up going to Boston University. During my junior year in college, we--our campus [Morehouse College] was visited by Clarence Mitchell from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He is a field officer for the NAACP at the time. And with the NAACP and the Urban League and other organizations working to fight segregation, Mitchell's goal was to encourage Morehouse students to apply to universities all over the, all over the nation. And so far as medical school was concerned, he pointed out that there were a number of medical schools that they had talked to who said they'd be very interested in receiving applications from Morehouse students. And he mentioned several, Boston University, University of Michigan, Case Western Reserve University, among others. And to make a long story short, I applied to both Boston University and the University of Michigan in addition to Howard [University] and Meharry [Medical College] and was accepted at all four of them. And so I chose to go to Boston because as I talked with my major professor--I was a biology major, Jim Burney, he encouraged me to go to Boston University. There had never been a Morehouse student who had gone to Boston University Medical School. There had been at the University of Michigan, Dr. Asa Yancey, who retired just a few years ago as a surgeon here in Atlanta had been a graduate of the University of Michigan Medical School. So I applied and, of course, I was waiting in October of 1953 to learn--to hopefully, be invited to go to interviews. And I received a letter from Boston University. And I opened it, hoping that it would be an invitation to come for an interview. It was an offer of acceptance. They accepted me without an interview. And so I was very pleased over that. But it ended up, when I went off to medical school the following September, that was my first time in Boston. So, but it was, that's how I, how I ended up going to Boston University because A, segregation in Georgia at the time, and then learning that there were these schools that would welcome black students applying down there. Speaker 1: But you went on--and also on the heels of 'Brown v. Board of Education',--you don't-- Speaker 2: Yes,-- Speaker 1: Just right on the heels. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Just right on the heels of that case. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: And so I bet your parents were very--everyone was happy about that case and what it meant. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, very much so. Story_ID: 13779 Speaker 1: This is a pretty, you know, sort of high time. I'm wondering though, you've never been outside the South. And so what was that experience like, you know, cause you're going to a place sort of sight unseen and, where you're southern in a northern city [Boston, Massachusetts], and I'm just wondering how, what-- Speaker 2: Right, well, well, first of all, I had been--hadn't been to Boston, but I had been outside the South. I'd been to New York and New Jersey, and because during my summer years in college, I worked in Atlantic City as waiter in Atlantic City in hotels on the Boardwalk. I also worked in a restaurant in Brooklyn, on Sheepshead Bay one summer, Lyndie's Restaurant. So from those times, I had, you know, been, been outside of the South, but I hadn't been to Boston. And so, but still going to Boston was a new experience. It was interesting and a little intimidating because I was the only black student in my class of 76 medical students. I was the first Morehouse graduate there in Boston University Medical School. And I hadn't really been to Boston nor lived there before. And my classmates were guys and gals. There were five women in my class--and by the way, Boston University in those years was proud of the fact that next to the Women's Medical College of Pennsylvania, they had the largest number of women medical students, very different from today. But in my class were people who had graduated from Harvard [University], Princeton [University], Amherst [College], Swarthmore [College], all of these places that were known to be academic powerhouses. And most of my classmates had never heard of Morehouse. And they were always curious, in a very nice way. But, you know, tell me about Morehouse, etcetera. So, yeah, in that environment, of course, it was intimidating that way until we had our first examination. And I got the second highest score on that examination. And after that I, I relaxed because I knew that I could match wits with, with my classmates. And I ended up finish, finishing third in my class, you know, from, from medical school. So, but, you know, medical school was a very demanding time for all of us because of the volume of information that we had to master and the discipline and working with patients in the hospitals when it came to our clinical years, in our third and fourth years of medical. So it was challenging, but also rewarding, you know, at the same time. Speaker 1: Did you find any issues with any of the faculty? I mean you were a very high performer, but was there any negative messaging towards you-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no.) Speaker 1: None of that-- Speaker 2: The opposite. Speaker 1: A very trained environment. Speaker 2: And very positive. I remember my anatomy professor, Elizabeth Meyer, who was very encouraging of me. And my biochemistry professor, Professor Burnham. No, no, I, it--I really have to say, in my four years as medical student at Boston University, I can't remember a single negative incident from faculty or students. In fact, it was a very positive nurturing environment. The only negative thing I can remember during that time was, I went, took one of my classmates to dinner in Chinatown in Boston. It was a white female. And when we sat down, the party next to us got up and left, you know, and it was obvious that--well, they were making a statement. But my classmate looked at them and looked at me and shrugged and we went ahead and had our meal and enjoyed it. So, and those friendships I formed at that time, I still have them today. So, no, I, I had a very positive experience, a very--and, in fact, when I told my classmates and members of the faculty that my goal was to return to the South as a family physician, they were trying to encourage me to stay in Boston or in New England, you know, and such. Why would you want go back? You know, you'd do very well here. We'd love to have you, you know, etc. So it was really a very positive experience. Story_ID: 13780 Speaker 1: What made you think that you wanted to go back? I mean what was forming those views, mainly because your family was there? Mainly because you could fit within Atlanta [Georgia]? I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, the reality is I stayed in New England. Speaker 1: I know you did, but I mean, but I'm just wondering what--. Speaker 2: Well, no, I really had the view of really working to not only provide health services which were needed, such as--remember, Dr. Griffin was the only black physician around. In fact, south of Columbus [Georgia] to the Florida border, and west of Albany [Georgia] to the Alabama border, he was the only black physician. And they were needed, physicians and my parents had really been great role models of people living in the community, providing the services that, that were needed. So that was really the vision that I had. Now, while I was in medical school, in addition to the social encouragement of my classmates, and the friendships that I developed, I really learned a lot more about medicine than I knew before. I learned about all these fields I had known nothing about. I became totally enamored of internal medicine, and then hematology or blood diseases, which is really--I became a hematologist because of my interest and attraction to study of diseases of the blood, and became really a medical researcher, and became a teacher. So, so I really evolved from that initial goal I had when I went to medical school to then becoming an academic physician, a, a medical school teacher and researcher, which is what I, I did because when I finished medical school, I, of course, had my house staff training as intern and resident at Cornell [University] Medical Center and New York Hospital in, in New York and then, specialty training, back in Boston as a hematologist at the Harvard [University] Medical unit at Boston City Hospital, for the Thorndike Laboratory, and then I had faculty positions at then Seton Hall [University] Medical School and then Boston University, and had become professor of medicine, when Morehouse College decided, during an era of expansion of medical education and new medical schools developing, when Morehouse College decided that they wanted to undertake the development of a medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine], they formed a committee of advisors that consisted of Morehouse College alumni, who, like me, had positions in academic medicine at various places around the country. And that committee, for example, included such people as Dr. Henry Foster, who was professor of obstetrics gynecology at Meharry [Medical College]. Of course, as you know, Hank Foster was nominated by President [Bill] Clinton be [U.S.] Surgeon General, but he was not confirmed, being an obstetrician who had performed, had performed abortions. It also included David Satcher, who was professor of community medicine out in Los Angeles, at the Martin Luther King Hospital. And then one of my classmates, Perry Henderson, who is an obstetrician on the faculty of the University of Wisconsin when I was at Boston University. So--and one or two others, we were asked by the college to serve on the committee to advise them about this idea of starting a medical school. So I did that and approached it initially with great skepticism and great reservation because colleges don't start medical schools, universities do. And universities do it with great difficulty, but I became convinced that this was not only needed, that it was doable; that the college had the academic strength and the administrative skills and the fundraising capacity and the national reputation that gave it creditability to do this. And so when they decided to go forward, I was in, asked to be dean of the program. And by that time, which was about a year after serving on this committee, I was convinced that this was the thing to do. This was exciting. Meanwhile, I'd been taking my own quiet assessment of my own career. I'd--by that time, I'd become professor of medicine at Boston University and Chief of Hematology at the Boston City Hospital, very significant positions. And I enjoyed that. But as I did that self assessment, I said that--to myself, I said, Lou, you've been very successful here at the Boston University Medical School. I'd become part of the quote old boy's club. But I said that if drop dead tomorrow, there'd be a nice ceremony and nice things said, and then the people would say, gee, we'll miss ol' Lou. But the place would go on without missing a beat. Coming back to start a medical school would have had a much greater impact in getting that going and, and something of significance than continuing in the role that I was playing at Boston University. I was very pleased with that, very satisfied. I had three children who had all been born in Boston. My wife [Ginger Sullivan], I met while I was in medical school. She was from Massachusetts. So I had all of these ties to Boston and to New England. We had started going to Martha's Vineyard for the summers and my children all skied up in New Hampshire and Vermont and all of that. But the overriding challenge and the overriding importance of this idea of starting a medical school to increase the number of black physicians, not only in Georgia, but elsewhere, and physicians in primary care and the need for such, and the idea of a predominantly black institution starting a medical school, all of that intrigued me. And, if I might say so, I had enough security--you might say, arrogance to feel that I--if there's anything I know, it's medical education. And also I was fortunate in being a graduate of Morehouse College and knowing that universities that have medical schools, even when they work very well, there're oftentimes major tensions and issues between the medical school and the rest of the university. So I felt that as an alumnus of Morehouse College, with still some of my professors, from the time I was a student, being there, I felt that I could negotiate those social issues between the medical school and, and the college. So in that sense, I guess I convinced myself that not only was this a great opportunity, but maybe I had some unique qualifications that would help me in this effort. So that really became very attractive. And so, so it was really a great challenge that I was then pleased to, to accept because in a sense, I felt that I didn't have anything else to prove at Boston University. I'd reached, you know, my pinnacle. And my goal at that time had been perhaps--I was forty-one when I came back. But I, my goal was perhaps to become chairman of a department of medicine, you know, either at Boston University or some other medical school, by forty-five. But this really was leapfrogging to another kind of career. Story_ID: 13781 Speaker 1: You did a lot of important research. And I'm wondering if you could--you know, research as part of your teaching--and I'm wondering--and that's when you published the most--and I'm wondering if you could sort of capsulize that whole sort of experience there and what that part of your life did for your career, and, you know, and your knowledge base? Speaker 2: Sure. Sure. Well, I guess, what I have to say is my career has had a number of phases. And, first, as a student, then as a faculty member, research and educator, and also as chief of hematology, being responsible for the care of patients with blood diseases at the Boston City Hospital, leukemia and anemia, etcetera. Each one of those areas, I enjoyed very much. As a researcher, I enjoyed the challenge of designing a study, looking for the answers to a questions. And sometimes you didn't get the answer, but other times you would. And the excitement and the sense of accomplishment and the--then the further research to show that this is not a fluke, that this was a reproducible phenomenon here, to show this was solid research. All of that's very challenging and very satisfying. And there's a certain kind of satisfaction you get from that, at least for me, that you don't get elsewhere. But then, as a teacher, working with medical students, teaching them, teaching the hematology course to second year medical students or make--what we call making rounds on the hospital wards with the residents and students and fellows, and teaching them at the bedside. Again, that was very satisfying, and also seeing patients improve as a result of your decisions, the diagnostic procedures and the therapeutic decisions that, that you made. It's going by and seeing someone who a couple of days looked awfully morbid or awfully bad, seeing them pink up. That, that's satisfying. I have to say that I had not had as a career goal, really becoming a medical school dean or president because in those years, it was a question of why would I waste my time pushing papers or in administrative issues. But the challenge, as I really thought about developing a new medical school, were such that this was administration in a different light than I had envisioned it. I, I had had my own stereotypes as a member, as a faculty member. And I have to say that having, of course, having been chief of hematology at Boston City Hospital, while I was doing teaching and, and doing research and patient care, I still had a fair amount of administrative responsibilities I had to do. And I decided that if I have to do administration, I want it to be major administration, not what I call minor, that is, deciding on schedules for technicians in the blood bank or preparing a budget for the department and that sort of thing. So, so I guess I'd have to say, now, having been in administration for really now, some twenty-seven years, there's another kind of satisfaction. It's long term. It's delayed, but it's there. And it's very real. Story_ID: 13782 Speaker 1: Let's put operation of this medical school here at Morehouse [School of Medicine] in historical context because there's Meharry [Medical College]. There was Morehouse-- Speaker 2: And Howard [University College of Medicine]. Speaker 1: And Howard. Howard. So which was--Meharry, that's-- Speaker 2: Well, Howard is the oldest. They opened in 1868, right. Right. Speaker 1: But can you just put this--because this had not been attempted for some time, I mean starting up, right in the black environment? Speaker 2: Right, sure. Speaker 1: So I just wanted you to put that sort of in historical context, what the significance is. Speaker 2: Sure, well, interestingly, Morehouse School of Medicine was the first minority medical school to open in the United States in the 20th century. Interestingly, there had been, starting with Howard in 1868, after the Civil War. Of course, Howard University was organized, and including a School of Medicine. And then in 1876, Meharry Medical College in Nashville, was organized. But then there were five other predominantly black medical schools that came into existence during the final quarter century, you know, of the 19th century. They included the Leonard Medical School at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina, Louisville National Medical School, in Louisville, Kentucky, the West Tennessee Medical School (Colored) in Memphis. The East Tennessee Medical School in Chattanooga, also for Colored, and the Flint-Goodrich [Hospital] Medical School in New Orleans. But in the first decade of the 20th century, a famous study of all medical schools was made that was called the Flexner Report because Dr. Abraham Flexner, a microbiologist was commissioned by the Carnegie Foundation in New York to evaluate medical education in the United States because in the early part of the 20th century, America was not the leader in medical education; Europe was. Places such as Edinburgh [Scotland], Bologna [Italy], London [England], Heidelberg [Germany], etcetera. And to make a long story short, Flexner was very critical of the poor quality of medical schools in the United States and because of his criticism, and this is written up in a book that still is available in medical libraries, by Abraham Flexner. By 1925, the number of medical schools in the United States and Canada had been reduced from 148 down to eighty, and among the schools that closed were five of the seven predominantly black medical schools. And then the period between 1925 and 1950 was fairly quiescent in terms of medical education. Beginning in the mid '50s [1950s], because of the growing population, there was increasing national concern that we as a nation would face a shortage of doctors if we did not increase their training. So funds were made available from the federal government and foundations to encourage the development of new medical schools. That started in 1956 with the opening of Albert Einstein School of Medicine in the Bronx, part of Yeshiva University and Seton Hall Medical School in Jersey City, both in 1956. Between 1956 and then 1981, forty-six new schools opened. So Morehouse School of Medicine was one of those forty-six new schools that opened during that remarkable period because there had been no medical schools to open in the United States since 1981 because during that period, where one third of the medical schools that exist today, had their creation, we'd doubled the training--and doubled the number of physicians being trained by medical schools in the United States. So, we're now graduating 16,000 doctors annually, as opposed to 8,000 doctors. The, the environment, therefore, in the late '60s [1960s] was one where the Georgia Comprehensive Health Planning Council, part of the state health department, looked at--to Georgia and noted, had a study done that noted that Georgia ranked thirty-eight among the fifty states in overall physician manpower. The health status of Georgians was lower than that of the national average. We had high rates of death from heart disease, cancer, lung disease, kidney failure, infant mortality, etcetera. So this committee, which I represented as the deans over the Emory Medical School and Medical College of Georgia, the two schools--medical schools in the state at the time, and from the medical societies, recommended the expansion of medical education in Georgia, and that such expansion, because 27 percent of the state's population was African American, but less than 3 percent of the physicians were African American. They recommended that special attention be given to increasing the number of black physicians trained here in Georgia. A member of that commission that wrote that report was Dr. Louie Brown, the black physician, who was president of the Georgia State Medical Association, which was the state chapter affiliate of the National Medical Association, an organization of black physicians, which, by the way, was founded in Atlanta in 1896 during the Cotton States' Exposition. So the NMA had its origins in Atlanta. But at any rate, Louie brought that report to the presidents of the Atlanta University Center schools, the consortium here. And Atlanta University took a look at the idea of starting a medical school since they were graduate school. But they decided this was not feasible by a vote in April of 1971 of their board, not to proceed. Hugh Gloster, then the President at Morehouse College, who was at that meeting, then asked if there would be any objection to Morehouse College looking at this idea, since Atlanta University had not--had decided not to proceed. That was important because the consortium that we know as Atlanta University Center, where all six member institutions belong, started in 1929. And the bylaws of the consortium assigned graduate and professional education to Atlanta University, and baccalaureate education to the colleges. So this was asking if there would be any objection because this would be technically a violation of the articles of collaboration in the consortium. There was no objection. And, therefore, Morehouse College looks at this, did a feasibility study, which was positive, said it could be done, and felt that the college had the academic, administrative and financial strength to do it. Then they--that was in 1972. They then received funds from the Bureau of Health Manpower in the Department and Human Services in the federal government to begin a planning effort. That was in 1972 to 1974. So, it was during that time this advisory committee of Morehouse College Alumni, which I was one, that I mentioned, this committee was formed to help advise the college on this whole idea. So in June of 1974, the college made the commitment to provide to develop the medical school. And so the recruitment for a dean began that time, and I accepted the invitation in January of '75 [1975], and came on board July 1st of '75 [1975]. So those were the circumstances that led to the development of the school. Initially, we were part of Morehouse College. I reported to the president of the college, but the plan we developed was for the medical school to become eventually an independent institution. So our first class we admitted in 1978, three years after we had started with the planning activities. And then in 1981, three years after the first class was enrolled, we were authorized to operate as a four-year school because we began as a two-year school in 1978, with our students transferring elsewhere for their last two years. But because they entered in 1981, which was the fourth class to enter, stayed with us, and the first M.D.'s from Morehouse School of Medicine were given in 1985. Meanwhile, Morehouse School of Medicine, in July of 1981, became independent from Morehouse College. So Morehouse College, itself, was never awarded an M.D. degree. But there is a segue, this plan that we developed over at the college to really not violate the articles of collaboration in the Atlanta University Center, but yet to proceed with the development of a full, four-year medical school. Story_ID: 13783 Speaker 1: Speaking of those early years, because it's not really easy to build institutions and to start something from scratch, do you think that the planning that was done, was it--did that strategic plan that was developed at that time, did that bode you well? And was it done right, and is that the reason for the institution or were there a lot of things that you had to sort of maneuver around? What was that sort of early-- Speaker 2: Right. First of all, I think the model that we had for our development has proven to be a correct one. And that is, we were founded by a strong college, strong in the ways that I mentioned--not only academically, but strong financially. And this college was blessed with strong visionary leadership because the main reason that this medical school was not founded by Atlanta University was that there was not that same kind of visionary leadership. They were not risk takers, whereas they were at Morehouse College. The--so, so having that academic home for the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine] to start was very important. And I'll give another example in my view as to how that has made a difference. I mentioned the fact that in 1981, three years after we enrolled our first class, was the last medical school to open. One of those schools was the Charles Drew Medical School in Los Angeles, an African American-oriented institution. They started in a different way, at the Martin Luther King Hospital in Watts, but affiliated with UCLA. That affiliation--there was a different model. UCLA expanded the number of first-year students they admitted, who then in their third year would come over to the Martin Luther King Hospital for their clinical years. That's still operating that way today. I don't believe that was what the intention was when they started more than twenty years ago. So, in a sense, perhaps that model and maybe other circumstances really didn't provide for the evolution of that into a full, free standing, independently accredited medical school, which they are not. They operate under the umbrella of the UCLA accreditation. And while there are fine people there, and the students get a fine education, that is really, technically not an independent medical school. We are. We were started by Morehouse College and then became independent in 1981. So I think the model was a good one, and, and secondly the strengths of the college were, were there. The commitment of the college president, Hugh Gloster, was there. And I learned a lot from him in terms of fundraising. I hadn't really been a fundraiser then. And we had good staff support too, the faculty in the college and in the college, the staff in the college development office. So we put the plan together, and, of course, I did a lot of consulting. I visited with other medical schools, with people at Emory [University] across town, at Brown University. I mentioned Dr. [Abram] Sachar. I visited Dr. Sachar at Brandeis [University]. He had retired as the chancellor, but he still had an office on campus. My purpose in visiting him was to talk to someone else who had created an institution. And he had been successful, and who also was a phenomenal fundraiser. I got the impression that every brick on that campus had somebody's name attached to it because he had been so successful as a fundraiser. And he told me how he organized his fundraising, organized people in the car industry, in the bakery industry, in the advertising industry, and had them compete. And all kinds of things. I mean he was--I'm sure he is a much greater fundraiser than I have ever been. But I learned a lot on the job, as I consulted with people. And we built a team. And we developed our own institutional plans for the vision of the school, the academic plans. How would we develop the curriculum, all of the things that ordinarily you don't think about in an institution. What would be our admissions standards and criteria? How would we do that process? How do we develop our budgets? What kind of departments would we have? All of those things. So, those three years from 1975 'til 1978 were involved in those discussions, that debate, that setting of division and that planning and fundraising. So all of that came together to a degree that we were then approved by the Medical School Accrediting Committee to open as a two-year school in September of 1978. So, so in a sense we had a lot of planning, but we also learned as we have gone on because every school, every medical school is different, unique. There's no other model like us that, that exists there. So, so it really has been a process, and we're still learning. But what we have is a vision that everyone buys into. We have a commitment to excellence. We know what we're trying to accomplish in terms of improving the health environment for, not only minorities--and I say minorities because increasingly the South is not only African American, but Hispanic American, Asian American and poor whites. And from the beginning, we have had a mixed student body. We've had white students from the beginning, roughly 15 percent because the common thread is taking care of the health needs of people who are disadvantaged. And there are disadvantaged whites as there are disadvantaged blacks and, and others. And that's worked well. And, you know, the one thing I wish is I could be a student here. I think that we have such a positive environment, not only in terms of the science and, and the process of being a doctor, but also the social interaction among our students. Our students are our best sales people. Applicants who come here, we don't have sell them a thing. Our students are the one's who tell them what a great place this is. And we see it also in the choices our students makes. When we were first opened in 1978, if a student had a choice between an acceptance by us or acceptance elsewhere, Duke [University] or Stanford [University] or Columbia [University] or whatever, usually we lost. But that's not the case today. We win more often than we lose because of the environment that we have developed, the history that the school now has, the vision that we have and all of those things that make for a very positive learning environment for our students. Story_ID: 13784 Speaker 1: Was there any resistance or fear, I should say, on the part of, let's say the, you know, Howard [University] and Meharry [Medical School] in terms of those--oh, you don't. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, there was. Speaker 1: Because I would think that there, you know, this is--the others that you mentioned, that's a whole different ball of wax, but, so I'm just wondering how you handled that, and how you sort of navigated those waters because--. Speaker 2: Sure, no. There were fears. There were fears that we would take away from the resources available to those schools. So, yes, there was resistance, not only from people within those institutions--and I say people because there was never official institutional resistance. But also the alumni of those schools. Then they, why do you want to do that? You'll take away--well, to make a long story short, it's very different today. We have very positive cooperation and collaboration among, not only these four medical schools, but also the veterinary school at Tuskegee University and five schools of pharmacy that are predominantly African American, Texas Southern [University], Florida A&M [University], Xavier University in New Orleans, Howard and Hampton [University], which has a relatively new School of Pharmacy, I believe about five years old. In 1977, two years after I started here, we formed the Association of Minority Health Profession Schools. And I was the first president. And the goal was for us to work together to really improve the environment, all of us, the--and the environment being funds available to support our programs, scholarships, etc. And we really are, you might--in the technical sense, we a trade association, but we'll work together in encouraging the Congress and state legislatures, as well as foundations, to support what we're doing. So today, while we are competitors in the positive sense, we are very real collaborators and supporters because working together, we help each other. So, so, yes. In the early years, there was that competition. But we're only working towards a common goals here, and there's plenty for all of us to do. Speaker 1: And during those early years, was there any, at one--any point where you thought, this is not gonna work? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That is so fascinating. Okay. And--. Speaker 2: Maybe I should have, but I didn't. Speaker 1: So you took to the fundraising, I mean, you were a good student on that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can tell you, I had a good teacher in Hugh Gloster, a phenomenal fundraiser. And, and, again, I visited people like Abram Sachar that had been very successful with it. And I talked to deans of other medical schools too, and at Brown [University], the University of Massachusetts and Dartmouth [College]. And they were all very encouraging too. But, one of those first fundraising calls, it was awkward. I'd have an hour, and I'd talk about a whole lot of things, and maybe the last ten minutes, then talk, talk about would you be willing to consider a grant, etcetera. But that's changed now because it's been very clear to me over the years, people know why I'm coming. They know that I'm in the business of getting resources for the school. So I consider my mission is to show them, of all of the requests that they have to consider, why they should respond positively to us. So I get to the point. And what it is we hope that they would do and what they'll consider, and I use the rest of the time to say, why. I don't do all of this preliminary things and then ask at, at the end because, again, I respect their time. Again, they know why I'm there. They, they want to know what is the question, what is the issue, and then why? And I try to do that and show them why this would be good for us and hopefully, a good decision as to how they will utilize their resources. Speaker 1: Dr. Sullivan, what was the amount that your plan said you needed to raise to make this happen? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I think initially, we were talking about $15 to $20 million, plus--over a period of five years or so. And we, we exceeded that by far cause if anything I think we under estimated that, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so are there other parts of that you would like to sort of touch upon? I mean you're still president here, but was there a core--you know, cause sometimes when you're building an institution, you look to sort of narrow its focus and not take on--was there, did you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Our mission, as we developed it, was to train young people from minority and disadvantaged backgrounds to become primary care physicians, to provide health services in medically underserved areas. So that, that was our mission, and still is. Now, we have added to that because I have often stated and firmly believe that institutions really have multiple missions, multiple dimensions, but there has to be that essential core. So that essential core remains, as I stated. But we also have researchers here. We say that one of our goals is to carry out research on those conditions, health conditions that disproportionately affect minorities, to add to the larger body of medical knowledge, to contribute to the health policy decision of the country. So all of those are there, but they don't displace the original or the core mission. They wrap around it or they add to it and they enrich our environment, you know, as an institution. Story_ID: 13785 Speaker 1: Can you explain the circumstances around you becoming [U.S.] Secretary for Health and Human Services? Speaker 2: Sure. Well, in a sense I would say that my career has been a series of events that a lot of them were not planned in, in a long view. But they were opportunities that developed because of the success that I had enjoyed in doing something at that particular time. Remember, I was going to be a family doctor when I went to medical school. But I then learned about a whole world of medicine I hadn't known before. And I was very much attracted to it. So that I did. And I was successful at that, and I was promoted and became full professor. And, again, I hadn't planned to become a medical school administrator, and, and probably would not have been so, had it been in a traditional position. But this opportunity to create something new from scratch, with a special mission, that was very attractive. So that's how that happened. As we developed our fundraising strategies here at Morehouse School of Medicine, we also worked to get federal support, which federal support goes to all medical schools. And so when the school was being started, Jimmy Carter was governor of Georgia. When he went to Washington [D.C.] as president, I visited with him. And through his office and that of his senior staff, we were able to get a grant program established in the [U.S.] Department of Education that was important to us. And we were able to also get a construction grant, that $5 million grant to build this building that we're in now. Our first building, our basic medical sciences building. This building was under construction when Carter lost the election. There was a new administration, and now, we didn't know any of them. So we invited the new President [Ronald] Reagan to speak at the dedication of this new building, thinking this would be at least a way to establish some contacts. Well, they strung us for about six months before we could get an answer. And they finally said that he couldn't come. And meanwhile, President Reagan had cut the education budget in March of '81 [1981], quite dramatically. And the higher education establishment was very upset by that. And then in August of '81, President Reagan made pronouncements, being sympathetic to Bob Jones University in South Carolina where such things as interracial dating had been banned. So what appeared initially to be a good strategic move became one that seemed to be less and less attractive as we went along. But when we were turned down by the White House, they stated that if we liked, that Vice President [George H. W.] Bush would be willing to come. So we accepted that. So he came and spoke in July of '82 [1982] when we dedicated this building. And that began a friendship that exists until this day. He was well received by everyone here, including the black Democratic office holders, such as Andy [Andrew] Young, Maynard Jackson, Ed McIntyre who was then mayor of Augusta [Georgia] and others; John Lewis, etcetera. And he stayed a long time. He was scheduled to stay fifteen minutes for the reception after the dedication. Well, that dedication had been nine o'clock in the morning. But he stayed more than an hour and a half. And then two weeks later, he called me and invited me to accompany him to Africa where he was going in November of '82. So I went as a member of his delegation. His wife, Barbara [Bush], was on the trip, and she spoke in various countries to adult literacy groups, women's literacy programs. So on the way back, after two weeks and going to eight countries in Africa, I talked with her on the plane, saying that what she was involved in was education, which is what we're doing, and that we needed to have some, have her on our board. And she said she'd have to clearance from the White House counsel. And she called three days later and said that she could do it. So she came on our board in January of '83 [1983] and served until January of '89 [1989], when Bush was elected the president. And, of course, at this time, then President-elect Bush invited me to join his cabinet because I had gotten to know him very well. And so I was pleased to do so, thinking that I'd never be returned to Morehouse. But when Bush lost his re-election bid and the trustees invited me to return, I came back in 1994, and, of course, have been here since that time. So really, you could see how this was a series of opportunities. And, and this really is a statement or an exhibition of what I believe is true, and that is, chance favors the prepared mind, that Francis Bacon said. So it meant that when the opportunity was there, because I was prepared, I was able to take advantage of the opportunity. So, so I firmly believe in whatever you do, you should work to be the best--and this is what Benjamin [Elijah] Mays taught us as students at Morehouse College, you should be so good at whatever you do that whenever they're considering someone for that position, they have to consider you. He said, you may not get the position, but it shouldn't be because you're not prepared. If you don't get it, it should be, perhaps luck, or some other reason. But you should be prepared so that when the opportunity presents, you'll be able to take advantage of it. And that's, that's what's happened to me. Story_ID: 13786 Speaker 1: How did you make it through those [Ronald] Reagan--what, at the point that he--that was early in his administration. So I'm wondering how, you know, he was cutting education funding and everything. So how did you make through those particular years--well, because she became involved? Speaker 2: Well, several things. First of all, fortunately, [U.S.] Congress didn't go along with the president's recommendations. So there was quite a hue and cry about really how the nation would be hung by, by such cuts. And secondly, forming that relationship with Vice President [George H. W.] Bush, I, I can tell you, I met with a number of federal officials, and even in what might be called relatively lean times, we were able to navigate and find ways to, to get support because we did get support for a second building. And the second building we dedicated in 1987. So we'd raised the fund--and that was another $5 million federal grant with the Congress. Congressman Louis Stokes, Democrat Congressman from Ohio on the Appropriations Committee was very key. But also on the Republican side, Sylvio Conte from Massachusetts, who was a ranking Republican on the Appropriations Committee was very supportive of, of us. And I could take a lot of time telling you the stories, but just very quickly, you have to be flexible and have your full wits in a position like this. And this interaction with Sylvio Conte is a good example. He is a ranking Republican on the Appropriations Committee, very, very much respected and beloved by both Democrats and Republicans in the Congress. So I went to see him to try and get his support because he sat on the Appropriations Committee that gave dollars for medical education. And he was from western Massachusetts. During that interview--during my meeting with him, it's obvious to me that he is distracted, that he was giving me the courtesy of the visit, but I didn't feel I was getting through to him. So then I mentioned to him that my wife [Ginger Sullivan] was from Pittsfield, Massachusetts, one of the places in his district. And she was a part of the Cesar family. Well, the Cesar, there are lots of Cesars over western Massachusetts. So immediately when I said that, he started to look right at me, and I had his attention. And so then I proceeded to tell him the names of, of my wife's brother who was very active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Pittsfield, Massachusetts and other people. And I knew he was counting votes. He said, well, this is someone, you know, rather than this being someone from Atlanta, where I couldn't vote for him, this is someone who really has connections in my district. And so, to make a long story short, once I had his attention, I told him about what the school was all about. And he was really supportive of that. So he had two reasons to be supportive. First of all, we're gonna fill a real need. Secondly, in terms of his own political career, this could be helpful to him. And, of course, I told the people in Massachusetts what he did for us. When we had our first awards banquet in 1981, we gave him a Presidential Medal because he had helped us get significant funding for our operations here. So that's just one of a whole series of things that, that we, that we did to show--A--what we're trying to do is important and has merit in its own right, but then there's another dimension as to why we should be supported. So, so you have to be infinitely flexible and opportunistic in the position like this, and entrepreneurial while keeping your eye on the long-range goal, as to where you're trying to go and what you need to get there, but taking advantage of your circumstances to help you get the resources to get you there. Speaker 1: So, and if you didn't know that you had the entrepreneurial knack necessarily? Speaker 2: No. No. Story_ID: 13787 Speaker 1: Talk about your time as, you know, as [U.S.] Secretary of Health and Human Services and how that added to this sort of continuum of your, sort of life experiences and what you learned there because I'm sure some of what you learned, you have brought back, you know, here, because it's though you're playing a whole different staff, and a political stage too, you know. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Well, I have to say, first of all, the four years I was in Washington [D.C.] were, again, a new experience, learning. I'd not been in government service before. And, as you probably know, this agency had the largest budget of any federal agency. 38 percent of the federal budget flowed through the Department of Health and Human Services and with 250 programs, ranging from Social Security, the largest program of $300 billion to programs such child abuse injury prevention, welfare, Medicare, Medicaid, etcetera. So that was, again, a learning experience. What I had learned by the time I went to Washington was an effective administrator learns how to build a team and to set the vision, set the course, but pick team members who could really carry out that vision. You can't manage those programs yourself. You have to have people who are not only experts, but who believe in your philosophy and in, believe in you and are committed to you and to the president to do that. So that was my role. And we worked to recruit and put together the right team when I first went, went to Washington, and it worked. So we were able to, I think accomplish a number of things. We introduced Healthy People 2000 and Nation's Health Goals for the decade of the '90s [1990s]. And we, you know, worked and developed the new food label that's still used today that's on the cans of soup or potato chips or whatever you buy. And that was to really give American citizens a tool which, whereby he or she can really understand what it is in the foods that they are purchasing so they can plan their diets. We can't tell people, you should have a certain diet if they can't understand what's, you know, in the food. I also worked to increase the number minorities and women in senior positions in the department. And we succeeded there because my commissioner of Social Security was Gwendolyn King, a black female, running a $300 billion agency. The first female director of the National Institutes of Health, Dr. Bernadine Healey, we, you know, recruited and appointed there. The first woman and first minority Surgeon General, Dr. Antonio Novello, Hispanic, Puerto Rican, we appointed there and so forth and so on because again, my vision was to fully integrate the department, to recognize that there were talents in parts of our population that had not been recognized or given the opportunity to show what, what they could do. And it worked very well. So, I, I felt very, very good about that. We, we established a number of other programs. We developed what we call a minority male initiative program through our welfare agency to really work with young males, often without fathers, in our communities around the country, teach them conflict resolution, job skills and a whole range of other, other things. Yes, so those were activist years, and I, I fully enjoyed them. But they were intense years because, not only would there be those managerial things, there would be ad ministerial parts of the job. If the American Hospital Association was in town and they had a banquet, and I didn't go, the question would be, "why is it that the secretary is not coming to our event?" That would, that would be interpreted as a negative message when that may not be what's intended. It might be you're just so dogged tired, you just wish you could go home and rest. But, no, you go to these, these events. You'd receive ambassadors from other countries or Ministers of Health and, etc. You attend the World Health Assembly in Geneva [Switzerland], etcetera. So you're both a symbol of the government's health programs and welfare programs as well as a manager of those programs. So from that standpoint, there were--it was an all-encompassing, very demanding job. And the challenge was to keep the department focused on its priorities. You'd always haves unexpected things. You may recall, there was a Chilean grape crisis in March of--let's see, March of '89 [1989], my first year there, where there was this threat of poison fruit being shipped from Chile as part of a labor strike there Chile where the laborers were losing. And so they called the U.S. Embassy and said there was a load of fruit coming to the U.S. that had been poisoned. So what do you do about that? So there was that kind of crisis, a management there. Or if there was a drug that it was discovered that had been approved that was comp--you know, had complications that had not been expected, evaluating that and deciding whether to pull that drug off the market or what have you? So, it was really a very exciting, very challenging. Story_ID: 13788 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. And I'm the interviewer. And Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, and giving us today's date. Speaker 2: All right. Well, I'm Dr. Louis W. Sullivan. And that's L-O-U-I-S W. S-U-L-L-I-V-A-N, President Emeritus, Morehouse School of Medicine. Today is November, what, 6th? Yes, I think. November 6th, 2004. Speaker 1: Okay, and our location is the office--1900 South Michigan Avenue. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 13789 Speaker 1: Well, I finished Boston University Medical School in May of 1958, and then went on to New York Hospital, Cornell Medical Center for house staff training. And I was the first black intern they'd ever had there in New York Hospital, and had two great years there as an intern, and then first-year resident in internal medicine. So that experience there at New York Hospital gave me the background that I determined I was most interested in blood diseases. So I had an opportunity, while at New York Hospital, to have some elective training in hematology, which I did. Speaker 2: Now, I want to ask a question about your time at Boston University Medical School. Were you--you entered as the only black student? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Was that the case for your four year--it was four years there, right? Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: Was that the case for the entire four years there? Speaker 1: No, I was the only black in my Class of '76 [1976]. There were three blacks in the whole school who were ahead of me. The class behind me had no blacks, and I think by the time I was a senior, there were again three or so blacks there. There were really--so there were blacks before me. In fact, the first black who had been admitted to Boston University Medical School was Rebecca Lee in 1890 or thereabouts. So, so I was the first to enter the medical school, but there were really typically one or none per class at the, at that time. Speaker 2: Do you remember the names of the three that were ahead of you? Speaker 1: I really don't. One who was two years behind me, I remember is Arthur Lee, who, who happens to be on our faculty at Morehouse School of Medicine. He's a thoracic surgeon now. So, so I, I remember him, but now I don't remember the others. Story_ID: 13790 Speaker 1: Do you remember who particularly mentored you during that time [at Boston University Medical School]? I know you had spoken of the fact that you were a little intimidated coming on until you had your exam-- Speaker 2: Sure, right. Speaker 1: --and had done so well on it. Speaker 2: Sure, right. There were several faculty who were quite supportive and encouraging, but the one I remember most of all was Elizabeth Moyer. She was professor of anatomy, and, of course, we had gross anatomy as first-year medical students. And, of course, the transition from college to medical school is a fairly traumatic one for--and this is a common experience that medical students have because in gross anatomy, you enter--as you're a first-year medical student coming in, you're confronted with human dissection. So you have a human body there that you are to dissect and learn from. And that really, if you talk with anyone who's a doctor, and almost invariably they'll say, the thing they remember most is the gross anatomy. And that's for me too 'cause I remember the first day I entered that laboratory, that was quite striking. I could feel really my skin crawl because while I wanted to be a doctor, this was really confronting what it really took to, to become a physician. So, I--so Dr. Moyer was the head of the gross anatomy laboratory. Of course, she knew that the students were really quite intimidated. And so she was encouraging to all of us, but she really seemed to take a special interest in me, you know, knowing I was the only black student in the class. I was from the South. This had been my first--this is my first experience working directly with white students. So while they were colleagues and companions, they were also were competitors. And I, beyond that, felt a special responsibility 'cause, like so many blacks in that situation, I felt that I, what--if I succeeded, that would reflect upon others. If I failed, that also would be a negative reflection. I was also the first Morehouse alumnus, Morehouse College alumnus, to go to Boston University Medical School. So, again, I wanted to represent my college alma mater well. And like so many other students, you know, my parents really were counting on me too. So, so I had a lot of responsibilities that I had assumed to myself. No one had told me this, but I just intrinsically felt that way. So Dr. Moyer was very encouraging, and really spent a lot of time in the laboratory with us as students. And I developed a relationship with her. I felt I could visit with her, raise questions or issues without fear of being embarrassed or intimidated. So she's one I remember especially. In my later medical, medical school years, certainly in my third year, particularly, which is when we started clinical activities, working with live patients, in the hospital and the clinics, Dr. Charles Emerson was a mentor. He was actually the chief of hematology at Boston University. And that was really the time I had the first inkling that maybe this was something I would find interesting 'cause I liked working with the microscope. Hematology involves a lot of microcopy cause you're examining blood smears, making diagnosis of anemia or leukemia or other blood disorders. So I, I found that quite fascinating. And I loved the structure of cells, microscopically, etc. But I wasn't sure at that time if I, if this was really what I wanted to do full time. But I found it fascinating. I had known nothing about it before. So that was a new experience. Story_ID: 13791 Speaker 1: Up to that point, you really wanted to be a family doctor, right, because that was your image of what doctors were? Speaker 2: Right, my role model had been Dr. Joseph Griffin of Bainbridge [Georgia], who was a family doctor. And I wanted to be like him. And that really was basically my image when I went to medical school. I learned about all these fields that there, there were, you know, ophthalmology, dermatology, psychiatry, child psychiatry, forensic psychiatry, etcetera. So really, I went from knowing very little to an almost endless array of possible fields. So, like many students, I really found all of this quite challenging and a little disorienting at times. So at the time, by the time I got to be a junior medical student in my third year, finding hematology to be fascinating, something I really enjoyed, it was really the first inkling that maybe this was the field that I was interested in, more so than, than family medicine. And, of course, ultimately, I did become a hematologist. Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you what attracted you to hematology? You talked about the cellular structure. I mean was that the sole thing or was it something about looking through, you know, a microscope that fascinated you or just sort of the infinite possibilities of the cell? I'm just trying to understand. Speaker 2: Sure, right. Well, again, I enjoyed examined blood smears and the challenge of making a diagnosis, looking at these cells under the microscope and, first of all, identifying what kind of cell it was. And in many forms of leukemia, the cells are unusual structures. They're, they're not normal. So the question is, is this really a leukemic cell or is this the cell that has been damaged by some infection or something else. And if it is leukemia, what kind of leukemia is it because that affects not only the prognosis or the expectancy of the patient as to how well they might respond to therapy and what their life expectancy might be, but also, you know, the whole diagnostic series of things that, that you would do. So this really gave you a lot of information and even, even when you got all of the information, there were always variations. It was never, you would never--and any hematologist will tell, no case is ever exactly alike. But, but with experience, you get much, much more confidence. But in addition to the microscopy, no, I enjoyed working with patients. You know, the patients would come in with various systems, and, of course, you would have differentiate one condition from another because symptoms--the patient may come in simply with fatigue or with mild fevers or shortness of breath or has noticed occasional red blotches on their skin or maybe lumps under their arm, which would be enlarged lymph nodes or whatever. So really, there'd be a variety of possible symptoms they would have. Some would come in with only fatigue or fever, and none of these other symptoms. So you really are confronted with quite a diagnostic challenge. So that, that also fascinated me. That was a real challenge. How do you really take such a variety of clues, and sometimes a minimum number of clues, and arrive at the correct diagnosis. And this is important because the patient's outcome depends upon how accurate you will be and how quickly you will arrive at, at the diagnosis. So it was all of these things. And initially the microscopy, but it's much, much more than that. And then, when you had a patient, whether the patient had leukemia or say, had anemia, it might be something as simple as iron deficiency anemia, which responds very readily, easily to, you know, iron therapy or it might be a vitamin deficiency, etc. Seeing a patient respond and get better was very rewarding. So, so all of those things really were the things that appealed to me. Speaker 1: Now, and we're talking about 1957, '58 [1958], around then, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 13792 Speaker 1: In terms of the practice of hematology, what was the status, you know, during that time? Had a lot of work been done and research done in the area, you know, I mean compared to now? I know you haven't practiced in a while, but, you know--? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, yes, right. Well, no, like all fields of medicine, the field of hematology has developed tremendously. It is far more complicated and involved and sophisticated now than it was. And it was pretty sophisticated then. And the other thing that attracted me to hematology at that time compared to some of the other specialties was, it was more quantitative. That is, you could measure someone's blood count or blood volume or their--rate of circulation. So you could measure things, say, much more, let's say, than in cardiology, when you'd listen for a heart murmur or what have you. Now, all of these fields have changed 'cause now you've gotten quantitative measures in cardiology now. But, but now, you really can measure all kinds of things, what's going on within the cell; rates of cell division, cell metabolism, etcetera. So, so the field now is far beyond what it was at that time when I first became involved. Speaker 1: Can you tell me what were the more predominant cases, things that you were seeing? Was it primarily anemia or was it primarily leukemia--I mean what were the types of, you know, cases back then? Speaker 2: Right, well, seeing both anemia, certainly in children, particularly or in women, particularly women who had several children, iron deficiency anemia, because that is a condition that you do see, particularly, among poor people because your sources of iron in the diet are, you know, meats, you know, primarily. So, people who are poor, you know, cannot afford to buy meat, steaks or chops or whatever as readily as people with middle or upper incomes. Secondly, they don't visit clinics or doctors as often so that someone might develop an iron deficiency either say, from multiple pregnancies--'cause each pregnancy, the baby requires a certain amount of iron that it gets from, from the mother. And that iron has to be replaced so if the mother has a poor diet and also is not taking iron supplements, that can cause it or if someone has a bleeding ulcer, they could lose blood in their stool and not be, be aware, you know, of it. So that would be one thing. Other anemia's due to vitamin deficiencies, say, B-12 deficiency or folic acid deficiency would give you a certain kind of structural change in the blood cells, which is always fascinating, again, getting back to, to microscopy. But when these patients were diagnosed and given the proper therapy, their response was really quite dramatic. Over the course of three or four days or a week, you'd have a changed person, someone who previously had been very easily fatigued or not much energy is now raring to go, eating everything they can get their hands on and feeling so much better, and then realizing, in retrospect, just how affected they had been by, you know, by the anemia. So that really was, was quite dramatic. When you'd see patients with leukemia, in one sense, while these patients, you were fascinated by, you also were, empathized with the patients because you then knew, here you had a condition that, while you could help them and provide some treatment, you couldn't cure them. You knew that in time, they were gonna die, you know, from this condition. Since the 1950s, we have made remarkable improvements in the treatment of childhood leukemia, whereas now, childhood leukemia most often can be cured. So that is very dramatic, what we've been able to do with therapy, you know, since that time. Adult leukemia, and also, certainly, chronic myelogenous or chronic myelogenous leukemia, which is a certain kind of white cell, it, you still don't have a very high cure rate. But we are getting better. So that's one of the areas that this field has changed dramatically, whereas it formerly was almost a diagnosis of certain death within six months or a year or two years, now we have a number of patients who are living ten, to fifteen, twenty years and children are cured. And why the disease is different in children than in adults, of course, is one of the mysteries, but, fortunately, we are--have that happy outcome. Story_ID: 13793 Speaker 1: Was there anything else that influenced you during your medical school period, you know, at Boston University [Medical School]? You were a very, I would assume like most medical students, very intense, you know, intensely focused on medical school only--, Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: --not much outside? Speaker 2: Yes, no, that--very true. Oh, yes. Really, of course, we learned early on in medical school, the difficulty of the concepts you had to learn was not all that challenging. You had some things in college that were equally challenging in terms of difficulties, certainly for me and certain terms of advanced mathematics or physics, etcetera, equally difficult as some of the things you have in medical school. In medical school, the challenge is the volume. There's just so much that you have to learn. And you realize too that the more you learn, the better doctor you'll be. So, so you always want to learn more because, you say, well, gosh, if I do this, then I'll even be a better doctor. Because there's always so much more to learn all the time, it's a constant thing. And, of course, one of the reasons I was challenged or attracted to become, a period of going into internal medicine and then hematology, was again the--internal medicine really is the diagnostic field in the medical specialties. This is the diagnostician who treats patients, true, but really if surgeons or ophthalmologists or dermatologists really need a consult, it's usually an internist. And, of course, then there'd be the sub-specialties within the internal medicine, cardiology, hematology, gastroenterology, etcetera. So, so, no, I was quite focused in medical school because of the enormity of the information. One of the reasons also for the growth of specialization has been the fact that there's so much information to learn, many people decide, well, I can really be a good hematologist, but as a generalist, you know, we really have even a broader scope. You might have a broader array of knowledge, but it's very superficial compared to being narrow and, and deep. So, so those are some of the things that we looked at in medical school. Speaker 1: So, speaking of specialization, can you pinpoint a time when things became increasingly specialized, you know, historically? Do you know when that happened in the medical field? Speaker 2: Well, it was starting to happen when I was a medical student, but really accelerated tremendously during the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]. That was stimulated by our nation's investment in biomedical research, primarily through the growth of the National Institutes of Health because, obviously, the more you know about, let's say a field in gastroenterology or cardiology or what have you, then the more there is a pressure to specialize. So, at, so the NIH, as you know, which really dates back to the '30s [1930s] but really got seriously underway as a research organization in the mid-to-late '40s [1940s] and certainly, after World War II, the NIH growth in their investment in research, not only that's done on the NIH campus, but the research that they fund around the country. That really escalated in the '60s, '70s, '80s [1980s], and it's continuing to do so. So, so that investment in developing new knowledge, of course, increases the trend toward specialization and really led to such fragmentation that, as the counter, the field of family medicine was developed because many people said--and I certainly agree with this concept, people need doctors, people that they can talk to, not technicians. And being a good doctor is having the ability to communicate with people and to develop their trust and to enjoy interacting with people. And, and, of course, there's a science body or technology that's, that's underlying all of medicine. But that shouldn't dominate it. That is, being a good physician requires more than having simply a body of technical knowledge. It means, again, being trustworthy, being effective in communication, being understanding of, of the patient's culture where you don't give a prescription to someone that's gonna cost a hundred dollars if they're unemployed, things like that, that seem so simple mistakes, but those kinds of mistakes are made all the time. And that can have a profound impact on whether that patient is helped or not. So, so that, of course, is why we've tried to move back towards having physicians who focus on the patient. And, and, of course, that's always a tension of balance. How do you really balance that out? Story_ID: 13794 Speaker 1: What was driving you at that point? And what were doctors looking--what were you looking, you know, to do? Were you looking to essentially feel that you were gonna help your community? Were you--you know, cause this is before, I mean you talk also about 'Brown v. Board', you know, and going--that's when you got to medical school. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But I'm just trying to get, you know, some sense of where you--not saying you were representing the black community, but what was the mindset during that time? Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Well, I was heavily conditioned by my parents. My--I was fortunate in that I grew up in a two-parent household. My parents were very dedicated to education. My mother [Lubirda Priester Sullivan] was a schoolteacher. My father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] was an undertaker. And they were committed to my brother [Walter Sullivan, Jr.] and myself getting an education. That was, so that was the first thing. We were conditioned by that. Secondly, my parents were active in the community. Well, because while I was born in Atlanta, I think I may have told you, I, we moved to a small town in Georgia [Blakely, Georgia]. Eventually, my father established a funeral home there. But he also established the first local chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] because he was working to really get blacks to vote because with the poll tax and all kinds of strategies to prevent blacks from, from voting, it was rampant then. And southwest Georgia where we were was a pretty bad place. Lynchings were still occurring when I was growing up, and my father, being a funeral director, we had a couple of bodies that he had, people who had been, been lynched. So, so fundamentally, the environment was one where my parents were saying, you really have to get an education. This, the way, this was the way for improvement. And in retrospect, I realize this now, but I didn't realize it then, they did a lot of things to really model my decision making or to influence me. I mentioned Dr. [Joseph] Griffin, who was forty-one miles southwest in Bainbridge [Georgia]. Well, not only did my parents drive down to see him when they needed a doctor, rather than going into the back door of a white doctor's office there in Blakely 'cause we had three doctors in Blakely, but only in an emergency would they go there. They would prefer to take an hour to drive down there. They would frequently take me with them. And my father operated an ambulance service at his funeral home. So he would frequently have me ride down with him to help him with this patient that he's taking to Dr. Griffin. Well, though he never told me this, in looking back, I'm pretty convinced that he was really re-enforcing this idea of Dr. Griffin as a model, role model, etcetera. And interestingly enough, the day I graduated from medical school, my father told me he had wanted to be a doctor. He had had to leave college--(crying)--my father left, left college after one year. He, he went to Claflin College [now Claflin Univeristy] in South Carolina. And he was the tenth of eleven children. And so when his father died, he had to leave to go back to take care of his mother and his youngest sister. This was down in Alachua, Florida. And the interesting thing was he never--he never told me that. But knowing him, I know that he didn't want to put pressure on me. Well, there are a lot of things--lot of things like that, that while I learned medicine, interesting, through a scientific perspective, there was a sense of responsibility that they passed on to me. And I get a lot of satisfaction of doing things that I think help other people. And so those were the things that were operating. It's fundamentally--whatever I do, I want to be the best in that I want to be measured by the standard that, that's out there, not some standard for blacks or minorities, but the standard for everyone because that's simply, I guess my ego structure won't--you know, I, I want to do that. But I also want to really--to me, the significance of my life is the things that I do not simply for me, but to help other people. So those, those, frankly, are the things that drive me. So, so that's, that's that. Story_ID: 13795 Speaker 1: One thing that is curious to me is, you said that the first time you saw the cadaver, you know, it was little, you know-- Speaker 2: Traumatic. Speaker 1: Traumatic, but you had seen--hadn't you seen dead--I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: --dead bodies. So, it would seem to be that--so what was the difference? Speaker 2: The difference was, first of all, this cadaver that I saw was--they had taken it out of the freezer. So when I pulled the sheet back, there was this frozen body. So this was different. And I, I think this is--I'm trying to remember for sure, I think I was better prepared than many of my classmates, but still (laughs), this was different. And then, starting the dissection because, you know, my experience with my father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.] as an undertaker, I would help him when he would go out to someone's home who had died, to help bring them back. But, you know, that's, that's very different than really becoming so intimate with the body that you then end up opening up with the scalpel and dissecting out, and identifying everything. Story_ID: 13796 Speaker 1: What I was saying is the first day at the anatomy laboratory, which is a about a week after we had started medical school, we had our exposure to anatomy. And it's traumatic, and one of our seventy-six freshmen students pulled back the sheet and said, "That's it," and walked out. And all of us thought he was joking, but never saw him again. He left medical school. He was really traumatized by this. It really is a very traumatic experience, but you get, get over it, get beyond it because again, when you're working with live patients, you know, your first patient you lose, who dies, that's very traumatic because, you know, you, you don't want that to happen because that represents a tragedy for that person, but also a failure for you. And, of course, the ethos in medicine is to be successful, you know, and being successful means your patients are better off because they've interacted with you. So that's, that's something that you have, you have to learn and get, get used to. And, of course, that's one of the reasons that some advocate that physicians shouldn't get too close to their patients, shouldn't get personally involved because you lose your, your objectivity here. So, so it really is a question of developing that fine balance between developing a good relationship and a warm relationship with your patient, but also becoming so involved that you lose your objectivity because then, you don't use your best judgment. And therefore, the patient's welfare is compromised. So there are a lot of adjustments that you make, and that's part of the professionalism that you develop as a, as a physician. Story_ID: 13797 Speaker 1: How then did you get to New York then? How was that--I mean how many places did you have to choose from or chose you or how did you go about it? Speaker 2: Sure, sure, right. Well, during my, spring of my senior year, I visited a number of places. And, of course, I had learned about these various places from some of the graduates of previous classes who had told us about them, their experience and so forth, and also this, the student affairs office, you know, has information about them and so forth. So I, you know, I ended up applying I think to--I think it was six places, New York Hospital, there in New York, University Hospital, right there at Boston University, University of Rochester School of Medicine because that was a place that had a good training program. Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland. When--also a place in Chicago--I'm trying to remember, I applied here in Chicago, and I can't remember where it was. It may have been out at Cook County Hospital, but I think it was Cook County. And the westward end of my interviews was actually up at the University of Minnesota, up in Minneapolis, because, again, I'd heard about that place as a good place for training. And, of course, I remember there was a Dr. Watson, who was the chairman of medicine, who was a nationally authority on a rare liver disease called porphyria where the liver has metabolic impairment that--the breakdown products from the hemoglobin, from the blood cells, is not properly metabolized. But Dr. Watson was an expert on porphyria. And so I was fascinated by that, and they also had another person, Dr. Wesley Spink, a nationally-known specialist in infectious diseases. So during the Thanksgiving and Christmas holiday breaks, I visited each one of these places in 1957. And based upon my experience at these places--there were some I decided I definitely don't want to come here, either I didn't like the environment or I wasn't stimulated. But then there were other places I said, gee, this is fascinating. And that happened to me at New York Hospital. Now, at New York Hospital, again, they had never had a black intern there. They'd never had a graduate of Boston University there 'cause New York Hospital being affiliated with Cornell [University Medical School] was considered one of the quote elite of very strong training places. So I applied there, but I was taking a risk. I was taking the risk that I might be rejected, but I decided, well, I'm gonna let them make the decision. I'm not gonna rule myself out. So I went there for that interview, and I had an interview with Dr. Marvin Schlesinger, who was at that time, chief of the gastro-intestinal division in the department of medicine. So the--the end of that interview, which was about an hour with him, he then asked me if I could possibly stay to meet the chairman of the department of medicine. And so I knew from that I'd passed the screening. So then this lark that I had undertaken in applying to a place where I was fully prepared that they would reject me, this became a real possibility. So, I was excited, I was able to stay for this interview, which was about an hour later. And I became very excited, thinking about this may happen. And then I walked into the chairman's office, Dr. Schlesinger took me in there. And then I was immediately taken aback because the chairman of medicine, whom I had not known really, had one of the thickest Southern drawls I had ever heard. And, and my immediate reaction then was, I've wasted my time. This will never happen. And he made every effort to put me at ease, small talk, etcetera, 'cause he also was a heavy smoker back then. This was 1957 because, as you know, you wouldn't--in those years, a number of physicians smoked. And so he asked me questions, and I would really answer very, with very clipped responses. I didn't expand very much. So at the end of the interview, which must have been about twenty minutes, he said, "Well, Lou, you know, we've never had a graduate from Boston University here. And so we really haven't had any experience with students from there. And we've never had a black here either", but, and he said, "We're aware of that." He said, "But, and I know you've applied to a number of places. And the rules of the intern matching program are we can't really make commitments here". 'Cause this is a national matching program that institutions have to participate in and can't make side deal with students, etcetera. You have to go through the matching pool. He said, "So we can't--but I just want you to know that, that if you're interested in us, we're interested in you." So that was his way of telling me they wanted--. So I left there walking on air because this application that I had sent in thinking that, well, this is just a long shot, really would be true. And then, of course, being, reacting to this Southern drawl--and, of course, in later years, I saw too how my experience in the South had conditioned me because I automatically reacted negatively to him. And it turns out, he was a great person. We became very good friends, very close because the experience I had--and, of course, I was accepted there. And then I started there on July 1st of 1958. Story_ID: 13798 Speaker 1: I was assigned to Ward H-5, one of the busiest wards in the hospital [New York Hospital], very busy, very demanding, but also a great place for learning. So, in a sense, that was great that I was assigned there, but also it meant that I was busy and had to be right on my toes. Well, after about two weeks, the head nurse came up to me and said, Dr. [Hugh] Luckey called up and says, when you get a chance, he'd like to see you down in his office. And my reaction was oh, oh, what did I do wrong? You know, have I made some mistake, I haven't measured up, etcetera. Went down, I guess about a half hour or so later, and he was asking me, "How are things going?" I said, "Fine." "Having any trouble?" "No." "You learning a lot?" "Oh, yes." "Are you enjoying it here?" "Oh, yes." You know, I was really on edge, waiting for the hammer to fall. He said, "Lou, I just--the reason I wanted to ask you is this," he says, "I want to be sure that you have a good experience here because I want this to be a great learning experience for you. And I know people here in the North--as you know, I'm from Tennessee"--he had been on the faculty at Vanderbilt [University] before coming to New York. "And some people in New York think that all Southerners are prejudiced." He says, "But I really want you to know we think a lot of you. We want you to have a good experience here so if you ever have any trouble from anyone, don't stop at the chief resident. Don't stop with one of the other persons. You come directly to me now, 'cause I, I'm not gonna, you know, stand for that." So that was another surprise. So I was, it was great. And sure enough, about halfway through my internship year, I did have an experience. I, I called him up. It was on a Sunday. The only thing I, that ever happened that first year. I walked in--I was rotating through the private service. And really, none of us interns liked the private service because on the public service, these were our patients. On the private service, this was the private doctors' patients. And they made the diagnosis or they wrote the orders and so forth. Some of them would let you do that, but basically, you earn a lot less. Well, this was on a Sunday afternoon. I'd been very busy, and I had, I think, admitted six patients that day. Typically, on the ward service, you have maybe two admissions, maybe three at the most. But admitting six patients, that meant you were just very busy. So this sixth patient came in. And the nurse called that they had this patient of Dr. [Claude] Forkner who had been admitted. And so about, I guess, maybe thirty or forty-five minutes later, when I went up to examine the patient, I could hear him as I walked down the hall. He was very loud. He was obviously intoxicated. So when I walked in the room, he took one look at me and said, "You get out of here." And so, at that time, I was already feeling pretty put upon, you know, with all the work I'd been doing that day. And, of course, when he said that, I said, "Well, that's fine by me. I don't want to see you either." So I went out, and I called Dr. Luckey at home. Now, Dr. Forkner actually had one of the largest practices there at New York Hospital and had a very wealthy clientele. So generally, those physicians you want to cultivate. Well, about ten minutes after I placed my call to Dr. Luckey, and I told him what had happened, that patient was being wheeled out of the hospital. So that was really an example of the fact Luckey meant what he, what he said. And interesting enough, to jump ahead a little bit, when I went back to Atlanta in 1975 to organize Morehouse School of Medicine, the first private grant we received to help us with the development of the medical school is from the Josiah Macy Foundation. Hugh Luckey was on the board of the Macy Foundation. And I later learned, of course, he was very supportive--I mean, now there were others, you know, there on the board too, but, but that--again, at New York Hospital, that was a great experience for me, and it also showed me that I also had some prejudices that I had to really get rid of, that I conditioned by my experience in, in growing up. And just to close the chapter on this, I've recently accepted the invitation to join the board of New York Hospital. So, so that's part of that, that circle, you know. Speaker 2: Now, when you were--during that, the period--okay, at New York University, was there any-- Speaker 1: New York Hospital. Speaker 2: New York Hospital, I'm sorry. Was there any sense about what direction you wanted to go after that? I mean, you know, you--did you just have that one negative experience? That was the only one? Speaker 1: That was the only one, right. And, and my experience with other patients and also with house staff and the nursing staff, always very positive. I, I'm sure, it is known that Dr. Luckey, you know, was very supportive of me and wanted me to have a good experience. But, of course, there were other people, you know, there. But he set the tone. Speaker 2: Did he ever say what he saw in you besides what he told you that time? Did he ever tell you later-- Speaker 1: (Shakes head for no). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Not really. I, I think it was--A--he was interested in having, you know, a black house staff, you know, there at the hospital. They had never one. So he, he wanted to be, you know, start that process of integrating, you know, of the hospital. And, having grown up in the South himself and having seen the injustice of segregation and discrimination, I think he wanted to help do something about that. And, you know, thirdly, I think I had a good medical school record. And I think also they wanted to expand their base of recruiting their house staff from other medical schools. They had never had anyone from Boston University. So I think all of those things and, you know, again, when I met him in that first interview, you know, I, obviously, I impressed him somewhat. So he was, you know, interested, you know, there. Story_ID: 13799 Speaker 1: What was the client population at New York Hospital? What was it like? I mean what was its racial mix and--? Speaker 2: Oh, it was overwhelmingly white; very few black patients. New York Hospital is on East 68th Street on, and York Avenue, right on the East River. And that area--that was a silk stocking district at that time. So we had occasional black patients. We had two black physicians on the staff, by the way. They had not had their training there, but they were on the staff. One, who's still alive, Dr. Aaron Wells, who was an internist, who also I think is on the staff Harlem Hospital. I can't remember the name of the, of the other. But they had recently come on the staff. So again, looking back, I think Luckey, Hugh Luckey wanted to really, you know, integrate the hospital. It's very different now. I've gone back to give talks there, and they now have a significant number of black and Hispanic house staff members there. So, so it was, it was definitely--and it was known to be, you know, a silk stocking district. They had this doctor I mentioned, Dr. Forkner had a practice. It was called "Passports International". He took care of number of the diplomats at the U.N. [United Nations] and people from abroad who came to the U.S. for medical care. I remember one of the patients that I took care of as an intern was the Senior Queen Mother of Nepal. She was a patient of Claude Forkner. There was the son of [Rafael] Trujillo, the dictator for the Dominican Republic. His son, I guess he was a aviator, came in as a patient there. So we saw a lot of patients like that and people who obviously were very wealthy. Cornelius Vanderbilt was a patient then. As a matter of fact, Mr. Vanderbilt came in. He had a condition that was called atrial flutter. This is a rapid heartbeat that can deteriorate into what's called atrial fibrillation where the heart just becomes chaotic and rather than getting a synchronized good beat of all the heart muscles going, the, the individuals cells tend to contract in a very chaotic fashion. So you have this heart muscle that's really almost trembling. But you don't get--it doesn't pump blood, and people can die from this because, it, in fact, the heart is not pumping and really you just have this thing that looks very chaotic. So what you try and do is convert the flutter or fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm. Well, when Mr. Vanderbilt came in--and the Vanderbilts actually were among the people who had been the major benefactors for the hospital, that meant Dr. Luckey took over the care of Mr. Vanderbilt and those of us on the house staff. But that was really too bad because Dr. Luckey, with all of his administrative responsibilities, really didn't see that many patients. The chief resident in medicine or the cardiology fellow saw patients like this all the time, you know, But, of course, we didn't have the authority there. So, what happened was Dr. Luckey gave him a small dose of medicine. That didn't convert. And another half hour, he gave a little bit more. And finally, the chief resident, his name is Jim Strickler, James Strickler, he eventually became dean at Dartmouth Medicine School. And he's retired now, living up in New Hampshire, snuck in while Dr. Luckey was not there and gave the patient a good jolt of dioxin, which is a medicine. And he converted immediately to, to normal sinus rhythm (laughter). So, at any rate, I don't think he ever told Dr. Luckey that he had done that. Dr. Luckey thought he was responsible for that, right. Speaker 1: Now, what was--did you see any difference in the care between, you know, of the wealthy? I mean did that experience teach you anything differently or did you observe-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not really. The difference between the wealthy patients and, let's say the ward patients, was simply they had nicer rooms and better food. But in terms of the care, no. They--the house staff, the interns and the residents who were seeing these patients every day, plus, of course, they have a number of fellows in training. You have your cardiology fellows, your gastrointestinal fellows, or you have hematology fellows. So, no, no, the quality of care, if anything, I'd say was really better for the ward patients. But you might be one patient in four in a, in a room, as opposed to being in a private room, you know, up on the, what we called the tower, up in the upper reaches of, of the hospital. Speaker 1: Now, you were there how long? Speaker 2: For two years. Speaker 1: For two years-- Speaker 2: From '58 [1958] to '60 [1960]. Story_ID: 13800 Speaker 1: Okay, and then you went? Speaker 2: I went back to Boston. Speaker 1: Boston, right. Speaker 2: Because by that time, I decided that I wanted to be a hematologist because I had a chance to take a three-month elective in hematology as a hematology fellow there at New York Hospital. So that really cinched it for me. That's when I really knew that. So I then, on July 1st [1960], took a year of pathology at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. And the reason for that was pathology, of course, is a field that is quite broad because the, the pathologist is a person who makes a diagnosis looking at a biopsy or does an autopsy, etcetera. So really, pathology is a field that really is quite good for really learning very well, a whole area of things. So I decided I wanted to do a year of pathology before doing the hematology fellowship. So I did that year of pathology at Massachusetts General Hospital and then went to Boston City Hospital as a hematology fellow in the Harvard [University] service there. So that's--and I, I was three years there on a hematology fellowship. So that's how I learned my hematology. Speaker 1: Now, who was directing your career at that time, and why did you, you know, why did you return to Boston? Was that where the opportunity was or you-- Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, this is less so today than it was then. But in those years, the pinnacle for medical education was Boston. No, right. So to be trained in Boston, you know, that was it. Now, the reality is that at that time a number of places certainly, Cornell [University], Columbia [University], University of Chicago, Stanford [University], all were good places and probably the training was just as good at those places. But traditionally, historically, Boston was, was the center. So really, being trained in Boston carried that extra certification, that extra endorsement and so forth. And, of course it would--the place was good for training 'cause the training I had, both in pathology at Mass. [Massachusetts] General [Hospital] and then hematology at Boston City Hospital, was excellent. So, so I don't have any regrets or any hesitancy about that. But the only thing I'm saying is I probably could have gotten just as good training at Columbia or Stanford. But it didn't carry that cache of being trained in Boston or, you know, trained at Harvard 'cause they had a laboratory at Boston City Hospital called the Thorndike Memorial Laboratory. And a number of people in leadership positions around the country at that time had had part of their training at the Thorndike Laboratory. So it was really that kind of attractive. And then, you know, as I said before, I always said for me, I want to be judged by the most intense competition there is. That's my own personal, ego satisfaction but also, reassurance too. So, all those factors went into it. Story_ID: 13801 Speaker 1: During your fellowships, were you doing research and what kind of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what kind of projects were you working on, sir? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, I was quite busy as a hematology, hemalogic researcher and publishing my research in various medical journals, 'New England Journal of Medicine', 'Journal of Clinical Investigation', 'Journal of the American Medical Association', etcetera. My main areas of research really was in anemias, what we call nutrition anemias. And perhaps the most significant research that I did at the time was research that I published in 1964 in the 'Journal of Clinical Investigation'. This was research showing that alcohol in amounts consumed by people who are heavy drinkers can suppress the production of blood cells by the bone marrow. And one could develop either an anemia or a low platelet count because blood platelets you need for, to initiate blood clotting. We could have, have either anemia or low red cell count or a low platelet count or even a low white blood, blood cell count as a result of ingestion of too much alcohol. And this could lead to problems from either the anemia or the low white count or the low platelet count, bleeding, you know, if you have a low platelet count or infection from a low white count. We also showed that this was reversible because this was work that we did, we had a metabolic research ward there at the Thorndike [Memorial] Laboratory. And in essence, this research we did then, I think we would have difficulty doing that today with an increase in form consent, etcetera. But what, what we found, occasionally we had patients who came into Boston City Hospital who had anemia. And then the anemia would appear to get better by itself. So we decided to--that's what led us to suspect this. So we decided to see if we could induce this anemia. And so we were able to do it by bringing patients who were heavy drinkers in, on the Thorndike Ward. We actually had them sign consent forms at that time because, although this wasn't a federal requirement, this was a, this was considered good ethical research, our methods. So we would do this. And we were able to, within a period of seven to ten days, reduce the blood cell count. And when we would stop the alcohol, after three or four days, when the--nothing much would happen, then you'd see a rise in the blood cell count. So I published that paper in 1964. So that was, perhaps, the most significant work. But then we did work on sickle cell anemia, other work on developing an assay for what's called gastric intrinsic factor, which is a protein produced in gastric juice that's needed for absorption of vitamin, vitamin B-12. So, no, I was very active doing research during that period I was at the Thorndike and in later years because when I finished my fellowship training, of course, I then went on the faculty there at Harvard [Medical School] for a year and then at Seton Hall [College of Medicine]. So, so, yes, I did quite a bit of research in those years. Story_ID: 13802 Speaker 1: The work on, in sickle cell anemia, was that early--I mean what--it was early work, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Who was--how did sickle cell become known or, you know, apparently,--okay. Speaker 2: Right, well, what happened, because within the medical community and among hematologists, sickle cell anemia was well known because we knew that this was an anemia that occurred primarily in blacks or in other people whose ancestors came from the Mediterranean area, that is Italy, Greece, North Africa, etcetera. But the most common presentation would be in someone who was African American or, or from Africa. So, so we did work in those years to try to understand more, what was it about, about these cells that caused the anemia. And not my work, but others' worked it--the work of others, particularly, Dr. John Harris, out at Case Western Reserve [University] who, parenthetically, had had his training about eight or nine years before I was at the Thorndike [Memorial Laboratory], he had been at the Thorndike. And that's another reason I wanted to go to the Thorndike because so many people who were really doing good work around the country had had their training there. Dr. Harris had shown that the thing that causes cells to sickle, that is, assume this almost banana shape, rather than being a pancake shape, was changed in the hemoglobin itself. The hemoglobin that is in solution within the red cell as opposed to something in the membrane. He was able to produce, in a solution of hemoglobin, these crystalloid formations of hemoglobin when he reduced the oxygen content in the, in the solution of hemoglobin. So, so that was, I guess 1957 or '58 [1958] that, that he, he did that. And it was shown that the cells became more rigid then. And they would--rather than flowing smoothly through blood cells, like say, a series of say, apples or others--well, apples is not the correct things, but--because they're really, the red cell is very concave, it's flat. But it's really sort of like my hand, that is, you have a wide dimension. And it really, in the middle it's narrower than on the edge. So, so at any rate what people who studied the dynamics of the circulation showed, was that these cells were very pliable, very flexible. And they flowed through the blood very easily because they could adapt to all kinds of changes in shape. Well, in sickle cell anemia, the--when the oxygen content in the blood was reduced, you'd get this crystalloid or factoid formation, the cell become rigid. So it gets to, say, a branch in the blood cell, and they become entangled and caused obstruction of blood flow. And, of course, that's what caused the pain or even could cause organ damage and, of course, in severe cases youngsters could die, you know, five, ten, fifteen years of age because the vascular events are, are resulting from that. So what made sickle cell become more widely known was the fact that [Richard] Nixon, when he was president, advocated for the formation of a National Center for Sickle Cell Disease. And that was in 1971 that that was formed because it so happened I was on the faculty at Boston University at that time. And I was invited to be one of the members of the Advisory Board for the National Sickle Cell Center there. Now, Nixon had done this--I am told, because as he was getting ready for, to run for re-election, he wanted to do something to appeal to the black community. And someone suggested, well, why not form a sickle cell center out at NIH [National Institutes of Health]. Story_ID: 13803 Speaker 1: So you were just, you were finishing up talking about [President Richard] Nixon. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. So, so when Nixon formed the first national sickle cell center [National Center for Sickle Cell Disease], he formed an advisory committee. And I served on that advisory committee for the sickle center because, when we had our first meeting at the National Institutes of Health, well, that first meeting was to determine what is a national sickle cell center? What does, does it do? There were already funds to support research in sickle cell disease from NIH or fund for clinics to take care of patients. Well, what we decided the national sickle cell program should have, are comprehensive sickle cell centers. There should be a number of these around the country, and comprehensive meant that the center, itself, should be involved in research in sickle cell disease, but it also should be involved in diagnosis of sickle cell disease and treatment and counseling of patients because we felt that the important thing was for patients to know, and their families to know, what are the things that precipitate attacks, sickle cell attacks? What are the things that they can do to prevent them or minimize them or recognize them, etctera? So we then established the template for, what a comprehensive sickle cell center would be and we also decided that there should be ten such centers scattered around the country. And that was based upon the amount of money that we had, you know, at that time. And so, that's how they were established. And including here, one of those centers was established here at the University of Chicago. Dr. James Bowing (sic)-- Speaker 1: Bowman. Speaker 2: [James] Bowman, that was the director of, of that. And he later came on the advisory board for the sickle cell centers, you know, also. And, in fact, got a center at Boston City Hospital, too, and other places around the country. So, so I think establishing those centers is really what gave sickle cell disease the prominence then because there was this program to emphasize them. Speaker 1: And that--just we sort of understand, in the African American community, where would there have been that focus before, I mean cause there have been a lot of diseases. I don't think--was diabetes, I mean that's a whole different area, but diabetes had, was that, had that gotten--? Speaker 2: Well, that was a concern, but I think in the African American community, you know, there concerns about heart disease and saw that as a, you know, death, death rates from heart disease are higher in the African American community, etcetera. But there was a center that, that was not called that at the time, Center for Sickle Cell Disease, at Howard University. Dr. Roland Scott, who was chief of hematology at Howard University and a pediatrician himself, had become very interested in sickle cell disease. And so he had been studying this for years. But there wasn't very much money, you know, back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], you know, when, when he was doing it. When the national program was formed, Howard was granted funding, you know, to establish a comprehensive sickle cell center. So, but, but up until that time, there were very few places that really had much invested in studying sickle cell disease. Story_ID: 13804 Speaker 1: What made you decide that you wanted to go into academia. That's, you know, was that a natural progression 'cause you could have different ways at that point. And I'm just--. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. Yeah, well, it, I guess there are a number of factors here. First of all, I became interested in hematology. And I, in becoming interested in hematology, I was fascinated by research. So, also, I mentioned Dr. Elizabeth Moyer in anatomy. When I told her, when I was there as a medical student at Boston University [Medical School], that I planned to become a family doctor and go back to Georgia, she said in so many words, "Well, why would you want to do that? You're too good for that. You're too smart for that." And so, really there was a sense of, my goodness, you know, this is not an area where my talents would be used or would give me much satisfaction. So that was really, I think, the bias in the system against general practitioners, they're later known as family doctors and also the bias of people who are within medical schools to believe that research and teaching is much more noble than taking care of patients. Anybody can take care of patients, but to do research, to develop new knowledge, to teach the next generation, that is a higher and more noble, you know, calling. And I was caught up in that. I was seduced by that. I don't believe that now. But, but, no, there's no question that that, along with the fascination of this field, you know, was that. And so it really was sort of an evolution because when I first was attracted to hematology, I was still thinking of myself, you know, doing practice, private practice, you know, as hematologist, well, as an internist, then with a sub-specialty in hematology, later, became just full-time hemalogic specialist. And I think my years of research in '61 [1961] to '64 [1964] at Thorndike [Memorial] Laboratory, again, led me to believe, well, the best use of my talents is to become a researcher and to stay in academic medicine and to do teaching and research, etcetera. So, so, again, I probably mentioned before, really, the opportunity to develop the medical school at, at Morehouse [Morehouse School of Medicine]. By that time, I, I guess I--that was 1975. So I was then forty--well, I was forty-one when I was first approached. So, I guess started at forty-two. By that time, I was sufficiently mature in my field and also sufficiently--I think my self-image and myself awareness was such, I said, I don't need to have somebody else's criteria for what's important. I said, what is--what's important for me is something that I can do that really will make my life more significant and, and really starting a medical school, you know, for minorities, African Americans and others, I thought was a tremendous, not only a great challenge, and I hadn't done anything like that before either, not only a challenge, but something that, if we succeeded, that it would be a much more lasting contribution, much more important because through the graduates of the school, you then have people who fan out to take care of people or who do research or do, or do teaching. So that was, I think, the evolution. Speaker 1: You know, and I found that was--you know, first you're, so you're forty-one, that's very young, when you think about it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean to start a medical school from scratch. Speaker 2: Yep. Story_ID: 13805 Speaker 1: The other thing is that, what--you, in this interview you also put it in context in that there had not been a lot of doctors graduating. There was a shortage of doctors, you know, in the early '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Sure, right, yes, right. Speaker 1: And so there was the perception that, you know, in order to provide correct medical care, there had to be an increase in the number of doctors? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: But what--but where was your administrative skill set coming from to do something like this? You talked previously about fundraising which is its own animal-- Speaker 2: Sure, sure, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, but, but administratively, what was that skill set, to start something from scratch (laughter)--it's one thing--. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I see, yes, right. Well, now, this is-- Speaker 1: Nineteen-- Speaker 2: What happened, my, as you know, I went-- of course, I was at Seton Hall [College of Medicine] for, for two years on the faculty, '64 [1964] to '66 [1966]-- Speaker 1: Can I just--what was it that had flattened out? I'm using--my terminology is not right today, but what had like--I mean you were on an even path, and you didn't see any, you know, growth? Why was that? Because you--to be president of Seton--? I'm just trying to understand what--? Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, right. Well, what happened I think, was really my maturation as an individual. You know, what--basically, I was recruited back to Boston University [Medical School] on the faculty in 1966. And then in 19--by 1973, I became a full professor of medicine and also chief of--well, actually in 1966 when I went back, I founded the hematology service for Boston University at Boston City Hospital. At the time that I was a medical student, Boston University did not have a hematology service there. Harvard [Medical School] had a hematology service and the Thorndike [Memorial] Laboratory and Tufts Medical School. So all three medical schools in Boston had faculty and students at Boston City Hospital. It was a major teaching hospital. But Boston University, should they need a hematology consultant, would get someone from the Harvard hematology service or the Tufts service to come. But when I went back on the faculty at Boston University in 1966, I then founded the hematology service for Boston University at Boston City Hospital. So there were three hematology services, one with each, each school. And, of course, that--I was very pleased and proud with that because this meant our Boston University services were more, more complete and much more comprehensive. But by 1973, by the time I came, became full professor of medicine, what I found was that a lot of my time as chief of, of the Boston University hematology service, was taken up with budgeting, with personnel issues, interviewing and evaluating, hiring or terminating medical technologists, supervising the blood bank, etcetera, setting up schedules and, you know. So fundamentally, I, I found I was doing a lot of administrative work. And I was doing what I called Mickey Mouse administration. This wasn't major policy issues. This was really making the trains run on time, having the blood bank operate. And while that requires a skill and so forth, and you want to do it well, this wasn't intellectually, you know, stimulating. So I really kind of felt--I, I'd kind of gotten into administration. I was spending about third of my time on things like that, which wasn't that exciting. So I had established at that time a goal for myself, that by the time I was forty-five, I wanted to be chairman of a department of medicine. So I thought, well, if I'm going to do administration, I really want to really do something more significant in administration. So when Morehouse College then decided that they wanted to start a medical school, and I was approached, while I initially had a lot of questions and some reservations, I was also intrigued. And as I thought about this, that's as I, you know, evolved with the concept, well, you know, if this is something that's, it's not only needed, but this is a place, the Atlanta University Center, this is a place where it could happen. This is the one place in the country where there's that sufficient collection of black institutions of higher education to form an environment in which a medical school could, could exist. And the other factors that were operative then was, this is my alma mater, Morehouse College and it meant also the opportunity of going back to Atlanta. And so all of that, along with the fact that I felt that this could really be much more significant, led to my decision to do that. And, and so, in doing that and making that decision, I knew I would be even more involved in administration. But then this was a different kind of administration. This was setting the course of an institution. This is setting an educational environment and really developing an organization that, in time, would really be its own operation. So those were the things that were operative, you know, you know, at that time. But my friends on the faculty at Boston University and elsewhere were advising me, well, Lou, you know, this is a high-risk thing. Are you sure you want to do this? Well, if you do, don't resign. Take a leave of absence because these things don't always work out, etcetera. But, no, I felt that if I was gonna do it, I really needed to be fully committed. And I was sufficiently confident that I could do it. Now, I tell my friends now, it's a good thing I really didn't know all of the things of what I was getting into because had I known then what I know now, I might have decided, well, no, I'm gonna stay and continue being a, being a hematologist. But the reality is, I'm glad, you know, glad that I did. Speaker 1: So the skill sets, are you saying that you did--I mean besides the, you know, sort of the administration, when you started the department of hematology, was there funding, where did that funding come from--? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --at Boston University? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that came from both--some from Boston City Hospital itself, other funds from the medical school, and then in attracting faculty into the unit, many of the faculty would also get research grants from NIH [National Institutes of Health]. So really it was a combination of, of all of that, that we were able to put that together. I had two training grants myself from NIH to, for, to run a hematology training program, to train additional hematologists. And I also had four research grants to support the research, you know, that I was doing. And we recruited other people who would do that. But the reality is this, when I went back to Morehouse [College] in 1975, I learned a lot in terms of major institutional administration, from Hugh Gloster, who had recruited me. He was president of the Morehouse College at the time. And it was, in a sense, there had not been a model, you know, for, for me to follow. So, so we learned as, as we went along. I talked to a lot of people and got some help, had consultants, etcetera. So, so in essence, we, you know, I said we built the bicycle as we road it. So we, we learned as, as we, as we went along. Speaker 1: No, I think it's a pretty amazing story. And then you talk about Abraham Sack, Sakar [Abram Sacher]. Speaker 2: Sacker, Saker (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Sacker (ph.) Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --from Brandeis, and that he was helpful from a fundraising-- Speaker 2: Sure, right. Speaker 1: --and then, but, you know, being able, sort a void, people were, from, you know, Meharry and Howard who were concerned about, you know, you coming in-- Speaker 2: Right, sure. Speaker 1: --and why was there a need. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But, it went, it seems to me that it went, well, I mean smoothly. I'm not saying it wasn't a lot of work, and you know, and hindsight is 20/20, but I mean you were a department--well, you were depart-? Speaker 2: Yes, we were a medical education division within the college [Morehouse] at the time, right. That's when we, you know, got started. Speaker 1: But I want to, I was curious about was, was it planned to have that progression in that quick a time frame, you know, to go from--? Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, right. Speaker 1: --was a part--you said you did the planning first-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 13806 Speaker 1: It was almost like the doors opened for this because you, Atlanta--the Atlanta University [Center]--I mean cause this was, they could have stopped you, right? They could have stopped--could they have stopped the whole project or because Morehouse [College]-- Speaker 2: Well, possibly, they could have made it more difficult because really what, what happened was this, the, you know, there're 126 medical schools in the country now. Forty-six of those schools had their genesis in the second half the 20th century, starting in the mid-'50s [1950s] with Seton Hall [College of Medicine] and Albert Einstein [College of Medicine] that opened in 1956. That was the basis, or the basis for that was the report, a couple of reports, the Baine Report (ph.) and the Coggeshall Report that said the U.S. was gonna be facing a doctor shortage if we didn't increase the number of doctors that we, that we trained. That report--and Coggeshall was the dean at Yale Medical School at the time. So the report had a lot of influence. That was the underpinning for Congress in 1963 to pass legislation, the health manpower legislation to provide federal funds for expansion of medical education, not only new medical schools, but also existing medical schools to increase their class size, funding for construction of new facilities, new buildings, purchase of equipment, scholarship dollars for medical students, dollars for faculty, just a whole array of, of funds. So really that was the environment that existed when Morehouse [College] looked at the question of a medical school because what had happened in Georgia was the Georgia Comprehensive Health Planning Council appointed a committee to look at physician manpower needs in Georgia because this was a time that medical schools were forming around the country. And so this committee was made up of physicians, some in practice, the deans of the two medical schools, Emory and the Medical College in Georgia and other, this committee reported in 1969 that Georgia ranked thirty-eighth among the fifty states in overall physician manpower. So we were below the national average. Secondly, the health of Georgians also was worse than the nation, you know, as, as a whole. But, thirdly, the health of, of blacks in the state was, was worse and among the physicians in the state of Georgia, only 2 percent of them were black, although 27 percent of Georgia's population at that time was, was black. So this committee made a number recommendations. There should be expansion of medical education within the state of Georgia because one of the other findings they made was that there were more Georgians going to medical school every year than there were places in the two medical schools within the state. And their argument was that if students leave the state to become doctors, the likelihood of them coming back to Georgia to practice was, was much less. So they were, so they used all of these reasons to urge expansion of medical education within the, within the state. So a member of this committee was Dr. Louis Brown, a black physician, who was then president of the state chapter of the National Medical Association, a black physicians' group. Louis, excuse me, Louis brought that, brought that report to the president, to the presidents of the Atlanta University Center because the presidents, you know, meet at least once a month, sometimes more frequently, but typically once a month. He was there to argue for a medical school. And Atlanta University was a logical institution for that because the consortium, the Atlanta University Center, was formed in 1929, and the bylaws of the consortium said that undergraduate education or undergraduate and religious instruction should be the province of the colleges. Graduate and professional instruction would be carried out by Atlanta University. Story_ID: 13807 Speaker 1: There's a little history behind that because actually Atlanta University [Center], prior to 1929 was a college itself, although it was called a university, it was really a college. They closed in May of '29 [1929] as a college and opened in the fall of that year as a graduate university. And there were people--when I went back to Atlanta, like Grace Hamilton who as a member of the Fulton County Board of Commissioners, who had been graduates of the quote old Atlanta University there. And also, well--I'll get distracted here, but there are also some interesting things. What happened to the students in course at Atlanta University when they closed that school? Well, it--because the affiliation initially was Atlanta University, Morehouse [College] and Spelman [College]. The expectation was that the men would go to Morehouse [College], the Atlanta University men and the women would go to Spelman [College]. And most of them did, but there were a few women--and I think there were eighteen, I was told, who actually enrolled at Morehouse because the agreement was that the students could go to either one. And so there were, you know, we always talk about Morehouse. Well, there were Morehouse women too. And I met one of them. Her name was Lottie Harris. She was the wife of Dr. J. B. Harris. And both of them are dead now, but they were in Atlanta. And J. B. was actually on an advisory board that I formed for the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine] when I went back in '75 [1975]. But when I was, when we were part of Morehouse College, they have a program there, and they'd play the Morehouse hymn, everybody would see this older woman stand up and thought, gee, this poor confused woman (laughter). But she knew exactly what she was doing. She was a Morehouse graduate, you know. But-- Speaker 2: What periods are you talking about, you know, where she would have attended, you know, the woman? Speaker 1: Well, no, that was prior to 1929. Speaker 2: Oh, that's fascinating, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah, right. So, so that--well, let me just go back a little bit more to give a little bit more background. John Hope was the first black president of Morehouse College, 1906, he became president. That year in the 'Negro Digest', which was published in Atlanta, he wrote a paper urging that these black colleges in Atlanta, Atlanta University, Morehouse, Spelman, Morris Brown [College], Clark [College], all were struggling, but if they were to come together and merge into one grand university, with the same resources, they could be one strong university with not only undergraduate programs, but graduate and professional programs, including a school of law, a school of engineering, a medical school, etcetera. Hope advocated for that, but he never succeeded, but he was persistent. In 19--I don't know the details of this, but around 1928, somehow there was a--Claremont [Colleges] consortium that was formed in California in 1928. And I'm told that, that then became model for John Hope to really form the consortium. And this is speculation now, but the speculation was that he saw the consortium maybe as a staging strategy to eventually get to this university. Well, they convinced these schools to form this consortium. It was called the Atlanta University Affiliation at that time, so the three schools. But part of the affiliation was that Atlanta University would close as an undergraduate and, and become a graduate. And Morehouse and Spelman would continue as colleges for men and, and for women. Dr. Mark Jackson, who was, at that time in '75 [1975] when I went back to Atlanta, a black physician practicing in Atlanta, I met with 'cause I was told this story. And he certified this to me. He had been recruited back from Chicago by Dr. Hope in 1928 when they were forming this affiliation to come back to Atlanta because they wanted to start a medical school. Well, they formed the affiliation, but then the stock market crashed. And these schools, which already had been struggling before, continued to struggle. The, the trauma and the conflict around this formation led Dr. Adams, who was president of Atlanta University, to resign. He had fought this idea. So when he resigned, then Dr. Hope was also made president of Atlanta University. So for two years, from 1929 till 1931, he served as presidents of both Atlanta University and Morehouse College. And in 1931, he gave the presidency of Morehouse College to concentrate on Atlanta University. But then in 1933, he died. He had, he had diabetes and, and he died from that. So with him, he was really the energy behind the formation of the Atlanta University Center. And again, speculation is that he saw this maybe as one way to get to this grand, grand university and, the fact that he did recruit Dr. Jackson back really was proof of what his plans were. Dr. Jackson told me that when the Depression hit, Dr. Hope called him in and said, "With this financial crisis in the nation, we won't be able to proceed now. But why don't you go out and practice for a year or two and when things turn around, we'll get back to the idea of a medical school." Well, as you know, the Depression went throughout the '30s [1930s]. And when Hope died in '33 [1933], that was it. Story_ID: 13808 Speaker 1: In later years, when this idea of expanding medical education in Georgia came along and then Atlanta University [Center] was approached, they--Tom [Thomas] Jarrett was president of Atlanta University at the time. He was an English major. And he really was not particularly enamored of this, but he was under the gun with this whole idea. And his school would be the logical place. And Louis Brown was very passionate about this, you know, at, you know, at the time, having served on this committee. Dr. Threatt--not Threatt, but Jarrett, Dr. Jarrett took this idea to his board. They'd done a feasibility study. That report came back, this is not feasible. So in April of 1971, the trustees of Atlanta University voted not to proceed because they had the feasibility study that had been done that said, this is not feasible, impossible to do. At that meeting, Hugh Gloster, of, of Atlanta University trustees, was in attendance because at that time, the presidents of Atlanta University, Morehouse [College] and Spelman [College] sat in on each other's trustee meeting, had, dating from the history of '29 [1929]. Hugh Gloster got up at that meeting saying, "Now that you have voted not to proceed, I'd like to announce Morehouse College really has an interest in this idea of a medical school. Would there be any objection if we looked at this question?" There was none. The importance of that exchange was the articles of affiliation of the center. And parenthetically, Gloster shared with me, and I'm--I believe this. There was no objection also because they didn't think anything was gonna come out of it. So he proceeded. And they did their own feasibility study in 1972, which came back positive. Morehouse College had the academic strength, had the financial strength and the fundraising experience really, and there was a need, so that this was feasible. This was a study funded by the Bureau of Health Manpower at, at NIH [National Institutes of Health]. So they got funding to do planning. And so that's when I got involved. As an alumnus of the college in academic medicine in 1973, I was asked to serve on an advisory board to the college to advise on this idea of developing a medical school. And others who were on that advisory committee included Dave Satcher, who was then out at Charles Drew [University of Medicine] in Los Angeles and Henry Foster, who later became Dean at Meharry [Medical College] and a few, few other people. So, we did the planning, and then when, in 1974, the, the college decided to ahead with the development of the school, that's when the recruitment of the dean began. And I guess I told you the story that I had developed this long list of names, but I--at that time, while I found this fascinating, I really had not thought of becoming involved myself. So I sent these eleven names. I really put together people I thought they ought to look at. And so, about three weeks later, Joe Gales called me and said the committee was very pleased to get my list and some very good names, but they were disappointed that it was not complete. So I said, "Disappointing, what do you mean, not complete?" And then, it hit me, I said, "Oh, no, no. If you're talking about me, no. I'm not interested. Look, I, you know, have an established hematology laboratory here, and, you know, my wife [Ginger Sullivan] is from Massachusetts. I have three children born here, and I, I'm not, not interested." Story_ID: 13809 Speaker 1: You were talking about, wait the recruitment, where were we, you were just--? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, recruitment of the dean for the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, so at any rate, Joe Gales said, "Would you be willing to come down as a consultant to meet with the committee? We're gonna meeting in New York in two weeks, to really talk with us as a consultant. We know you're not a candidate, but what are some of the things you think we should do, this medical school should do, etcetera, if it's gonna be successful?" And the thing I said then, which I still remember now, I said, "Well, okay, Joe, I'd be pleased to do that, and this would be great because I certainly would like to see this thing succeed. But I'm coming down as a consultant. I'm not candidate, you understand?" "Oh, yes, that's fine." So I went down. And my wife [Ginger Sullivan] went with me. We drove down. And this is in September, late September of 1974. And the fall color, you know, was there, going down the Connecticut Turnpike, etcetera. So, we had this luncheon meeting which had been scheduled. And my wife was gonna visit a girlfriend of hers in Atlanta--in, in New York, and she was to come back and pick me up there at the Hilton Hotel at about 2:30. Sure enough, 2:30, the phone range there in the private room where we were having lunch. And we were in the midst of a conversation, so I told my wife, "Gosh, we're really in the midst of something right now. Can you maybe come back in an hour?" An hour later, the same thing happens. So finally, about 4:30, we finished, and, of course, in the discussion that ensued, all kinds of questions, how large should this school? How could it be funded? Where would the applicants or the students come from? What, what should its primary mission be, whether it's primary care or other areas and so forth. So--where would faculty come from? So, these were the kinds of questions. And so we had a very lively discussion and because I was not a candidate, I didn't hold back. And I said, well, I don't agree with that. No, I wouldn't do that at all, etcetera, or I agree with that. Well, at the end of the afternoon, 4;30--Hugh Gloster--well, people in that meeting included not only Joe Gales, who was professor of chemistry at the college, but Hugh Gloster, himself, president of the college, Arthur Richardson, who was dean of the medical school at Emory [University], Peter Colletti (ph.) who was vice president for health affairs at Brown University 'cause he was advising the college on, on this, and one or two other people. So, at the end of afternoon, Hugh Gloster said, "Well, Dr. Sullivan, we really appreciate you taking the time and coming down and advising us on this. This is really very helpful. And I know you didn't come as a candidate, but I really hope that you will rethink that because I can't speak for the committee here or the other people, but so far as I'm concerned, you're the man we want. You're the man we need. And this would be great," and he's like, "well--." Obviously, I was flattered and I'd really bought into this during that time, not knowing, I--going around this slippery slope. Driving back to Boston that afternoon, late afternoon sun, the leaves were just gorgeous, I was quiet. My wife wanted to know what's going--why did this take so long, etcetera? And so I then said, "Would you be willing to consider living in Atlanta?" She said, "I knew it, I knew it," etcetera. And so that's really how it, it got started. And so we--after that, you know, I had some negotiations and discussions about salary and all of that, but, no, I, I really became very fascinated by this. And also, as I mentioned earlier, I really, in a sense, I had, I'd proved everything I felt I wanted to prove. I'd proved that I could operate and achieve in the larger environment, that I had gone up the ladder academically. I'd had successful research and teaching and, and all of that. And I was very happy and pleased with that. But in the same way that back in, you know, in the same way that I had realized that, back at Boston City Hospital, I was kind of on a plateau here, that this was a chance to really break out of that. So--and this was my alma mater. And like all Morehouse [College] men, to the disgust of so many other people, when they start doing this, I was proud of my college. And, and so I felt that, well, let's give it a shot. So that's how it happened. Story_ID: 13810 Speaker 1: What was the focus area? What did that, you know, those things that you had commented about in that meeting-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --I mean what was, what did you feel was important? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the, the planning study that had been done, and I'd not been part of that, really--and that I bought into, was that this [Morehouse School of Medicine] should be a school developed to train people with the emphasis on primary care, family medicine and general internal medicine and pediatrics, and its graduates would be focused on medical practice, as opposed to research careers, you know, or policy careers, etcetera. And that was, that was the need because the under--the philosophical underpinning for the whole idea of the medical school had been this study by, through the Georgia Comprehensive Health Planning Council back in 1969, that there were counties in Georgia that didn't have any doctors at all and people who had trouble getting to doctors. I think there were many areas where obstetrical services were not available. People would have to drive two hours or more to see an obstetrician. And clearly, that was untenable there. So really, the need for this was articulated in such a clear way that our feeling was that if we can really change that by developing this school, this would be a tremendous achievement. So that was really the underpinning. And what has happened over the years, most of our students, roughly, almost three quarters, have gone into primary care. There have been others who have gone into research and teaching, which is fine. Others have gone into health policy positions, and that's fine because while our focus is on primary care, we don't want to be uni-dimensional. We want to provide a broad array of experiences for the students who come, and also for the faculty who teach there because that enriches the educational environment. And that also says to the community of medical schools around the country, that while we have focus here, that we're not 'One Note Johnny'; that we are uni-dimensional and there are these other areas that we are also contributing to. And so that's the way it's, it has developed. So I'm pleased with that. Story_ID: 13811 Speaker 1: Now, how do you build a, you know, a medical school? I mean do you build it year-by-year, I mean 'cause you--is that how you do it? And I--'cause that--. Speaker 2: Well, well, the way, the way we, we did this at Morehouse was as follows. First of all, it takes a lot of money to develop a medical school. And also, it takes a fairly complicated infrastructure there because universities start medical schools, not colleges. These forty-six new schools that started in the second half of the 20th century, they were all part of universities, except for one. That's Morehouse School of Medicine. We're part of Morehouse College. But we existed in a university environment, you know, in the Atlanta University Center. So we had really the academic environment, the interaction with faculty and physics or in chemistry or in sociology, other fields. We're among the schools in the Atlanta University Center, but the financial responsibility, the legal responsibility for the medical school was Morehouse College. So we, the plan we developed was to develop as a two-year school. That was deliberate, but then later to develop into a four-year, year school. So what that meant was that the first two years, which are primarily the learning of the sciences basic to medicine, biochemistry, anatomy, physiology, microbiology, etcetera, and plus, a little introduction of clinical medicine. So you do need to have some clinical, some physicians there. But the third and fourth years are really the clinical years, when you have then, teaching in internal medicine and surgery and pediatrics and obstetrics and radiology and all these, all these other areas. Those are much more expensive. And, there're a number of clinical departments in the medical school, many, many more. You could have fifteen or twenty clinical departments in a medical school, depending upon the school. You could have a department of ophthalmology, of otolaryngology, radiology, pathology and, and so forth. There's the basic sciences, usually six to eight departments, and you have Ph.D.'s there. So your costs and complexity for the first two years is much less. So, so we started deliberately with that. But a plan that we had agreed on before we got started was that we would evolve to become a full, four-year medical school, degree granting, you know, ourselves. But the, the plan was we'd start here, both less complex, less expensive, and then, and then evolve. And also, and it's a new school. It didn't have any credibility, didn't have any history. So going to sources of funding, you know, was, you know, somewhat difficult at, at the time. Speaker 1: So how much money did you raise for that first, you know, for the two-year school? And then, where did the, where did the faculty even come from? Did you borrow faculty in? Speaker 2: Sure, well, over, the first two years we were there, we raised about $8 million for, for the school. The faculty, most of the faculty we recruited from other medical schools. We have a small number of faculty from, we recruited from Morehouse where Joe Gales, who had been involved and Tom Norris, who was chairman of the department of biology became involved with the medical school, and one or two others. But by and large, we recruited faculty from all over, from the University of--State University of New York at Syracuse, among the places, Columbia, Illinois, and so forth. So, and we would, we, of course, advertised in the various, you know, academic medical journals here. So that, that's how we, we got started. Story_ID: 13812 Speaker 1: And then student body, that's also something, you know, to recruit-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --cause you have to people wanting to come. So how did you do that? Speaker 2: Sure, right, right. Well, what, what happened was that first of all to get funding--and, and a lot of funding of medical schools come from, comes from the federal government or state governments or even private schools, say schools like the University of Chicago School of Medicine, you look at their budget. It wouldn't be surprising if two-thirds of their budget really comes from federal or state dollars, although they're a private school because medical education is so expensive. What happened back in the '60s [1960s] to help support the development of medical schools, were a number of programs for initiating medical schools because the typical federal money, you'd get, you'd have to be an accredited medical school. You'd have to have your program accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education [LCME], which is the body that accredits medical schools. But a school that's starting up in development could get funds, these other special funds for, for new medical schools. But to bring students in, you have to be accredited. So that was our goal, and so we were visited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education in January of 1978, when we thought we had developed our faculty and our curriculum and our facilities well enough to really stand for an evaluation for the accrediting committee. So in April of 1978, they granted us what was called provisional accreditation, whereas you'd--their rules are, you don't and you were never fully accredited until you have offered all four years of medical education. So we--but having provisional accreditation allowed us to admit our first class, as a two-year school. And also part of what we had to have to get provisional accreditation was a pathway, unimpeded pathway for any student coming to us to get a degree. So we had to have contracts with other medical schools to take our students into the third year. And that was provided by Emory [University], you know, the University of Alabama Medical School in Birmingham, Howard University and Brown University. We didn't have a contract with Meharry [Medical College] because Meharry, at that time, had some difficulties themselves where the LCME didn't want them to enlarge their class. So, so that provided the, the guarantee. The--in actual fact, our students actually transferred all over, including, say here to the University of Illinois. I'm trying to remember our--we had a student in our either first or second class, Jeff, I can't remember his name. But he finished at University of Illinois, but having those guarantees at these other schools really meant the LCME pproved us and our students would--could enter, knowing that if they were academically successful, they would, you know, get an M.D. degree. But we wanted to become a four-year school ourselves as quickly as possible for a variety of reasons. So we pushed our development as hard as we could. And then in the fall of 1980, we were again--we applied for accreditation as a four-year school. We were visited, and then in April of the following year, we were accredited as a four-year school. So, so the class that entered the fall of '81 [1981] stayed with us. So they had their third and fourth years with us. And the first M.D. degrees we awarded from Morehouse School of Medicine were in 1985. So that was ten years after I had started there at the school because we had the first students in, in 1978. And the first three classes transferred, but the fourth class stayed with us. And so over, over the years, we've grown because our first class was twenty-four students per class. Now, we are at fifty-six students per class, and going towards sixty-four. We expect to plateau at sixty four in the next three years, which will be our mature class size. Plus, we've developed a Ph.D. program. We've had a number of Ph.D. graduates. Now, we have some eighteen Ph.D.'s in the biomedical sciences. And that program was started in 1991. And we have a master's of public health [MPH] program as well, which was started in 1995. And we've had I think, some eighty-three, to eighty-five to ninety MPH graduates of the medical school, plus, a number of other things since then. But, yes, going back to our earlier development, in 1980, '81 [1981], when we received our approval to operate as a full, four-year school, we became independent from Morehouse College. And that's on July 1st of 1981 because the plan that we articulated, working with Hugh Gloster, was that Morehouse College would never award an M.D. degree itself. Story_ID: 13813 Speaker 1: Now, remember I mentioned Grace Hamilton, who was a member of the--she was on the board of trustees at Atlanta University. She was a graduate of the old university. When I came on board in 1975 as the dean of the school [Morehouse School of Medicine], the trustees of Atlanta University demanded a meeting with the trustees of Morehouse College to discuss this plan for a new medical school at Morehouse College to decide what this meant. So at that meeting, which occurred in New York in November of 1978--and I was there, the question was raised, what is Morehouse's intention with this medical school? And Hugh Gloster then stated that Morehouse College undertook this only after Atlanta University decided that they were not in a position to do it. I also raised the question, was there any objection with Morehouse College looking at this, and the Atlanta University trustees, in April of '71 [1971] said there was no objection. So it was only after that, that we proceeded. So our plan is we're very much aware of the articles of affiliation that date to 1929. Morehouse College's role is to get the medical school started. It is not, and it is not our plan that Morehouse College would ever award an M.D. degree because the plan that Dr. Sullivan and I have developed is that, before the medical school becomes a full-fledged, four-year school, they'd become independent of Morehouse College. And so that placated them because, frankly, this was an embarrassment to Atlanta University and its trustees there, and a number of other things too. I, I went and had private meetings with Grace Hamilton because, in addition to her--because she was vice chairman of the board of Atlanta University, in addition to her ire about this school, she and Hugh Gloster didn't get along. So, so Gloster said, "You go meet with her." And he filled me in on the background there because what had happened, Grace Hamilton's husband, who was named Cookie Hamilton, was registrar when I was a student at Morehouse College, when Bennie [Benjamin Elijah] Mays was president. And Gloster came in as president in 1967 when Mays retired. And by that time, Cookie had really kind of become--he wasn't the old Cookie. You know, he wasn't really functioning or--and so, Gloster terminated him. So there was personal animus there. It was one of these things that probably needed to be done, but yet, you know, they resented that. So, so there were a lot of behind-the-scenes politics that we truly tried to, to placate. But when we became independent in 1981, we then applied for membership in the Atlanta University Center as--then we would have been the seventh institutional member of the center. And the rules of the center require that to become a member of the center, you have to have an affirmative vote by each member institution. So we had to get all six institutions to agree to the medical school becoming member. It took us two years. So finally, in, in March of '83 [1983], the final institution approved us. And then the medical school went into the Atlanta University Center as the seventh institution. And as you know, since that time, Clark [College] and Atlanta University have merged so there's still, you know, again, six institutions, you know, in the Atlanta University Center. One of the ironies also is that Cleveland Denard became president of Atlanta University after, what? He retired there. Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: You know who I mean, I keep almost saying Threatt, Treatt was at Morris Brown [College], but-- Speaker 2: [Thomas] Jarrett. Speaker 1: Yes, Tom Jarrett, yes, sorry. The interesting thing was that when we became independent from the college, Hugh Gloster tried to get an office for me in Harkness Hall. Are you familiar with the--Harkness Hall was the administration building there for, with offices for the presidents of Morehouse, Atlanta University and Spelman [College]. Now, going back to 1929, when this whole idea of the affiliation developed, they got funding from the Rockefeller Foundation to help fund this new affiliation. And so the funding included money to build an administration building for the presidents and other administrative officials and a, dollars for Harkness Library--no, I'm sorry, no, Harkness Hall was an administration building. But the Trevor Arnett Library, so, you may recall that it used to that--well, I guess still is, but the, all the schools there, except the medical school, we have our own library, but all the schools have, use the same library. Well, that dates back to 1929. Well, when we became independent from Morehouse College, Hugh Gloster tried to get an office for me in Harkness Hall. By this time Cleve Denard, Cleveland Denard was president of Atlanta University. And he objected to my having an office on the second floor of Harkness Hall where the other presidents--so my office was on the first floor of Harkness Hall because, quote, you know, that we didn't have the stature of the other presidents. The irony is, about a year later, Cleve Denard came to see me. Atlanta University was having some financial problems. And we had applied for membership in the Atlanta University Center, but Denard came and said, he wanted to see if we'd be willing to consider becoming part of Atlanta University, all this other history here. And we said no. I, I said no because I suspected that his motives were not really academic, but that he saw the medical school as a cash cow because Atlanta University was having its problems. But then there was this other history of this kind of minor insult, you know, that they had. So, he said--so, at any rate that's, that's how that happened. So the medical school is still an independent member of the Atlanta University Center. Speaker 2: And who are all the members now, of the center? Speaker 1: Yes, it's Morehouse College, Clark-Atlanta University, Spelman. Morris Brown is no longer a member cause they had, became, remember, bankrupt. And so they lost their membership in the Center. But the Interdenominational Theological Center is the other institution and Morehouse School of Medicine. Story_ID: 13814 Speaker 1: You raised $8 million, was that now, was there a formula per student? You know, cause you said a lot of the funding-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --so is it sort of like guaranteed, if you have so many students, you're gonna get this much money and you have to apply it? Or it's not that? Speaker 2: Well, roughly, but it, it's not a straight line. We've received capitation support of dollars, kinds of dollars you are speaking of, from the state of Georgia for every Georgia resident, up to twenty that we took in. If we took in twenty-one, we got a capitation of twenty. So we couldn't just automatically get more money from the state. And at that time, capitation dollars, I believe were $4,800 per student. It's much more now. I think it's around ten or $11,000 per, per student. But we also worked and got capitation support from the state of Alabama for students who entered Morehouse [School of Medicine]. But the agreement with Alabama was that the students, of course, not only had to be Alabama residents, but when they finished the two years with us, they would have to transfer to the University of Alabama in Birmingham. The University of Alabama was interested in getting more black students into their medical school because they were being criticized for having too few black students. And so when we became a four-year school, that agreement was phased out with the state of Alabama. The--we also received capitation support from the state of New York. We were able to get that funding from the state of New York. And that capitation support was much more generous than the dollars we were getting from Georgia. At that time, I think we were getting something like $7,500 per student from the state of New York. And that came about because Arthur Eve, who was the speaker of the New York Assembly, an African American himself from Buffalo, came down and visited us there. And so, he was interested in being supportive of us. And so he proposed that they could do this that way, with the New York residents we, we admitted. So he got a bill through the New York legislature to provide capitation support for any New York resident who went to Morehouse School of Medicine, Meharry Medical College or the University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine because he teamed with the Hispanic Caucus in the New York legislature to get their support. And so that arrangement was one that they wanted. So, and then the other funds that we raised were really straightforward grants for, you know, operation of our residency program and, you know, dollars for scholarship programs and so forth. So capitation was part of what we had, but that was only, you know, one, one part of it. Speaker 1: Now, the rest of--you raised a total of $25 million, is that right, for that? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, where did the rest of that money come from and was that during the period you were going from two to four years. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, right, because, see, we raised funds, not only for operations but for construction. So the first building we constructed, that building was started in 1979. We moved into that building in 1982. So we raised six and a half million dollars for that building. Now, the next building we moved into in 1987, that again, was another six and a half million dollar building. That building wasn't quite as large. The first building is 91,000 square feet. The second building was something like 79,000 square because construction and inflation occurred at that time, and we still had the same amount of money. We raised $5 million federal dollars we, we got from the Congress through legislation. And we had friends in the Congress who helped us, like Congressman Louis Stokes, at that time, from Cleveland and others. And plus, the Georgia legislature would, you know, also advocate, you know, for us. Then, I guess that $25 million was really--but, when I then went off to Washington [D.C.], you know, as Secretary [of Health and Human Services] in 1989, because then we came back later in '93 [1993] and resumed, you know, the other, you know, other fundraising. Speaker 1: Now, at the time that you went to Washington--but I want to put this--so you said, when you came back though to do the medical school, Maynard [Jackson] was mayor and that--do you think that helped sort of in a way, just, you know--okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it did. Now, in Georgia healthcare is a county responsibility. So Maynard, as mayor of the city [of Atlanta, Georgia], really could not send funds our way because the city didn't provide--the Grady Hospital, a big hospital there, is a county-supported hospital, Fulton and DeKalb counties. So that's a two, two-county hospital. But as mayor, his statements in support of the medical school, and the things that he did such as having lunch down at the Commerce Club, that was simply his way of saying to the leadership in Atlanta, this is imporant. I want you to know about this. This is something that I support. and so forth. That would help me in other ways because many people who want to do business with the city would obviously want to be supportive of the mayor. So that's the way that he could support me, you know, there. And of course, having lunch at the Commerce Club was, again, a statement that this was a new Atlanta. You know, Maynard often used the phrase this is a New South, that this is not the South that existed when he and I were students at Morehouse College because as you--as I think that I have said before, when I went to medical school, I could not go to the Medical College of Georgia. The state of Georgia paid the difference in tuition at Boston University versus the Medical College of Georgia for me to go to Boston University. Plus, the cost of two round-trip tickets from Blakely [Georgia] to Boston versus Blakely to Augusta [Georgia]. So that was their, quote, separate but equal strategy for blacks. You know, they did the same for black Georgians who went to Meharry and so forth. So my coming back twenty-one years later, in 1975, you know, things were very different there. Story_ID: 13815 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: All right. I'm Dr. Louis W. Sullivan, and that's L-O-U-I-S, Sullivan, S-U-L-L-I-V-A-N. Speaker 1: And I want today's date. Speaker 2: Today is November 29, 2004, yes. Speaker 1: And we're at 1900 South--the HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue. Speaker 2: You want me to say that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: We're at, we're at HistoryMakers at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago. Speaker 1: Yes, and your profession, once again. Speaker 2: I'm a physician and administrator. Story_ID: 13816 Speaker 1: When we [Morehouse School of Medicine] were getting started, one of the things that we did not have that a number of other institutions did have when they got started was a base for financial support. And I often use as a comparison the Hershey Medical School as part of Penn, Pennsylvania State University which started about two years from when we got started. They started with a $40 million gift from the Hershey Foundation. So we started with a very good idea and a lot of excitement, but no money. So our effort really entailed building a base of financial support. So part of our effort was to try and get some support from the state of Georgia, as well as from the federal government in addition to private support. So we met with the governor of the state, and with the support of the Georgia Legislative Black Caucus that included such people as Ben Brown, who's the chairman of the caucus and Julian Bond, who's a member of, of the caucus and others are there. And through meetings with the governor and their support, we initially received a grant from the governor of $100,000 from his emergency fund to help us with our planning, in June of 1976. The following year, we were successful in increasing that to a million dollars year over a five-year period. And that was very important, and that has continued and has grown so that now, we receive from the state of Georgia an appropriation in the range of $11 million a year, which is very crucial support for us. And that's now out of a total budget for the medical school that's approaching $100 million. So about 10 percent of our funding comes from the state of Georgia. That funding is important, not only for the dollars, but also the kinds of dollars, flexible. We can use the state dollars where they're needed. The only restrictions we have there, we can't use the state dollars to purchase land or construct buildings. But we can use it for faculty salaries, student scholarships, operating funds, heating, maintenance, etcetera. That's very important because as an institution that really depends upon public support or financial support, often times, that comes with restrictions, dollars for endowment, which is important or dollars for scholarships which also is important, or maybe dollars to support a specific department. And that may be just what you need, but it may be that that particular department may really be already better off than other departments. So unrestricted dollars, anyone will tell you, who is in this kind of business, unrestricted dollars are the most valuable ones because you can use them where you--where they're needed. So the state dollars played that role for us. And so that really was key. That also gave us credibility with other funders because would take a second look, saying if, in deed, the state of Georgia made that kind of commitment, they would take a serious look as well. So those actions early on gave us, not only dollars where we needed, but also gave us credibility and we were able to parlay that and keep bringing other sources of support as well, including federal dollars for the medical school. Speaker 2: Now, that initial hundred thousand in sort of planning dollars, you are asked--you did a study I assume with that, the hundred, you know, the original hundred thousand you said? Speaker 1: Well, yes, we used it primarily for strategic planning. Story_ID: 13817 Speaker 1: There had been a feasibility study done by the college that started in February of 1972 that went until, I believe, until the Spring of '74 [1974]. That was a grant from the federal government to look at the feasibility of the college starting a medical school because colleges don't start medical schools; universities start medical schools. And there are many universities that looked at starting a medical school and decided that this was such an undertaking that they weren't interested, places such as Princeton [University] or MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], two very strong universities that years ago decided that they were not prepared to commit the resources and the effort to develop a medical school. So having a college, a much smaller educational entity start a medical school, and the medical school really being a professional, a graduate professional school, was quite an undertaking. So for the feasibility study that was done by Morehouse College about starting a medical school was very important. The results of that showed that it was feasible. It was unusual, but it was feasible. The college had the financial strength, had the administrative leadership, had the fundraising experience and skill and had a strong academic record there. So all of those were felt to be important, and really had a commitment to address the need for more African American and other minority physicians as well. Speaker 2: Now, how long did it take for you to feel that you were sort out of the woods in those initial, you know, years? Speaker 1: Well, every step along the way, we felt reaffirmed that the reality is that we could never fully relax and feel that we had everything we needed. And we really had to budget and use our dollars very carefully so that we would really have to establish priorities. And fortunately, we had sufficient dollars to bring on the faculty and the staff that we needed. We were able to generate scholarship dollars also for our students. But all along the way, and even today, whereas the school is now much more developed and is doing well, even today, I could cite for you a number of things that we really wish we had more of: endowment. I think we have now some $40 million. A typical endowment for a fully-developed medical school is around $200 million. So we're on the way, but we're far from there. Scholarship dollars, we still need more because too many of our students graduate with high debt burdens because of loans that they have to take to finance their medical education. So, so I would say that we've never yet reached the stage where we felt, well, we can now relax and things are going to move their own, own momentum. It still takes a lot of effort, a lot of planning, a lot of imagination to really find ways to secure the dollars that we need. But, and we've been fortunate. We've had a lot of support from various people, including members of our board, foundations and others. So, so we're very pleased with the development. Story_ID: 13818 Speaker 1: Where did you focus your efforts those early years, though, 'cause you're building a staff at the same time that you're recruiting students, at the same time that you're, you know, building a board. So I'm just--that's what I was just trying to figure out, you know, if you could outline, 'cause we hadn't done that. Speaker 2: That's right. Well, the first thing we did--because I started in 1975, in July, we worked to plan for the shape of the school, to--what was our mission to really define that very clearly. Then--which we, which we did, with our core, the staff that we had at the time. And then we focused on developing a board for the medical school. That board had its first meeting in April of 1976. And that was called the board of overseers because at that time, being part of Morehouse College, the trustees of the college were the official governing body. But the board of overseers was set up as kind of a board in learning and more an advisory board. But as we developed and the plan to become independent from Morehouse College evolved, when that happened in July of 1981, the board of overseers then became the board of trustees for, for the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine]. So we really started early on to develop the board, the mission; at the same time, bring on the staff, begin planning for the school, setting our office of academic affairs, our admissions office, recruiting individuals who would develop the departments of anatomy and biochemistry and physiology and pathology and all of the, all of the departments there. So all of that was necessary for us to really have in place, to receive our accreditation, along with having sufficient financial resources that we could give some reasonable assurance to the accrediting body that we would be able to operate over a period of several years because the accrediting body did not want to give accreditation to an organization whose finances were so shaky or unpredictable that it might be going out of business the following year. So all of that came together so that in April of 1978 we were visited by the accrediting body at our request. And they found that we had developed a coherent plan. We had identified facilities for the education to occur, the teaching to occur in temporary facilities on the college campus, with adequate numbers of faculty to undertake this, and our finance, and our budget was sufficient and reasonably stable to believe that, barring some extraordinary catastrophe, that we would be in business the next year and the year after that. All of that was reviewed by the accrediting committee. And then they gave us provisional accreditation. That then allowed us to enroll our first class, which we did in September of '78 [1978]. We set up the Office of Admission immediately after we received our provisional accreditation in the spring of 1978. Speaker 1: Now, who would you say on your board in those early years, were critical members, you know, in addition to the board? Speaker 2: Right, our first chairman of the board was Dr. Edgar Smith, a biochemist in training, who had been a co-faculty member with me at Boston University. And I knew Dr. Smith, and he, of course, was very supportive of what we were trying to do. So he agreed to join the board and to become chairman. He also recruited a number of other people, local physicians, Dr. Calvin Brown, who was the vice chairman of the board of trustees of Morehouse College. He was critical because, of course, he explained to the board of trustees of Morehouse College, the importance of this and why the college should undertake this as well. Then we had a number of other people who had relations with the local physicians. So that was important to receive their support. We also had Dr. John Bowers, who was the president of the Josiah Macy Foundation in New York, a foundation that had an interest in minority medical education. He brought knowledge and credibility from the foundation world to us. So we had a number of people like that. Now, we had another person who was not on the board, but who had played a key role in the, convincing the college that this was a good idea, and that was Dr. Louis Brown, who was a practicing internist there in Atlanta. He had been a member of the original study group back in 1969 that issues a report proposing that Georgia should expand medical education within the state, and that expansion should also help to address the shortage of African-American physicians in the state. So he played a key role as well. So we had people on the board as well as others in the community who were very important to, to get their support and also for them to translate this idea in the community because not surprisingly, there were a number of skeptical--skeptics at that time who said, well, you know, this is a crazy idea. Who ever starts a medical school and everything that's entailed there. But we had sufficient support that we thought it was really worth the effort. And so, as a result of that, we now have a well-established medical school. Speaker 1: Now, were there other people--what about people on the administrative side that you think were critical, you know, in those early years, or do you--? Speaker 2: Yes, well, key there, first of all, was Hugh Gloster, who was president of Morehouse College because he was convinced that this was a good idea; secondly, that Morehouse College was the ideal place and could do it. And thirdly, he was committed to it himself because, of course, I learned later that there were some faculty at Morehouse College who really were very skeptical of this and who worried that this would be a drain on the college's finances; would be a drain on the president's time, on Hugh Gloster's time, dealing with this, and who had other, other concerns there. And, of course, there were trustees of Morehouse College who had similar questions. So having Hugh Gloster who was very committed to this idea, and he was a successful president, he--a very successful fundraiser. And, of course, one of the questions some of the college faculty had was, would this really be the undoing of his success in gathering funds for the college here. Of course, that proved not to be, be the case. So Hugh Gloster was key, but then there were three people he appointed to work half time on this effort, who were members of the college faculty or staff. They were Dr. Joseph Gales, who was professor of chemistry. And he is a person who chaired the feasibility study that the college did. And then the planning study as well that was in 1974, '75 [1975]. Then Dr. Tom Norris, who was chairman of the department of biology at the college was another faculty member. And then Ms. Alice Green who was the college's director of development, fundraiser. So we had two faculty members and that administrative staff. But they were the core planning group who were there. They were working on this idea really from 1972 until '75 when I came on board. And when I joined them in 1975, they continued with me on this effort. And Dr. Norris, for example, became our first dean for academic affairs, you know, for the, for the medical school. Dr. Gales continued as professor of chemistry in the college, but still worked with us. He left Morehouse College to become president Talladega College, I believe around 1980, '81 [1981] there. And then he later rejoined and came back as our director of development at the medical school around 1984 or there abouts. Alice Green continued with us until, again, about 1980 when she accepted a position as director of development at Howard University. And so, so those were the key people who were involved in, in the beginning who worked with us. Story_ID: 13819 Speaker 1: Did it take a lot to convince students in those early years to apply [to Morehouse School of Medicine]? Or was it just, it's a case of there's a medical school, and, you know, we can attend? Speaker 2: Yes, the reality is that there more, many more applicants to medical school in the country than there are places. And typically it's a ratio of roughly two-and-a-half or three applicants per place. So we did not have any shortage of, of applicants. The--and so, when we announced that we had received accreditation, of course, we had already received applications from a number of students in anticipation of us receiving our accreditation, our provisional accreditation. When that, when that happened, we then had an admissions committee already formed that worked to view the applications. And we also had, I should mention, very active support from in Emory University School of Medicine. We had a number of their staff working with us to share their experience as we set these, these things up. So we then sent out offers of admission to students beginning in April 1978 for the class coming in that September. That was late in the normal cycle of admissions offers to medical schools because those offers usually go out starting in the fall for the coming year, say in September, October, November for the following September. So--and usually, classes are filled by January 1st, certainly no later than February 1st. So when we sent out offers of admission beginning in April of '78 [1978], we were late. But there was still quite a pool of students who had not been successful in gaining admission to medical school, who, indeed, were pleased to join us. And so, so we got off to a good start that way. And, and, of course, we started remember as a two-year school, offering the first two years of medical education. And the arrangements we worked out, which were contractual arrangements, because they required--such specific written contracts were required by the accrediting committee, to guarantee any student admitted to our program, that as long as they had a satisfactory academic performance, they would guarantee an unimpeded pathway to get a medical degree. So Emory University had a contract guaranteeing placement of our students into the third year there if they were successful with us. And we had a similar contract with the state medical school, the Medical College of Georgia, and then Howard University School of Medicine and the University of Alabama School of Medicine. So we had those arrangements with those four institutions, which were guaranteed, was needed by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education, the accrediting committee. But in addition to that, we had a number of our students who applied and accept, were accepted elsewhere to Brown University, University of Illinois and other places as well, but the guarantees were those four medical schools. Story_ID: 13820 Speaker 1: The one question I've read--and you mentioned this in the first interview, now, Meharry [Medical College] and Howard [University College of Medicine], was there any, I mean besides the initial not wondering why, you know, Morehouse [School of Medicine] was doing this, did that continue or did that abate? I mean you're saying that you even had this, a placement arrangement with Howard. So I'm just wondering, you know, was it sort of continuing because you're the new kid on the block, you know. They had the, sort of the king, the two kings, and I mean, and just, you know, why was this needed? So I was just wondering, did that abate or did it just sort of lessen as time went on or did it--? Speaker 2: Right, well, it lessened because since there were skeptics, even with Morehouse College, obviously, there were skeptics at Howard and Meharry, etcetera. And some people wondered would we be competing with them for students, etcetera. But over time, that abated, and we were able to show that working together, we were able to accomplish a number of things. And, in fact, on the legislative front, convincing the Congress that there were programs that were needed to increase the number of minority students entering medicine, in programs that benefited Howard, Meharry and Morehouse, and Charles Drew [University of Medicine] school as well. So by working together, we showed that we could be much more effective than doing this individually. So, whereas there was that initial skepticism, with a couple of years we really had very positive strong relationships. And that's continued through, to today. Story_ID: 13821 Speaker 1: After the accreditation [of Morehouse School of Medicine], what were the critical things that were facing you, you know, in running, you know, in running and managing the school? I'm just trying to understanding sort the guideposts. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well, initial accreditation was as a two-year school. That was a good staging platform, but we wanted to be a full, four-year medical school and award our own degrees. So when we received our initial accreditation in April of '78 [1978], that was something that we really saluted and celebrated. But this really gave us impetus to begin to put those things in place that we needed to operate as a full, four-year school; that is, to recruit faculty for the third and fourth years, which are usually clinical faculty and departments of medicine, surgery, pediatrics, obstetrics and the other clinical areas. And secondly, to develop relationships with hospitals where our faculty and students would work because they needed to have exposure to patients. And really a good part of the clinical learning experience is learning from physicians and, and residents in the hospital and, and really seeing patients and participating in, in their care. So developing those hospital affiliations was, was essential in our effort to become a full, fully accredited four-year medical school. And we developed that relationship with Grady Hospital, the large public hospital in Atlanta, as well as with a community hospital, Southwest Community Hospital, a private hospital in southwest Atlanta that was really in the heart of the affluent black community there in, in Atlanta. So developing the clinical departments was our major challenge. And, and one of the reasons we had started as a two-year school was that we knew that as difficult as beginning a medical school--and certainly with the first two years, was, developing the clinical years was even more difficult. So, so we really took one step at a time; first the two-year operation. Then we worked to develop the four years. And then we applied for accreditation review for that, and we received that in the fall of 1980. So that enabled us to then begin operation as a four-year school, beginning in the summer of 1981. And that event also triggered the separation of the medical school from Morehouse College because the articles of affiliation of the educational institutions within the Atlanta University Center really had ascribed undergraduate education to the colleges, along with religious instruction dating back to the time when these were religious affiliated schools in the early part of the 20th century. But graduate and professional education in the articles of affiliation of 1929, and the formation of the Atlanta University Center, those articles said that graduate and professional instruction would be at the province of Atlanta University. So from a technical standpoint Morehouse College was pushing the envelope in starting the medical school. But, as I mentioned before, Atlanta University had been approached, but they had turned it down. And they had also been asked if there was any objection if Morehouse College looked at this question, once the trustees of Atlanta University, by resolution in April of 1971, had voted not to proceed, thought it was not, not feasible. So, but the way this was finessed was the commitment given to the trustees of Atlanta University at a meeting between the executive committee of the Atlanta University trustees and the executive committee of the Morehouse College trustees in the fall of 1975, in October of 1975, after I had arrived there, that the commitment was that Morehouse College was never going to itself award an M.D. degree or graduate degree. The program as it got started, as it would get started, was not going to be degree granting the first two years, and the student has to transfer. But the plan was to become a four-year school, but before that happened, we had become independent, that is, the medical school had become independent from Morehouse College. And it was left open as to what its future would be in terms of its relationship to Atlanta University Center. And the options were three. One would be, it would become independent and have no relationship to the Atlanta University Center or B to become independent and possibly become part of Atlanta University; third, that it would become independent, and it would be an independent institution with membership in the Atlanta University Center. And that third option is really what unfolded. Story_ID: 13822 Speaker 1: So when that came, came about in, I guess in 1980, we felt, you know, confident, you know, there. And the faculty that we had recruited, we recruited from other medical schools. So we felt pretty confident about the faculty. The real challenge with the faculty was the fact that we had people coming from different institutions all over the country and then coming into a new institution and developing our own culture, our own ethos and our own environment, that, that was the thing, really assembling all these people and really becoming one institution here. So, because institutions do differ in terms of their, their character. So that was really part of the challenge, but also part of the excitement too in developing the school. Speaker 2: Now, so, let's say in--was it 19--1985, what--? Speaker 1: That was our first commencement. Speaker 2: That's your first commencement, okay. And then, but in the meantime, Barbara Bush joined your board, right-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --in January of '83 [1983]? Speaker 1: '83, yes, right. Speaker 2: Right, okay, and can you--you had met her, you had met her on a trip? Speaker 1: Yes, that's right. Speaker 2: Right, and gotten to know her. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And then she actually served until-- Speaker 1: Until January of 1989. Speaker 2: When her husband [George H. W. Bush] was elected president? Speaker 1: Right, yes, right. Speaker 2: Okay, during those years from, I want to say, well, the '85 [1985] to '89 [1989], can we talk about what the critical things that happened at the school [Morehouse School of Medicine], you know, and in its growth? Speaker 1: Surely, right. Well, first of all, 1985 was a banner year because that was the year that we, first of all, received our full accreditation as a four-year school because we were not eligible as a new institution to be fully accredited until we had offered all four years of medical education and had been evaluated on the quality of that. So that occurred in the spring of 1985, so that really was a very important milestone. And that also meant the students who graduated in May 17th of 1985, were graduating from a fully accredited medical school. That was important, not simply for cosmetics, but also it meant that their eligibility for appointments for residency training programs in hospitals around the country was facilitated because every hospital wants to be sure that the medical graduates coming in for advanced training or post-graduate training, you know, are graduates of a fully-accredited medical school. So 1985 was very critical there. So that was really, you might say the full flowering of the developmental years of the medical school. After 1985, it really meant building upon that foundation that we had, had developed. So what that meant was adding facilities to the school because we had started with small classes. And the plan was to increase class size as we went along because we dedicated our first building we constructed for the medical school in July of 1982. And then vice president, George Herbert Walker Bush, was our speaker. And that's, of course, when I met him. And, of course, he invited me to accompany him on this trip to sub-Sahara Africa in November of '82 [1982]. And Barbara was on that trip, and that's how I met her and convinced her to join our board, which she did in January of eighty--'83. So, so-- Speaker 2: Was it atypical for her join boards at that point? Had she been very active at that point or did they have a relationship with Georgia? Speaker 1: No. No, this was--well, this was the other part of developing this school, serendipity, really being opportunistic and entrepreneurial. So, in essence, we really invited George Bush to speak because he was Vice President, because we wanted to really have a relationship with federal officials who could be helpful to us. And that came off very well because he came. He clearly was impressed. He enjoyed his time there. He was well received by all these Democratic politicians, John Lewis, Andy [Andrew] Young and others who, you know, were very anxious to get their picture taken with the Vice President and so forth. So--and then, of course, the fact that he subsequently invited me to accompany him on this trip to Africa because he wanted me to be part of his delegation representing our country, as he visited eight countries in sub-Sahara Africa. So that was an unexpected outcome, but--and then meeting Barbara Bush was also part of that. But we, indeed, used that opportunity to invite her to come on the board. And, of course, she said yes, because, you know, in, being somewhat entrepreneurial, you know, my philosophy is, I never turn myself down, you know. I'm not gonna say, no, she won't be interested. I'm gonna ask her. She'll have to say no. And also, that brings up another point, in this business, you have to really be willing to hear a lot of no's because you do a lot of asking. And for a variety of reasons, a lot of people will say no, they can't or it's a bad time or they're not interested or what have you. And you get maybe four or five no's to every yes. But what you do, you forget the no's. You don't let them get you down. The one yes you get, that's a great victory, and that really sustains you and really propels you for the, for the next thing. So, so getting Barbara on board was a tremendous opportunity that we had, and, of course, as I mentioned previously, she served as our speaker for a number of luncheons around the country when we had our first national campaign that started in January of 1984. And that campaign with a goal of $15 million, we ended up raising $18 million. And so she was really very helpful in--because she gave her credibility, and by extension, the credibility of the vice president and their circle of friends, that this was an important institution. So, so that helped a lot. So that, in developing a new institution, a new organization, you must plan, I'm convinced of that. But beyond that, you have to be prepared for the unexpected opportunity. So, so that was part of our philosophy, and we were able to bring Barbara on board because of that. Speaker 2: But Dr. Sullivan, was it typical that she would have done things like this, you know. I mean, was she active like that, and, you know, in different communities with things, and especially-- Speaker 1: Well, the thing that she was involved in at that time, and that really convinced me that I should really try and get her on our board, she was very active in promoting adult literacy programs. And, of course, as you know, she started her own Barbara Bush Foundation really for adult literacy. And her goal there was to really reduce the number of adults in the United States who were really illiterate, and, and those individuals who were able to develop reading skills, changed their lives and the lives of their families. I thought that was quite, quite impressive. But I convinced her that we were in the same business, education. She was in a special area. We were in a special area. But certainly, there were linkages there. So she responded to that. But I also am convinced, as I've gotten to know her and her family, is that they were also committed to minority education as well because one of the little-known facts is the fact that the Bush family has been involved in the United Negro College Fund since its inception. George Herbert Walker Bush's mother was one of the founding directors of the UNCF back in the '40s [1940s] when it was founded. And since that time, to this very day, a member of the Bush family has been on the board of directors of the UNCF. And I, I've learned also that one of the personal charities of George Herbert Walker Bush or Barbara Bush is the UNCF. And they contribute to that, you know, every year. And I learned that Dr. Trenholm, a former president of Tuskegee [University], was a personal friend of George Herbert Walker Bush. So, so there were those things which I was not aware of at the time, but there were those things in the background that, when I made the approach, were really helpful in convincing them that this was an important need that we were trying to address. I think that convinced them to, for Barbara to come on our board. Story_ID: 13823 Speaker 1: You also said, I think, that Congressman Louis Stokes was also very helpful, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, right. The way that came about was this. I started in 1975. And Julian Bond and Ben Brown said we want you to meet Ralph Metcalfe in the Congress. And, of course, he was from Chicago, as you know. He was on the Authorizing Committee for Health, the committee, you know, the Health Subcommittee of Energy and Commerce. So I met him, you know. They took me to, to see him and Andy [Andrew] Young, who was in the Congress, you know, at that time. So, when I met him, of course, he introduced me to Louis Stokes because Metcalfe was on the Authorizing Committee that drew up laws pertaining to health issues. Well, Lou Stokes was on the Appropriations Committee. So I, that's when I met Lou Stokes. And both of them were very supportive of the school. And Stokes, over the years, was very key in us receiving a number of federal appropriations. The first building we constructed that we dedicated in 1982. So a $6.25 million building, $5 million was a federal grant that Louis Stokes helped to get for us. The second building was 1987, another $6.25 million building. Again, a $5 million federal appropriation that Congressman Stokes helped us to get. And also on the Senate side, Senator [Arlen] Specter that was very key as well, and a number of other appropriations. And the latest building we constructed, the $21 million National Center for Primary Care, $16 million of that were federal dollars and two appropriations. And Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr. was instrumental in those appropriations. So, so we've had a number of federal grants that either Louis Stokes or Jesse Jackson, Jr. have helped us with and others as well. Congressman Charlie Norwood, Republican Congressman from Augusta, Georgia, a dentist, has been very helpful to us. And, in fact, we have been fortunate in that, by and large, the entire Georgia delegation in the Congress has been helpful to us. And that's one of the interesting stories that I want to tell too, about the evolution of this school. The fact is, while we are a minority school, predominantly African American school, trying to address a need, we really have had the support of not only blacks in the state of Georgia and in the Congress, but whites as well. And so, so that really is a process where I think that we are benefiting by the results of the civil rights revolution, the Black Caucus in the Congress, but also the whites who are really very helpful in joining with us because they see this as a need, not simply for the African American community or the minority community, but for Georgia or the nation as a whole. So that's really part of the interesting evolution of this whole process that is a great contrast to my experience growing up in segregated Georgia. So, now, we have really an institution with a special mission, but with broad public support from all segments in Georgia and around the country. Story_ID: 13824 Speaker 1: What were you learning about how Georgia had changed, you know, and that whole thing because you had been away. You know, you had seen the North may have been better there. You had very warm feelings towards Morehouse [College]. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: And I know you've said, you know, when you came back, Maynard Jackson was mayor and that was--but I'm just wondering what were you learning about, you know, sort of dealing with people and sort of interactions and how Georgia itself--? Speaker 2: Sure, right. Well, that was very interesting because growing up in Georgia as a boy, one of the major members of the U.S. Senate was Eugene Talmadge who really was an ardent segregationist. And, of course, my father [Walter Sullivan, Sr.], in founding the chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in this rural town of Blakely in southwest Georgia was really, had had a number of rough days because of that. And when I left Georgia in 1954 to go to Boston University to medical school, I was leaving the segregated environment and going to the Northeast, which really was a breath of fresh air, so to speak. And so twenty-one years later, when I returned to the South, the change was dramatic. Not only was Atlanta, now having a black mayor with Maynard Jackson, they had the Black Caucus in the state legislature, Herman Talmadge, Eugene Talmadge's son was now in the Senate. But Herman Talmadge was supporting the development of the Morehouse School of Medicine. And he actually became one of our trustees for the medical school. And he also helped get appropriations for the school. And he actually was at the press conference announcing, in April of 1975, that Hugh Gloster held at Morehouse College, announcing my appointment as the dean of this new school that was being formed [Morehouse School of Medicine]. We had Herman Talmadge, who was a senior senator and Sam Nunn, the junior senator, both at that press conference to make statements of support, you know, for this. That was, perhaps, among the most dramatic changes that I personally witnessed. And the rest really has been just a series of, of actions here that. I came back to, to a state that really in my view had really come through the civil rights revolution in a very positive way, had been a strong center of resistance. You know, the Albany movement, you may remember down in southwest Georgia, a lot of marchers and resistance there. So, so having gone through that in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and then to come back in the mid-'70s [1970s] and see this, was dramatic. But it also meant that the political power in the black community was also being recognized and respected by the white community and by white politicians and all of this really helped change, change the environment. Maynard had me as the new dean of the medical school, down to lunch in the Commerce Club, the major business club, the exclusive business club downtown. So as mayor, I was there as his guest there in the private dining room. So a lot of these things which now, we think nothing about, they are very important symbols of the change, you know, at that time. So it's a really, it was very traumatic. And I say that the medical school benefited from those changes by having all these people who, whose predecessors in prior years or prior decades would have been very much against this. But they were supporting this. And, in turn, our success as an institution, I think, is helping to continue that change, And, and the attitudes of people as well because I believe I mentioned that while Boston did not have legal segregation, through visible things, ran into a number of invisible barriers there where you were surprised to, to find them, that they were there. So, so that was--I learned while I was in the Northeast that as, while it's quite different from the South, there were still some barriers. And, and they weren't, were not honest because they, they didn't say they were there. And they acted as though they were not there. And so you'd run into them, and then you'd be surprised or taken off, off guard. So, so that was a lesson to me that this was an issue that had to be dealt with up front. And my way of dealing with it is in helping to address issues such as improved healthcare, increasing the number of minorities in the health professions because they take positions of leadership, not simply in health, but as economic centers in their communities, participating in the other life of their communities. So by looking upon this a process where everyone participates over time, these attitudes that were, unfortunate attitudes that were there in the past, really will melt away. So, so that really is part of what the larger picture of what we've doing, you know, at the Morehouse School of Medicine as well, addressing the specific need of the shortage of African American and other minority physicians, but also changing people's minds and attitudes that our graduates are just as bright, just as well trained, have, indeed, gone on to positions of leadership in other medical schools or in state governments as well as in private practice of medicine. So all of that is part of a larger picture in addition to the specific goals that we, we have at the medical school. Story_ID: 13825 Speaker 1: Is there a specific relationship between the medical school and the Center for Disease Control [and Prevention] or does that--did it help that, you know, the CDC was located there in any way? Speaker 2: Yes, it helped in a way. Basically, the way this, the way it helped was this: There are a number of scientists there on the staff of CDC, and we drew upon those scientists to come over as lecturers in the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine], to sit on our some of our scientific advisory committees in the medical school. And that was a very good relationship because scientists at institutions like CDC or NIH [National Institutes of Health] in Washington [D.C.] or the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] really benefit from having a connection with an academic medical center. So it really is a win-win situation. So, no, we did have a number of people from CDC who worked with us, supported us, along with Emory [University] as well. And that helped us in the sense that long before we had a sufficient number of faculty in all of the areas at the school, that were on our payroll, we were able to draw from CDC. And they really served as volunteer faculty. So that really was a process that we could take advantage of. And, of course, they would enjoy the teaching experience in a school of medicine because, as you know, in order to teach someone something, you have to know it yourself. And you find that when you think you know something, then put it together in a lecture to share it with someone who doesn't know that. So you learn maybe the gaps in your knowledge or the strategies you have to adopt to be able to explain this to someone else. So the process of teaching is a very beneficial experience for scientists themselves, as well as the collegial environment. And everyone wants to interest people in their own field because you want to bring them into your field, whether it's infectious diseases or surgery or pediatrics or whatever it is. Story_ID: 13826 Speaker 1: What things did you think that didn't go right in that sort of growth period, that if you had to change it again, you would have done differently because it seems like everything really fell in place and it was sort of a blessed project from the beginning. But I'm wondering on hindsight, you know, other things, cause, you know, the accreditation went fine, you know, the building of the staff went fine. You had, you know, the fundraising came along, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, I would say--I don't want to convey the impression that there weren't any setbacks. No, no, that, that was not the case. I, I would say perhaps the area where, I wish we could have done better, and I think it would have accelerated our development, was in fundraising. It takes a lot of money. That is, we were able to put this together to be sure. But we started out with twenty-four students per class. And we, after a period of three years, started to increase the class size, and we went up to thirty-two students per class. And we stayed at thirty-two students really from around 1981 until 1995. We then started the process of doubling the class size. And we now had fifty-one first-year students entering the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine] this past summer of 2004. And we have plans to increase up to sixty-four students over the next two or three years. So you see, that's a long, long time. Had we had the financial resources, we could done it more rapidly. So, so one of the reasons I think we did have the successes that we did, we didn't stretch beyond the resources that we had. We felt it was much more important to develop a strong institution, if that meant it would have had to be a small institution, than to overextend ourselves and develop a mediocre larger institution. We felt that that would not be helpful to us or to anyone in long run. We wanted to be, there to be no question about the quality of our educational experience, the strength of our graduates. And that has paid off. So, so I would say the thing that I wish we would have had even greater success, is bringing in the necessary financial resources faster so we could have developed the school more rapidly. But we didn't. And so we worked with the resources that we had. So, so that worked out fine. But, clearly, the process was slower than it could otherwise have been, had we had more resources. Story_ID: 13827 Speaker 1: In terms of your career growth, this, you had, because remember how you said in Boston, you were sort of capping out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so this opened up a whole new world and a new side of you in terms of even administration and heading something up and fundraising. Now, when--tell us about how the--you know, the [U.S. Department of] Health and Human Services position came about? Speaker 2: Well, there again, it was part of really serendipity. The, that process really came about because we invited George [H. W.] Bush to speak at the dedication of our first building because we hit off. And then, of course, he invited me to go with him on this trip. I got to know him very well. After that, my wife [Ginger Sullivan] and I were frequently invited to events at the Vice President's home there in Washington [D.C.] and certainly various receptions, Christmastime and other events in Washington. And so I got to know him very well. And, again, I had not planned or thought of going into government service or becoming secretary. And, in fact, one of my trustees had been a finalist in 1985 for the position of Secretary of Health and Human Services, but was one of three finalists. But one of the other two persons was chosen, Otis Bowen, who was my immediate predecessor. So when Vice President Bush then ran for President in 1988, and it looked at if he had a reasonable chance of winning, my trustee, who had not achieved the position in 1985, approached me as to whether I would support him for this position because he felt he would like to make another run. And I, I agreed. So I spoke to, you know, then Vice President Bush about, about my trustee. And he'd come to know him because we actually--when we celebrated the completion of our first national campaign and raised the $18 million, we had a luncheon for the campaign committee at the Vice President's home in Washington, and Barbara Bush hosted that at, at her place. And so my trustee was among the ones present there. So, and he was very active in Republican politics, and was with a major pharmaceutical company there, had lived in Connecticut. So I, indeed, voiced my support to then Vice President Bush. I had two people, during the summer of 1988 call me to say they were putting my name in for consideration as Secretary HHS, whereupon I said, no, I really am supporting, you know, my trustee. You know, I've given my commitment. And I was then reminded--and the first person actually, Roy [Leroy] Keith, who was then president of Morehouse College, and Roy said, "Lou, I didn't call you to get your permission. I'm calling you to inform you so that you will know and won't be surprised. And your trustee is fine, but I don't know him. I know you, and I think you'd be a good Secretary. And I'm hoping that this works out, and I'm hoping that you would consider it if it happens." So, and this is a long conversation. And it's one of these conversations that after about twenty-five minutes, you say, "Okay, Roy, I, I've heard you, but fine. This isn't going anywhere." I was trying to convince that this was a mistake. And so finally, you know, I said, "This conversation is taking too long, so I'll just say, okay, fine, you go right ahead," you know, with that. And I thought, this isn't going to go anywhere. So why am I wasting more time really trying to convince him. So, well, about two weeks after that I received another phone call. This one was from Dr. Frank Royal. Frank Royal is an African American physician in Richmond, Virginia, active in the Republican Party, very close to Senator John Warner. And Frank called to have all of the, the identical convocation--conversation. He didn't know Roy Keith. So that was totally independent. And so this time, I didn't waste any time. I said, well, Frank, well, thanks very much. I'm pleased in your confidence in me. I'm not sure that this is really for me, but if it happens, fine, thanks. And so, I--that was it. Well, sure enough, when Bush was elected in, in November of that year, I called him the next day down in Houston to congratulate him. And by the way, he was wearing a tie that evening, election evening, that I had bought in New York two weeks before. There was a shop on 5th Avenue I passed that had a beautiful blue tie with little red elephants on it. So I bought it and sent it to him with a note saying, "Wear this on election day. It'll bring you good luck." And sure enough, he was wearing that tie when he was on television that evening. So when I called him the next day to congratulate him, I said, "See, you wore the tie. You see what happened (laughter)." So we had a good laugh. And then I went on to say, and I remember, now, you know, my trustee, is someone who is a finalist, I think would be great secretary and is very interested. And so he then said, "Lou, I--you've told me about that." And I remember, and I've, I've passed his name up the chain. And he said, "I'm not getting quite the reaction I think I need to go forward with this. So I was wondering, would you be willing to come up here. We can--I want to sit down and talk with you about this, maybe in about ten days or so." And so I said, "Well, sure." Story_ID: 13828 Speaker 1: My question was, was he [George H.W. Bush] really saying, come and let's discuss this candidacy of Monroe that you are pushing? Or, was he saying, I want to talk to you about this position. It was just that ambiguous. And so I wasn't sure. But there was enough of a suggestion to me that the latter was what he wanted to do. I talked with the chairman of my board at the time, saying, I'm going up, and I may be imagining things, but I think there's a possibility he may want to talk with me about becoming secretary. So my chairman said, well, fine, if, you know, the president asks, you don't turn the president down. The other person I talked to was Tom Murphy, who was the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the [Georgia] state legislature who really was very powerful in state government. He had been very supportive of us in getting state support for the medical school. And he was a Democrat, a life-long Democrat. So one of my questions was, would I damage the relationship of the medical school with him and the state legislature if, indeed, I went into this administration. So I went to see him and told him that I thought there was a good possibility that they might want me to join the administration, though I wasn't sure. And so he was quiet for a minute. He says, "Well, look, if the president asks you to do it, you've got to do it. I think you ought to do." He says, "Plus, insofar as I'm concerned, there's not a dime's worth of difference between Bush and [Michael] Dukakis." He really didn't like Dukakis. So, so he wasn't shedding any tears that Dukakis had not won. So that really gave me my pass, that if this happened. So, sure enough, when I went to Washington and met with him, that's when he said, he says, "You know, Lou, I would like to have you serve as my Secretary of Health and Human Services. You'd do me a great favor. You'd do this country a great service if you were to do it." So that's how I became secretary. So I, I accepted, and so went forward from there. Story_ID: 13829 Speaker 1: Was there someone in line for the medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine]? I mean that's happening pretty quickly. Speaker 2: Right. Well, no. Well, well, let me put it this way. At the medical school, our executive vice president was Jim Goodman. Jim had left, I guess in early 1988 to--he retired and moved out to Seattle and really started a business himself. And so I had recruited a replacement for him, Dr. John Maupin, who had been director of a community health center there in Atlanta. And he was a dentist by training. And so, when I was recruiting him in the spring of 1988, John spoke with me. He says, "Now Lou, if I accept this job, am I going to see you go off to Washington just as I come aboard?" I said, "Oh, no. There'll never be any chance of anything like that happening." I said, "I don't have a political background, etcetera." And so sure enough, that happened. And what we did, I actually--when I accepted the position [U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services], I called Jim Goodman out in Seattle. And I was able to recruit him to come back to serve as president there. And so he came and served as--so he was our second president for the medical school. But John Maupin, of course, has never let me forget that. Now, John, you may remember, in 1993, just as I was coming back to Morehouse School of Medicine, John was recruited to Meharry [Medical College] as president of Meharry. So he's president there now. So he, he doesn't let me forget that I wasn't going to go anywhere. And, of course, he came, and then what he had predicted, and which I was saying no happened there. But, so that, that's what, what happened. We were--because we did not have a plan, 'cause really I, I had not anticipated that. And so far as I was concerned, my plan for the medical school was still being implemented. I had not reached a plateau that I was, felt that well, this is something now that I think I should turn to, to other things. So it was very different from the time I left Boston to come to Morehouse to start the medical school. There, I'd felt that, well, I've reached the plateau and so, therefore, I need to look at other opportunities. That wasn't the case there in the fall of 1988. So I left the medical school, frankly, with mixed feelings. On the one hand I was interested and excited about this opportunity for larger service here. And I felt that this also brought some other things that I was pleased, I was--a graduate of Morehouse College would be there in the cabinet, African American, etcetera. But, in spite of all of those things, I was leaving thinking well, this is a job I haven't completed yet here at the medical school. And so I wasn't entirely at ease about that 'cause I, I'd certainly did not want to see this medical school start, start to have problems here. But, fortunately, it, it didn't. But then, then, of course, the other part of this, I--because of the federal rules, I could not have any ongoing ties to the medical school. I couldn't have any understanding that I would be coming back. So when I left at the beginning of 1989 to go to Washington, so far as I was concerned, that was it. My Morehouse days were over. But Jim Goodman, whom I had recruited back, left in the summer of 1982, during the election season, to move out to Arizona and to go in business. The board approached me about coming back, and I said, I really can't really resign in the middle of an election year because that would be taken very badly-- Speaker 1: You mean 19--it wasn't '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: 1992. Speaker 1: '92. Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sorry, what did I say? Speaker 1: '82. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. '92. So I said, I, I really can't, I--you know, out of loyalty and support to President [George H. W.] Bush. So I said, I think you ought to proceed with, with the search because if he's re-elected, and he asks me to stay, my intention would be to stay for another year to a year and a half. And my, my thinking was, I was not going to serve another four years. But I was going to serve up to a year and a half. And my--there were two reasons. One, he'd developed--we developed a health reform plan that he had introduced in February of '92 in Cleveland during, at a speech he, he made. It didn't go anywhere because in an election year, I have since learned, it's very difficult to get legislation through because with the Democratic Congress and a Republican President, there was no support for enacting something that he could take great credit for in the election. So, I felt that, well, we'd really push, if he's re-elected, try to get this through. The second reason for that timetable was, when I went to Washington, my income was cut in half, and my expenses doubled. And I was really living on savings. And I figured that about a year and a half would be about as much as I would be able to last, given my financial situation because federal salaries really, then as well as now, are really not comparable to, to the private sector. So, but those were the reasons I told the trustees of the college they should really proceed with the search. November eight--'92 came around. Bush lost. I got a call again from the trustees. And they deny this, but I accused them of really just pretending that they were continuing the search, waiting to see how the election would come out. So I was offered the position, and I went back. And in a sense, that gave me a chance to complete what I had started. So I, I really was very pleased with the opportunity of doing that, and did that in preference to doing something else in the private sector that would have been much more lucrative financially. But I knew that, you know, my heart was in developing this institution. So that's how it happened. Story_ID: 13830 Speaker 1: What are you thinking? You've never, I mean you've not spent time in government, and it's definitely not, you know, presidential-- Speaker 2: Right, sure. Speaker 1: --you know, a cabinet position. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what are the things that you--and you have to assemble a team. I mean none of that had been in place, sort of, right? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So, how much time did you--first of all, your board member, when did he learn? Did he learn when the rest of the country learned or did you-- Speaker 2: No, I called him. I called him. Well, first of all, I called him after I received that second call from Frank Royal. And so I told him, I said, Monroe, as you know, I've given you my support with the Vice President, if he's elected, to be Secretary of Health and Human Services, but I just wanted--you know, I've had two people call me who insisted they are putting my name in. So his response was, "Well, okay. That's fine. That's great. Maybe one of us will get it." So he--so that was his attitude. And so that seemed to me to be his way of saying, well, that, that's okay. Well, when I then was invited to Washington [D.C.] and was offered this, and I called him, he congratulated me. But it was obvious that he was, was disappointed. So, so, yeah, that, that's how that happened. Speaker 1: Now, you--that meeting was in-- Speaker 2: November-- Speaker 1: November-- Speaker 2: --of '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: So you have between November and January-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: --to get things together. So there are things just basically about--you were gonna move, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Oh, yes, right. Speaker 1: So, looking for a place and all of that? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was there any agenda setting or any white papers that had been developed? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so can you talk a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yes, that really was a period that I served as a special consultant to the government. So during that time, we were doing a number of things. I was assembling a team of people for appointments within the department. Speaker 1: You're saying it started immediately, that you start doing this immediately. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: So what about the--you know, the time that the things at Morehouse [School of Medicine]-- Speaker 2: Yes, no, I was doing both really. Yeah, now, this wasn't full time in Washington, but yes, oh yes, getting to know people. There were a number of people who were, you know, obvious candidates for positions in the department. First of all, I had to really, myself, learn the various positions in the department. You know, 124,000 employees in the department, of which about the top 400, you know, are political appointees; say the, my Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, my Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, the head of the Public Health Service, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration [FDA], the head of National Institutes of Health [NIH], head of Health Resources and Services Administration, Social Security Commissioner, the administrator for the Healthcare Financing Administration, Medicare, Medicaid, and then a number of other positions, Assistant Secretary for Personnel. So all of these were political appointments, which I then really had the responsibility for assembling. And, of course, there were a number of people who were candidates for that, some of whom I had not known before; others recommended by the White House, the president or, or his staff. So I did a lot of interviewing. And so, I really, on the one hand, if I had a person that I felt was a very strong candidate for a position that I wanted to put in, I would purely argue for that person. For example, Jim Mason, our assistant secretary for the Public Health Service, I'd known, who was director of CDC [Center for Disease Control and Prevention]. And I'd worked with him right there in Atlanta. So he became Assistant Secretary for the Public Health Service. So, and over that, and he supervised CDC, NIH, FDA, and so forth. Gwen [Gwendolyn] King, who is an African American woman, became our Social Security commissioner. I had not known her before, but I met her. She had been active in the Republican circles. And we hit it off. Her vision of the Social Security Commission and things that needed to be done and, and mine, you know, jibed. So there was a lot of personnel work. Then there were a lot of white papers or background papers I read about the agency or issues there, you know, such as Social Security, this viability of the retirement funding system because, as you know, that has always been, you know, been a challenge. So learning the pros and cons of the various arguments there and what the issues were. So, yeah, that time was really a time, you might say, in waiting because my nomination was sent to the Senate on January 20th, and I was confirmed on March 1st. So there was a period there of some, roughly six weeks after my nomination had been sent in, that, that I was confirmed. So meanwhile, there was an acting secretary in the department, who was, had been the deputy secretary under Otis Bowen who had been my, my predecessor. But the acting secretary would frequently consult with me. I had an office there in the building, but I really did not participate in any public events or etcetera, because the Congress is very jealous of its prerogatives, did not want to have someone acting as though he or she were secretary, had been confirmed, if they had not. So, really, I kept a low profile, but really communicated with the Deputy Secretary. And if there were issues that he felt needed to be brought to my attention, you know, he would do that. And we would talk about it and, you know, decide how we would handle them. So that, that's really how that happened during that time. Story_ID: 13831 Speaker 1: How did you find the confirmation process [for U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services]? Speaker 2: Challenging. The--well, challenging in one sense. So, actually, by the time we had my hearings, I'd really, pretty much understood the department quite well. The real challenge was the issue of abortion because I, I knew this was controversial, and I'd never really dealt with this issue before because as a hematologist, blood specialist, you know, this was not something that I ever was involved in or participated in. But coming into the federal government, I felt that the safe and appropriate way to respond the abortion question was to say, well, the law of the land is that a woman has a right to choose. And as secretary, I'm sworn to uphold the law. So I felt that would be cut and dried. That was not well received by the pro-life community because they, they took that as something that--less than vigorous. So there were a lot of challenges and questions there. But we got through it, and so my confirmation on the committee--I think the votes were something like twelve to one or thirteen to one, I've forgotten the precise one. And the only vote against me was Jesse Helms. So I said to my friends, "Well, that's all right because had Jesse Helms voted for me, I would have had a lot of explaining to do among my friends back in Atlanta there." So, so that, that's how that happened. Speaker 1: Now, did the President [George H. W. Bush], did he say anything that was important to him, you know, from--you know, besides--I mean issues of Social Security are always an issue. But were there other things that he said were important or were you sort of given a clean slate. I'm just trying to understand-- Speaker 2: Sure, right. Well, basically, what, what the President said to me when I went up to meet with him that time was he wanted me to be his Secretary of Health and Human Services. And he went on to say, "But Lou, you know, I have to say, I'm not sure if I'm doing you a favor if you accept this because this is a difficult position," because it really was, and continues to be, one of the positions that draws a lot of public attention, a lot of crossfire, a lot of conflicts. Stem cells, for example, right now, being one of the areas because Tommy Thompson is our secretary. And when he was governor of Wisconsin, as the governor of the state of Wisconsin, he supported the development of strong stem cell research programs there within the state. And so, now, as the secretary, of course, with the President [George W. Bush] having stated his restrictions and reservations about stem cell research, Thompson, if he's to continue as secretary, has to, at least from a public perspective, support the president's perspective. Probably, if he could get him to change his mind, that's one thing, but, but that obviously is, is not the case. So, there were a lot of issues like that, and really the question comes down to, can you support the president and feel that you can support him with fidelity and not really compromise your basic, basic principles? And I reach that, that resolution there because, you know, I knew this was a difficult question, you know, about abortion, but, but, frankly, I thought I was, had developed a good strategy for addressing it. But that, obviously, didn't, didn't work. But, but the president said that he knew that Social Security was a difficult issue, the financing of Social Security, and also the third rail in the Congress. You don't touch Social Security or be electrocuted, etcetera. But he said he was supported, was supportive of the programs within the department, you know, AIDS research, CDC [Center for Disease Control and Prevention] prevention programs and certainly Medicare and Medicaid and, of course, he would be very pleased if I were to give leadership to the department. But that, that was about it. Nothing more specific than that. Story_ID: 13832 Speaker 1: Now, just historically, the religious right had sort of gotten its legs really under the [Ronald] Reagan administration, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, and so they were something, you know, that had grown tremendously within the Republican Party. Now, were you blindsided sort of, you know, at their reaction or--I mean you said, I thought I had developed a position. But on the other end, were you blindsided? Speaker 2: Well, yes, in a sense because, see, the way this came to the floor, there was a reporter for the 'Atlanta Constitution' who wanted to do a profile of me. And I said no, because I had been advised by the White House staff don't talk to the press; wait until you're confirmed because again, the Senate confirmation committees don't like to have people who they are going to be confirming reading about their positions in the newspaper. They like to hear this firsthand and directly from them. So when I was asked to do this profile, this reporter said, you know, that we would embargo this until after you're confirmed. So this would really be a profile we would like to do once you're confirmed. So I said, well, okay, if that's the condition, fine, I'll agree. My mistake. I should have gotten that in writing because two days after I spoke to him--and one of the questions he asked was about abortion. And that's what I'd said. So that was in the 'Atlanta Constitution', and that really caused a stir. And that, and this reporter, frankly, built his career on that because he then went to 'The New York Times' from there. And, of course, all of my, the White House staff and the other public relations people said, how could you be so nave to accept the word of a news, of a newspaper reporter that they would do that. And you see what happens. And basically, the one risk to my confirmation being derailed was that. So, but we, we got through that. But that, that really was a risk. And that's also when I learned to be somewhat more cautious with the press because I really, I was doubled crossed there. And I, I really--I thought I was doing a local reporter, a local paper, a favor. He was going to have a heads up. So, as soon as I was confirmed, there'd be this profile, etcetera. But he didn't respect that. So that really was a real painful lesson for me at that time. Story_ID: 13833 Speaker 1: You are, you know, at this point, Atlanta's favorite son. You know, I mean people have a lot of expectations, you know, or hopes, right, with your appointment? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's what--I'm just what I'm saying--with your--the appointment. So what are you wanting to do with the position [U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services]? I mean amongst all of this, what do you want, you know, sort of your legacy--what are the issues that you want to put, you know, first and foremost? Speaker 2: Sure, right. Well, when I was asked by President-elect [George H. W.] Bush if I would take the position, I talked to him about that. And I said well, these are some of the things that I would want to accomplish. And I'd like to get your reaction and your thoughts on this. I said I would be working to appoint more women and more minorities to senior positions in the department, and that includes various advisory committees for the public health service and for Social Security, you know, etcetera. So I wanted to increase the funding for research at NIH [National Institutes of Health], the NIH has to support colleges and universities and medical school around the country. And I would also want to strengthen the Medicaid program as well and all those. President Bush says well, I agree with that. I'll support you, you know, on that. So when I became--when I was confirmed, I set about doing just that. And the appointments that I made include the first woman head of NIH, Dr. Bernadine Healy, the first woman and first minority Surgeon General, Antonio Novello, Hispanic; the first African American to head the Health Care Financing Administration, Bill Toby, William Toby, there. I had Bill Bennett, a former NIH employee, working as one of my staff on developing committee--recommendations for advisory committees at NIH and Social Security there. And his job was to really identify and help develop a bank of minorities and women. And so we were able to make a number of appointments there. And I did other things, such as I established a minority male initiative, $100 million program, to really look at the whole issue of the problems that minority males have, you know, violence, shortened life expectancy, poor health habits, etcetera. And I had an advisory committee made up of community people to help with that. So there are a number of programs like that, that I initiated. And so I was, you know, quite, quite proud of. And, of course, interestingly, since then, we've had, first of all, Jocelyn Elders as Surgeon General. Actually, my Morehouse College classmate, Hank Foster, Henry Foster was first nominated to be Surgeon General. He was an obstetrician. He was on the faculty at Meharry [Medical College]. But he, he was not confirmed. And that was because he was an obstetrician. And he had performed abortions. So he was knocked out of the box. But, but Jocelyn Elders then came in. Then you had Dave Satcher, who, who followed there. And now, you have Richard Carmona, Hispanic. So it's interesting that that position had never had a minority before, and now there's been a string of minorities there. And other, and women in other senior positions in the department because my, my goal was to really change the culture within the department, to bring in new voices, new perspectives. So that I was successful in. Some of the other things I was pleased to accomplish was the new food labels that we introduced there, that got a lot of attention. That's now in the process of undergoing some revision, but it really provided people for the first time food labels with information in, in an understandable frame of reference. So it said, what percentage of the daily requirement is this fat? Or is this carbohydrate or protein or vitamins, etcetera, to help people really plan their own diets in a much, in a much better way. And, of course, we released, Healthy People 2000 in September of 2000, a blueprint for improving the health behavior, you know, of Americans. So, those are some of the things that I was proud of. Story_ID: 13834 Speaker 1: You also had a fight against the tobacco companies, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit? And then we'll go back and talk about a few of the things, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Yes, the tobacco fight actually started in January of 1990. I had spent two weeks in the Middle East, a week Israel and a week Egypt, reviewing NIH [National Institutes of Health]-supported research programs over there. That was part of a larger effort of our government to really have these two countries and their governments and their people communicating with each other. Some of the research, for example, was research on insect vectors in the Middle East. And so insects don't respect national borders, the kind of project that scientists in Israel would want to talk to scientists in Egypt and so forth. So I had been over there for that. And then stopped--and my wife [Ginger Sullivan] was with me, and we stopped in Rome for a day on the way back to visit Cardinal Angelini, who was in charge of the Catholic health, healthcare system worldwide there. So as we left Rome, on the plane, I picked up the ['International] Herald Tribune', and there was this small article about this protest in the black community in Philadelphia, about R. J. Reynolds' [Tobacco Company] plans to introduce Uptown, a new mentholated, high tar, high nicotine, non-filtered cigarette, into the black community in Philadelphia. It turns out one week to the day from that, that day, I was scheduled to speak at the University of Pennsylvania for the dedication of a new research building. So I turned to my wife and said, "Look at this." I said, "I'm gonna really blast them when I go to Philadelphia on this." So, so I got back to the department the next day for my morning staff meeting, brought this article in to my staff. And I passed it around and said, "Does anyone know anything about this? This is outrageous." So everyone started smiling. I said, "Well, what's funny?" Well, they were aware of this--they had seen the article. So they had talked among themselves. They had come into the meeting, not only to inform me, but to convince me that I should really speak out about this in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 13835 Speaker 1: So your staff at that time, they had, you know, they had come prepared, you know, that day at the meeting, saying, you know, this something that you should do. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, right, right. Speaker 1: Now, did you--at that point, because, you know, the tobacco industry has a very strong lobbying-- Speaker 2: Yes, sure. Speaker 1: --okay, effort. So what did you--did you learn--had you experienced lobbyists like, you know, in that, not in really, in the--. Speaker 2: Well, I had interacted somewhat with the tobacco companies' lobbyists before because I really already was talking about healthy behavior, saying people should not smoke. And, of course, you know, tobacco lobbyists were saying, well, tobacco is a legal product, etcetera, and it's an individual choice, and, you know, you know, you're really compromising people's choices. And my response to that was, no, I'm trying to inform me of what they are doing to compromise their health. So what I'm hoping that, indeed, I will be successful in doing, is convincing them not to use this product. I said, I haven't proposed, you know, any legislation. I said, but, you know, what I had proposed, I said because I, I know that prohibition would not work. You know, we tried that with alcohol, you know, of course, with disastrous results. I said, but what I want to do is to have people aware of the fact that this is a bad product and will cause you disease, disability and death and so forth. So I really had had some interactions because they're on--some of the talk shows, you know, they frequently had me and someone from the tobacco industry, you know, debating that. So, so there was already that. But then, with this effort, I thought this was a real affront here. And the fact that the black community in Philadelphia where there were plans to introduce this [Uptown, a high tar, unfiltered cigarette], had themselves said, we don't want this product. Please don't bring that here. So the happy circumstance that I was going to be there, so I said I was going to do that. So I really spoke out condemning R. J. Reynolds [Tobacco Company] for this, suggesting they should really abandon their plans to introduce this cigarette. The community didn't want it, to bring disease, disability and death, and I wrote also a letter to a man named Johnson, who was then president of R. J. Reynolds, proposing that they withdraw their plans to introduce this. And it got a lot of press, on television and newspapers around the country. And very much to my pleasant surprise, two days later, I got word that they were canceling their plans for this. So this cigarette was never introduced. So I was very pleased with that, and, of course, I continued to be outspoken about tobacco use because the point I made repeatedly to everyone, including the tobacco industry, was my concern was that this was the number one preventable cause of death in the country. Now, there's roughly 2 million deaths in the year--in the country every year from all sources. This was not quite a half million, about 450,000 deaths every year due to lung cancer, emphysema or other diseases resulting from tobacco use. So my emphasis was really from a public health perspective cause a number of people assumed that since I was really so outspoken and vehement that I was a reformed ex-smoker, which was never the case. I never smoked. And so my, my zeal was really trying to get a public health message across because the evidence is so compelling. And we had known this since 1964, but the tobacco industry had constantly published intervening messages suggesting that smoking isn't so bad or this is really an individual rights issue. Don't let other people infringe upon your rights and, and that sort of thing. And, of course, the reality is that 3,000 teenagers begin smoking everyday in the country. And this is the ongoing source of future smokers for the tobacco industry. We know that a lot of this is part of the teenaged rebellion, that part of quote becoming an adult is doing something that your parents don't want you to do or doing something that's identifies as quote cool, or doing something that is rebellion, etcetera. And so, and also a teenager's thinking, well, I won't get addicted. I, I can always stop, but really before they know it, you know, they, they are addicted. So really, the tobacco industry knows all of this. So they know that they really are hitting young people at a particularly vulnerable time in their lives when for a variety of different reasons, this would appeal to them because this is a part of their becoming an independent person. Story_ID: 13836 Speaker 1: Dr. Sullivan, at what point did the, did the medical industry really start to understand the addictive qualities of tobacco? Do you--I mean historically, do you know when that--? Speaker 2: Well, it really--well, starting in the late '40s [1940s]. First of all, there were some studies by--I can't remember his name, but a pathologist down in East Orange, New Jersey, at a veterans hospital there, who really did a lot of work suggesting that, not only was tobacco associated with emphysema and possibly with lung cancer, but also was addictive. But that was, at that time so revolutionary, but there were a number of later studies. So once the aggregate weight of all these studies came forward, that's then what gave Luther Terry, Surgeon General, the evidence for him to then conclude that smoking causes lung cancer, and therefore, it, you know, tobacco use is a bad, bad product. So, so there were a number of things really going back into the '40s [1940s] there. But, but, of course, as years have passed, we have a lot more information about the addictive qualities of tobacco that we--than we had back then. Speaker 1: And didn't you encourage the tobacco--or maybe, I don't know if I read this, but did you encourage the tobacco industry to do positive programs as part--can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. We, part of, of my criticism of the tobacco industry was that they should publish complete information about the addictive qualities of tobacco and the adverse health consequences of tobacco use, that an overwhelming percentage of cases of lung cancer are due to tobacco use, not that lung cancer develops de novo, you know, by itself in the majority of cases. Really about 85, 90 percent of cases of lung cancer occur in people who are, you know, heavy smokers. The emphysema is another problem. And then, of course, the addiction, you know, it, itself. So, so what we were encouraging the tobacco companies to do is say, truth in advertising, really publish all of the information about this product. And so you're saying it should be individual choice, let people make choice from being fully informed here. So, so, yes, we were, we were very outspoken with the tobacco industry that, that we felt was a responsibility that they had producing a consumer product, that they should really have the fully-informed consumer of that product. Speaker 1: So was this your--did you start first with the tobacco industry and then went to the food industry? Or were those pretty much in tandem because you're talking about truth in advertising on both? Speaker 2: Right. They were pretty much in tandem. Now, the tobacco effort really started before the food label was, was introduced. The food label was introduced in '91 [1991]. But we had been working on the food label because they were separate efforts because the, the food label, of course, was designed to have, fully inform people, as they plan their diets, really if it tells them when to go on a low-carbohydrate diet or a low-fat diet, you need to know, what does that mean? And so that's why, the label, as you see it now, which you did not have before, not only says the number of grams of a substance, but also what is the percentage of the daily requirement. And also the label says that the total calories in a typical American diet should be 2,200 for men and 2,000 for women, so people would have a frame of, of reference here. So, so these were separate efforts, but really they were both efforts to really see that we have a fully-informed consumer because ultimately, the health of our citizens and the country is really gonna depend upon having fully-informed individuals. You can't legislate health by itself. There are a number of things that you can do. But ultimately, it's a process. You have to have people who are committed to their health, know that they can influence their future health and motivate them and inform them how they can, how they can address that. Speaker 1: Okay. But you know what's interesting about that, I remember, you know, being consumer in this whole thing, and, you know, and the food industry taking a--you know, being upset about that and what it was gonna require-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, you know, people--I remember a lot of discussion about that. Well, were you surprised at all about the resistance for the food companies-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you weren't? Speaker 2: Actually, because I had a fight within the administration about this. That was with Ed [Edward] Madigan, who was then [U.S.] Secretary of Agriculture. He resisted this new food label that we wanted to introduce that we had developed within the FDA [Food and Drug Administration]. And, and, of course, FDA has certain responsibilities for informing the public, regulating foods and the safety thereof. But agriculture also has responsibility. So there's a lot of interaction between the two agencies. Ed Madigan's argument was that the new food label really was not an advance, that really, it was confusing, etcetera. I knew that fundamentally, the beef industry and the dairy industry were important constituencies of the Department of Agriculture and that there was a lot of concern in those industries that this label, would--showing the fat content in those products, would have an adverse impact upon their, their consumption. I was aware of that. But my interest was the health of the American people. And so, my longest meeting in the Oval Office with President [George H. W.] Bush was in 1991 with Ed Madigan, where we debated with the president--we presented the new food label that we wanted to introduce. And the rule within the administration was if two secretaries have some disagreement that they cannot resolve, don't go to the press. Let's come to the White House, come to the President and see if we can resolve it. So, so we had that meeting. And when Ed Madigan said, "Well, well, this would be confusing, Mr. President." So at that time, I pulled out a McDonald's placemat that we had gotten from the local McDonald's chain, that had a really-food information on it, very much similar to what we were developing in the food label. So I then pulled that out and said, "Well, Mr. President, if really this is confusing, I don't really understand why McDonald's, the largest restaurant chain in the world, would use something like this. It seems to me that they are on to the same strategy that, that we're on." So President Bush said, "Let me see that." I knew when that happened, we, we had the argument because he looked at it. And after a few minutes more, he said, "Okay, fellows, I've heard both of you, and we're gonna decide, and, and we'll get back to you. And remember, however the decision comes down, we're still on the same team and, you know, we really want both of you to back that." So the next day I got a call from the president saying that he was approving our proposed food label. Speaker 1: That was a major coup. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Because it's changed a lot of things and how people shop and, you know, look for things. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. And that's exactly what we anticipated. And that's important because when you talk about, you know, managing diabetes or obesity or high blood pressure or heart disease and saying all the diets that we want people to follow or develop, they have to have some way to do that. They can't really go to an encyclopedia and, and do that. But having something like this, that is also on so many products that they've become used to it. And then are using. So, no, it has been a significant advance and we were very pleased with that. Story_ID: 13837 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your position on AIDS, you know, because that became somewhat controversial, right? No? Speaker 2: Well, there was a lot of-- Speaker 1: Well, I read that you were--okay, that you broke away sort of from the party line, okay-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, I see. Speaker 1: I mean I won't say, well okay. Speaker 2: Right, of course, there was an AIDS panic in the country in 1989 and when I became [U.S.] Secretary [of Health and Human Services]. And we--. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, why there was a panic? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. This was a new disease that really was spreading. It was fatal. We didn't have any effective treatment, you know, for it and certainly did not have, have a cure. And so, we did a lot of things as a country. Remember, we passed the laws for the immigration ban, to anyone--in fact, they could not immigrate to the United States. In fact, now, some years later, we're taking in, as a nation, a second look at that because the question is, is this really having an, an effect and is this really serving to, really be an unnecessary source of irritation and not accomplish anything. But at any rate, we passed that. And there were such things as Ryan White, the boy out in Indiana who was expelled from school because he was infected. And, of course, we were trying to say then, this disease is not passed by just casual contact with people, among people, and certain children playing. You know, it has to be really very intimate contact, either sexual intercourse or I.V. [intravenous] drug use, sharing needles, that sort of thing. But people were, were not listening. So--and by the way, I approved, in October of 1989, my first year as Secretary, I approved reimbursement for AZT, the first drug that was found to be effective in suppressing the, the virus. And it was not cure--we still don't have a cure, some thirteen or fourteen years later. But now, we have a whole panacea of drugs that are effective, and our therapies are much better than, than they were. But in 1989, I wanted to really develop a working relationship with the advocates within the AIDS community. And they were very strident. They assumed that because I was part of a Republican administration and they had not had a happy experience during the [Ronald] Reagan administration, that this would be much of the same. And, of course, I, I went to the International AIDS Convention out in San Francisco my, my first year as Secretary really to try and form a relationship, again, and have a dialogue developing. So that's when, of course, the AIDS activists tried to prevent me from speaking at that, in the Moscone Center there. So, that, that was one thing. And then among the groups that were very active was a group called Act Up. And frequently, when I went to various places to give speeches, there would be Act Up demonstrators. And their technique would be to wait until I got up to speak and then jump up and yell, "Murderer", and pointing at me or to stand up and turn their backs to me while I was speaking, so it would be, maybe eight or ten of them in the audience there. So a number of things like that, that really were not pleasant, but I determined that I was not going to respond in kind. This would not be appropriate, not be effective. And, and that worked because after a time, the audience really tired of these demonstrations, and particularly, this was a college commencement where you had relative there to see their son or daughter graduate. And they have this demonstration. After a time, the crowd really would tell a person, sit down or, or leave, or what have you. So, so that, that was really a very common experience, you know, at, at that time to really try and deal with that in a way to try and keep open lines of communication, as well as trying to keep, you know, above the fray during that time. So that obviously was very tricky in trying to do that during that time. Speaker 1: Now, with--now, the dental community, did they play any role, because it was-because there was this real concern about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --dentists, and people, right. Speaker 2: Right, there was--I've forgotten the name of the patient, but there were, there was at least one patient, possibly two, that who was infected by a dentist because of faulty, you know, sterile technique of the, you know, of the dentist. And, of course, among the things we were doing at the time was saying that all healthcare workers, doctors, dentists, nurses, others should really use proper aseptic technique here. But we know that casual contact would not result in transmission. But if you're handling blood or body fluids, you know, you could have the virus there. So you would not want to be handling those, say if you have a cut finger or that sort of thing. And you want to dispose of them properly, and, and make sure that utensils were properly sterilized 'cause we knew the virus would be killed by sterilization. So, so we really were emphasizing the fact that healthcare workers needed to be sure that they were not becoming careless in handling materials from AIDS patients, but at the same time, to not shun AIDS patients, not to really get caught up in the hysteria and really isolate these individuals cause we wanted to be sure they did get appropriate care. So, so that was another challenge that we had. Story_ID: 13838 Speaker 1: Dr. Sullivan, you know, they say that you were the longest serving, you know, at 47 months-- Speaker 2: Up until that time, yes. Speaker 1: Up until that time. Why had that been the case up until that time? I'm just-- Speaker 2: Well, that was really what President [George H. W.] Bush, President-elect Bush was referring to when he said that he wasn't sure he was doing me a favor because he said that the average tenure of Secretaries of HHS [Secretary of Health and Human Services] was about eighteen months. And some of them really got involved in controversy about Social Security if they made recommendations, you know, for change or demonstrators because what I learned quick, very quickly was that this secretarial position was the most picketed secretarial position of all. Whereas, you--the Secretary of HUD [Housing and Urban Development] might occasionally get some concerns from, about homeless people or, or problems there. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs almost never had, you know, pickets there. The Secretary of State might occasionally have--on some international issue, but not really very often and certainly not the Secretary of Treasury. But HHS because of the issues you deal, people's health, things like AIDS, drug abuse, things like that, abortion, welfare, all of those are things that people feel very strongly about one way or another. So I learned that. But I learned that you really have to accept that and not let it rattle you. You know, you have a job to do. You have a message to carry to the American people and what I found, my challenge was to make sure that, that getting that message out was not impaired, you know, by the demonstrators. Another group was a group called ADAPT [American Disabled for Attendant Programs Today]. This was a group of people in wheelchairs, an activists group. Their issue was that they wanted me, as secretary, to reallocate one third of the dollars we spend on nursing home care, to be spent in ambulatory care in private homes or elsewhere, taking care of disabled people. The reality was, I didn't have the authority to do that. That would have to take an act of Congress. But nevertheless, although they knew this and had been told this repeatedly, they always insisted on, on demonstrating. They would show up when I was speaking at a--I spoke at the University of Illinois commencement here, in the huge gymnasium here, and they were there, and they demonstrated there. They would wait until I would get up to speak, and then they would throw themselves out of their chairs and start crawling towards the stage; and because they will have been placed down front by the ushers so that they could see, because if somebody's in a wheelchair, you wouldn't put them at the back row because the people stand up for things, and they can't see. So they--and they knew this. They're very smart, and the nicest people you'd ever want to see until I'd get up to speak. And then they would throw themselves out of the chair and start chanting, "Why won't you meet with us?" in unison, crawling towards the stage. They also knew that, as I was told by my public relations people, always try and explain something in one or two sentences, in a sound bite. If it takes more than that, you've lost, that it's confusing, etcetera. And so to try and explain to the audience, well, folks, really what the issue here is, they really want us to reallocate funds for nursing home attendants to really home attendants, and I don't have the authority to do that. Well, it just doesn't wash, you know. So, at any rate, that, that was the kind of thing that I had to get used to as, as Secretary. Story_ID: 13839 Speaker 1: Now, the pace. I mean here you are--before you're president of the medical school. And it's a start-up, and there are lots of demands on your time. But here, you move into a very public position [U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services]. You're not necessarily always in control of your schedule or issues, right, that crop up-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah, true. Speaker 1: You have a huge--you said, 124,000 employees. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How are you finding this whole thing? You know, and Washington [D.C.], a different community. You've been Northeast, you've been in Atlanta, but this is Washington. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, true, right. Speaker 1: So, I'm just trying to understand how you--are you finding it exhilarating or are you finding some of it strange are you finding--? Speaker 2: Yeah, both. Exhilarating and strange, surprises. Yeah, but basically, I knew that what I really needed to do in going to HHS [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] is really be more a manager of people. I knew that I would--could not be a hands-on manager for hardly any of these things. But, but my job was to recruit and retain the best people, motivate them to really give them the vision and where we wanted to go and turn them loose. So, so I knew that was just--and also to represent the department and to represent the President [George H. W. Bush]. So there was a lot of public appearance there to really either talk about welfare reform, you know, or NIH [National Institutes of Health] research or what the President's goal is in terms of changing the health system, etcetera. But the actual work and putting the plans together, this was my--this would be what my staff was for. The, my Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, that was our departmental think tank to say, well, okay--and, they, I would meet with them. And we would talk about various strategies, and, you know, pros and cons, and I would either agree or disagree and try and point things in a slightly different direction. But the in depth analysis of what the components would be, how much this would cost, what would be the pros and cons of each of these, this was really their responsibility to, to come up with. And mine would be to ultimately approve this and then take it to the President, and get the President to, to sell it. Frequently, this also meant meeting with other cabinet secretaries, like the Secretary of Labor. Labor has health interests, labor unions and, and all of that. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs--VA has a very important health system. Department of Defense has their own health systems as well to really see how much of an intermesh or integration there is--or if there are things that are different. We wanted to be sure that we understood all of that before we went forward because the other thing in the public square is, you never want to have someone else say, well, look, here's this thing that you didn't consider or did you know about this because that could then take away your credibility. It could still be a good plan, but if you've lost credibility or the confidence of the Congress, that this is really a well-thought-through plan, you know, then you could be a little trouble. Speaker 1: But then that's a lot of burden on a person. If you're a Type A personality type, isn't that a lot of burden? Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but, again, what you have to do is realize that you're in a public position and, and realize again, say, with the demonstrators, for example. The demonstration--demonstrators were there because I was Secretary. It wasn't that, with we don't like Lou Sullivan. But we're gonna use Lou Sullivan to try and get our point across. So, so, so really, you learn that, you know, as you go along. Story_ID: 13840 Speaker 1: Can you tell me three of your most memorable experiences during your time in HHS [U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services]? Speaker 2: Well, I guess one, I'd mentioned earlier, the tobacco issue. Another was the Chilean grape crisis, because, of course, as you know with this threat that there was poison fruit on its way to the United States from Chile that we had to react to. With the issues there was clearly we didn't want to have anyone drop dead after eating some fruit here, because we wanted to protect the public health. And secondly, since there had been a very public statement that there was such poison fruit we needed to be sure that that was not true and also to demonstrate publicly that we were exercising due diligence in seeing this--to build public confidence that we were really on top of this--on top of this question. And finally, we were concerned that if we banned the importation of Chilean grapes that we also had a domestic industry--that if people stopped eating grapes that would hurt our domestic industry also. But after weighing all of those things, and we found one in the Philadelphia docks, one bunch of grapes were it looked as if there were three grapes that seemed to have puncture holes in them and they were slightly discolored, we weren't sure--and we also measure the cyanide content in those grapes--and we had, meanwhile, developed tests to measure if there was any measureable cyanide in normal grapes and we had found something like 0.1 microgram of this per grape. Well, these grapes we tested were something like 0.2 so it was really double--slightly more, but still not a lot but--to make a long story short, we decided that we needed to ban that fruit. And so we did that, realizing that we were risking all of these things, plus an international incident. And sure enough the Chilean fruit growers' season was ruined that year. And of course, I was sued as [U.S.] Secretary of HHS for $600 million for that. Story_ID: 13841 Speaker 1: You, then, have this--does it, you said you had other offers. But is it, you know, Morehouse [School of Medicine] was calling, is it--did it take much to make a decision? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew what I wanted to do. So I really only gave this a couple of days' thought. I wanted to be sure that I wasn't simply being too precipitous. And I, I should really think things through. And I did, and, and I knew that--A--I, my income would be less, but I also knew that my sense of accomplishment and my contribution, I felt, would be more important in continuing the development of the medical school. And I still feel that way today. So I have absolutely no regrets because I feel that every graduate of this school is an extension of me because, you know, I--of the role that I played in helping to develop this school. And the same way--I think I mentioned that while I did not end up going back to Georgia as a family doctor, which was a goal I had in mind in going to medical school, I now have a number of family doctors in places all over Georgia and elsewhere, that I can say a part of me is with them. And so that, so that in terms of personal satisfaction and sense of accomplishment and fulfillment is, is very important to me. And so that's, that's why it really was not any significant debate when the opportunity, you know, came around. Speaker 1: So, Dr. Sullivan, what was important for you to--what did you want to accomplish, cause this is 1993 that you go back? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: So what are you wanting to make happen-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --during that time, and you're not burned out either? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay, okay, you're not--need a break? Okay (laughter). But some people, you know, okay, some people talk a(bout, you know, it being--that it takes them a while to get off the treadmill that they were, you know, on. Speaker 2: Sure, sure, right. No, see my belief is this, if you're interested in what you're doing, and if you get tremendous satisfaction, that is a process of self-renewal and inspiration all along. And that's the way I felt about this. This is not a job. This is a mission; this is a calling. This is really an opportunity to really make a difference, that a lot--that most people don't have. And I consider myself fortunate to have had this opportunity because I can now go to my grave feeling, well, I've made a difference. It's not just that I fed my family or educated my kids. I formed an institution that really is training people who make big differences in the lives of people all over the country, and really, around the world. So, so that is, that's worth a hell of a lot more than, than dollars. At the same time, it's not been a financial sacrifice because, you know, I've had a good income. It's--the fact is, it has not been a spectacular income, but so what? I mean, I can wear one suit at a time or one pair of shoes at a time. And I'm not enamored of wearing big gold watches or that sort of thing. As a matter of fact, in some, I guess this is me, I guess in my own fairly conservative nature, I--a lot of these things I--simply do not appeal to me what so, whatsoever. So, so for the things that are important to me, this school is really right up at the top. Speaker 1: Now, one of the things that you wanted to finish though, and have the school sort, you know, did you feel that it was still sort of in the tentative stage? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Basically, during the four years I was away, we slowed down in the development, and certainly on the fundraising. And I, you know, cause I was aware of that, as the years passed while I was in Washington [D.C.]. And they also concerned me because I knew that this school had not reached the stage where we could say, well, it's now on safe ground here. So, so I went back, in fact, first of all, because I wanted to. You know, I really got a lot of personal satisfaction. But secondly, I went back feeling that I could really make a difference, help to really turn the fundraising around. And we did. And so we were able to--we mounted another campaign, you know, for, for the school, which was very successful, that we got good leadership, [Livio] DeSimone, Chairman of 3M, Charlie [Charles] Heimbold, Chairman of Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Bill Taylor, Chairman of CIGNA and Lew [Lewis] Platt, former Chairman of Hewlett-Packard, all were members of the leadership of that campaign, and they--we were successful, you know, in that, you know, campaign where we raised more than $25 million there. And, of course, with that we--you see, when I left in '89 [1989] to go to Washington [D.C.], we had two buildings. I came back in '93 [1993], we still had two buildings. Well, since then, you know, we have added a new research building--two, two new research buildings. And we've added a National Center for Primary Care building that we dedicated in November of 2002. That's our latest building. We have, in effect, doubled the space that the school has, you know, since I came back in, in '93 [1993], and added some things we didn't have. We have our own, now 700-seat auditorium, a cafeteria, which we had not had before. In addition to additional research space, new programs such as having our National Center for Primary Care, the Dave [David] Satcher leads now. So, so it's both been expanding the, the size of the school, but also increasing the scope of the programs within the school. And we're really in many ways having programs that other, older established medical schools are coming to learn to about and to emulate. So, so in that way, I think we're making a real contribution. Story_ID: 13842 Speaker 1: Did you recruit Dave [David] Satcher back-- Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay, so that, and that's a big deal in and of itself-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --the two of you being there. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, right. Speaker 1: So, what--in that period--so we're talking basically in a nine-year period, you know, you were able to do those things. Were you, were you also working on more of a succession plan at that time, where you're, you know, and so what were your--did you go back to also work on a succession-- Speaker 2: (Nods for yes). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, right 'cause there had not been a succession plan when I went to Washington [D.C.] because of the abruptness. But again, I felt that the ultimate test of the viability of this school [Morehouse School of Medicine] really is to have an orderly transition from one administration to the, to the next and have the school really survive. And see, in 1998, we--when we had our accreditation review, and we came through that with flying colors, and we were told that we were being recommended for another maximum period of accreditation, a full seven years, which is the maximum length that you're given, this was our second, seven-year period. The first had been '91 [1991], then again in '98 [1998]. So I felt that academically, we were in the strong position. Financially, we were much, much stronger. We had matured more as an institution. We had started the expansion to double the, the class size. So I felt, and then I was also going to be, you know, seventy in the year 2003. And so I said then that we really--and I announced to the school that we were going to start a search for the next president. And whereas, there was no urgency, we wanted to start soon enough so that we would not have a period of interim presidency. And I had seen interim presidents at many other institutions, including places like Meharry [Medical College], at Charles Drew [University of Medicine] and Howard [University College of Medicine]. And I felt that those were periods that were not particularly positive ones or not periods of growth. And I wanted to avoid that. And so, and then so I wanted to have such an orderly process. And also, psychologically, I felt that while I was still enjoying everything that I was doing, that it wasn't necessary for me to be president to enjoy that. I, I felt sufficiently identified to the school that I could really watch the school's growth and development from afar and still get that sense of satisfaction, and could still be helpful because I continue as a trustee for the medical school, which involves fundraising, etcetera. So really those were the factors that led into development of a succession plan and then, as you know, we recruited Jim [James] Gavin, who succeeded me in July of 2002. And Dave Satcher also came in September of 2002. So, you know, I had recruited Dave that spring. He went first to the Kaiser Family Foundation office there in Washington for a period of six months as a fellow. But he had--we had gotten him committed to coming back to Morehouse to head our primary care center because, as you know, he had been our first chairman of community and family medicine back in 1978, and then left in '82 [1982] when he went to Meharry as president there. Story_ID: 13843 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for--I mean you've built an institution [Morehouse School of Medicine], which a lot of people don't, and you've handed it off successfully, which a lot of people don't, founders don't. So my question is, you know, at this--what do you want to see, you know, for the institution? Remember you were even talking about the, sort of the, you know, that it didn't--it wasn't all stable and just sort of the direction. And you were even talking during our break about people understanding the true mission. Speaker 2: Sure, right. Well, as you know, we have, among other things, developed, not only the M.D. program, but Ph.D. program to train biomedical scientists, anatomists, biochemists, microbiologists, etcetera, who will be doing teaching and research, not only at our school, but other schools, and a master's of public health program as well because we need to have people who will head up county health departments, state health departments, be health educators, etc. So we now have these three degree programs. What I, what I would like to see at this school is the continued development of all of those degree programs and continued financial strengthening of the school because, again, medical schools or health profession schools are very expensive operations. And if you want to have a first-class institution, you have to have the resources that you can attract good people. You have to have the dollars to support them as they get established at your place. And once they are established, they usually generate their own support by getting grants from NIH [National Institutes of Health] and, and elsewhere. So I want to see that continue. As things have developed, although we are the youngest of the three predominantly black, four-year medical schools, we're number one in research grants from NIH. We're thirty-years old, whereas Howard [University College of Medicine] is 100 and--I guess 130. They were founded in 1868, and, as part of the university. Meharry [Medical College] was 1876. So Meharry is almost as old. So, so I think that we have--and we're doing better, frankly, than one third of the medical schools in the country in terms of their success in attracting NIH research support. So by the external revenue bodies, that determine the quality of the research we have there in our faculty, we're doing, you know, doing very well. I wanted that to continue to develop because as long as there are other institutions that are doing better than we are, that's a goal that we, we want to have. And so that's really what I hope will be the culture of this institution. Never be satisfied with being third or fourth or second. Always strive to be number one. You may not get there, and it may take time, but as long as that's your goal, you know you're--you'll be better this year than you were last year. And next year, you'll be better than this year. That's, that's the important thing. So really, in that sense, I think we'll not only be training first-rate health professionals, but in a larger sense, we're making a statement to the nation. And that statement is that, yes, we are a minority institution focusing on problems of the minority population. But the quality of our education, the quality of our science is first rate, you know; that is, you know, we don't have different science here. We don't have different academic standards. We have the same academic standards, and we are doing just as well as any other institution here. So in a sense, that really helps to dispel sort of the lingering questions in the minds of a number of people, if this minority or this is African American, does it measure up? So by, by having all these external bodies and evaluations by which we're measured, we're saying, yes, darn right, we're measuring up. And we're now setting the pace in a number of areas too. So that's, that's a larger view and vision of what we really would be saying to American public as we really move toward an increasingly diverse society. Speaker 1: Now, but--in an increasingly diverse society, what are you saying about the role of a minority institution, 'cause there's a lot of discussion about that, and even as your role, you know, with HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]? Speaker 2: Sure, well, you know, I'd say that all of us strive for the eventual goal that there're no longer--that there will one day be no need for special institutions, such as ours, because we will have, indeed, succeeded in seeing that we are well represented, and not only in terms of numbers, but our culture, you know, our dignity, and are at the table with, with everyone else because, you know, we have at Morehouse School of Medicine, white students. We've had them from the beginning, and Asian students, as well as from--with backgrounds from China, Japan or India, etcetera. Hispanic students. So, but we're saying that we are operating in a culture coming out of the black community. And what we're saying is that this culture has every bit of strength and dignity and promise as any other culture. What has hampered us has been discrimination where we've not had the resources to develop and people have actually, actively tried to prevent us from, from developing. Well, in spite of that, we're saying we are developing and now that we're in a new environment, now, we want to be sure that we demonstrate to the larger community, including the black community itself, that we can do anything any other institution can do in a first-rate way and have this come out of the black experience in, in the country. And that will be a positive contribution. Story_ID: 13844 Speaker 1: The medical profession has changed a great deal from the time that you first were, you know, a young person, and even observing the, you know, the local doctor or even as a young medical student. And I'm wondering, you know, some people say that, you know, it's expensive, you know, to even go, and it doesn't have the financial reward, you know, that it had. And then there's huge malpractice insurance. So, I'm just wondering what your thoughts are about it as a profession and for people? Speaker 2: Sure, yeah. Well, I think those are valid concerns. And I'm concerned about that also. There's, there's no question that because of the financial pressures that exist to try and restrain the healthcare costs and where physicians' incomes really have been compromised, that bothers me because, you know, I do believe that the training that is required is very long. The training is very expensive. It's very intense. And it really also requires continuing education. Then you don't reach a position as a physician where you can say, well, I've learned it all, so therefore, I don't need to bother anymore. That's not, that's the case at all. This is a profession that really has high demands. So, therefore, I believe that having a good income is perfectly justifiable. And when we have the kinds of constraints and arbitrary rules now that really impair that, that, that hurts the profession. Couple that with malpractice, where physicians and other health professionals, dentists and others, oftentimes out of fear of some possible rare occurrence, will actually--will order virtually almost every test that's imaginable. First of all, that's wasteful because those seldom would be, would be productive. But it also really adds to the expense, and it changes the dynamic of the interaction between the doctor or the health professional and the patient, where the patient may be viewed with some concern or suspicion. Is this someone who might bring suit? That really is very different from the environment and medicine when I was growing up, where the doctor was a trusted individual. And if you talked about suing a doctor, I mean, I mean you'd be ostracized by your neighbors or in some--this was just totally inappropriate. So, so, yes, the environment has, has changed, and that's not for the good. I do think that we have to have malpractice reform to change that, to reduce the unnecessary tests that are ordered, that are really defensive medicine, to increase the communication and rebuild the trust between the doctor and the, the patients. And certainly, medicine has also changed in that we have a lot more information now than we had when I was a medical student. You know, and information turns over about every seven years, that is, if we really--and, of course, that's good because we can do a lot of things now that we could not do years ago. And just a very quick illustration, when I was [U.S.] Secretary [of Health and Human Services], I approved AZT for the first drug being effective. Now, there's some thirty drugs. People were living, back in '89 [1989], twelve to eighteen months with a diagnosis, once they had AIDS. Now, they're living twelve to eighteen years. So, so that, that in itself is a remarkable illustration of really how medicine can advance and change the lives of people because now these are people who are raising their families, who are still working, earning wages, paying taxes, rather than being disabled and having a short life expectancy and leaving young children behind here. So, so, yes, it--this is a very dynamic profession. The knowledge base is constantly being added to it. And that's a challenge to keep up with that. So, so, yes, medicine has changed. Some of it for the better; some of the social circumstances, such as malpractice and some of the regulatory issues really have made it more difficult. So we really do want to find a way to really get beyond that so that we can really recapture some of those things that really were positive about the social interchange between the health professional and, and the patient. Speaker 1: And you think that's possible? Speaker 2: I hope it, I hope so. It's gonna take, it's gonna take a lot of work and just saying it won't make it so. But it, but really, there is value in that. So we'd like to recapture that, right. Story_ID: 13845 Speaker 1: I want to ask you one question that's been on my mind throughout this, what has made you still so committed to the black community? Don't look that way, but I'm just saying there were many times that you could have left the community-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --alone. And I mean, not-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I used, I use the--there are several answers to that. My parents were very committed then. They made a difference. They didn't run away. They, and they went into this rural southwest Georgia community and did a lot of things at great personal risks. So, I've incorporate some of their values here. And part of that was the fact that it's not sufficient to simply get something for yourself and run because that's very selfish. That's very self-limiting in terms of one's contribution and what one can do. So, so I, I've inherited that. Secondly, you know, I'm very much aware of the fact that regardless of where I might go in this country or what I might do or how much wealth I might accumulate, I'm still black. And, and that has some negative connotations today. Well, what do you do about it? Well, I believe that I, as a black person, have a responsibility to help change that. We can't wait for some white person or some white group to do it. We have to have enough self-confidence, enough dignity, another--enough sense of self worth to believe that what we are doing is just as important as what the next guy is doing. And we have to convince that next guy about that, by our deeds, not simply by, you know, by our, our rhetoric. And I think in, in the process, you know, by our achievements, we do change people's perceptions and, and their thoughts. And so that's, that's, that's a contribution. I've never really thought even for a moment of the idea of running away. But I have a high school classmate of mine who's very fair, who's passing for white. And I don't know where he is now. But I thought that was very tragic, that he really was so insecure and so--not having a sense of self worth of himself, of who he is, that he would do that. See, see, in, in a sense, I say that the fact that there are these issues or these problems, you know, that's not something for me to run away from. That's something for me to work to change 'cause I don't believe that this is--these are problems that are the result of a number of factors, including other people's misperceptions or their prejudices, etcetera. It's not enough to just condemn them because I might feel better and get a catharsis out of that, that won't change things. I have to really show these individuals that they are really fundamentally wrong in, in their perceptions. And you do that by showing that you can run as fast, or you can calculate just as much and solve intricate problems as well as, as they. You can contribute to the advancement of society as, as much as they. You do that. It takes time. But over time, things will change in the same way that things have changed significantly, you know, over my lifetime. So, so that's, I guess that's, that's how I look at things. Story_ID: 13846 Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Sullivan, what--I want to ask this question about legacy because we ask this of everyone, but I want you, in answering the question to think about, you know, your parents and about--well, I want you to think about your parents and what you came from, which you alluded to. I want you to think about the work that you've done, I mean because when you think you came to be head of a medical school at forty, which is really sort of--right? Forty, were you forty when you-- Speaker 2: Forty-one, yes. Speaker 1: Forty-one, okay. And, you know, and you build an institution [Morehouse School of Medicine], which people haven't seen, and you're still like very vibrant and off, you know, doing this thing here, you know, the museum, the health museum [National Health Museum], and still very committed to issues. But I'm just wondering in answering--you know, what do you want? You know, what do you want people to say about Lou Sullivan? Speaker 2: Well, I guess in the simplest terms, that he made a positive difference in the lives of people 'cause fundamentally, that's what it's all about, cause it--take the health museum, for example. I'm not building a black health museum. I'm building a health museum. Now, you know darn well, it's going to be sure that the contributions of blacks and other minorities are in there, but this is a museum for everyone. So, I guess, that's one example of what I'm saying is--there are things that we need to focus on in terms of correcting inequities within the black community, but we have to go beyond that. We have to continue to do that, but we have to grow beyond that to say, we have a contribution we can make to our larger society that everyone benefits from. There is no National Health Museum now. If we're successful with that, that will a contribution that I will have made for everyone. So I guess it comes down to really making a difference. This medical school's made--you know, is making a difference. Having become [U.S.] Secretary [of Health and Human Services] is making a difference, developing the health museum, and the other things I'm involved in are helping to make a difference. I get a lot of personal gratification out of it. That's what keeps me going. That's why it's not a job. It's something I enjoy doing. I don't play golf. I tried that. I decided after a time, what am I--the hell am I doing out here chasing this ball around. And I have very good friends who get a lot of satisfaction out of it. That's not the way I'm made. Now, maybe five years from now or ten years from now, I might feel differently. But what I say is, there are still things that I can do that are important to me and important to other people. And if I have that ability, if I have that talent, if I happen to be positioned that I can influence things, why not? You know, that's, that's, that's what drives me...