 Story_ID: 33076 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Certainly. My first name is Porcher, P-O-R-C-H-E-R, middle and L'Engle, capital L-apostrophe,-capital E-N-G-L-E, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R, Junior. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 9 August, 1925, the largest city in the world today, Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Now, it's the largest in terms of the square miles, right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Not in population. That is correct. Speaker 1: All right, okay, just wanted to make that clear. And, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: My occupation most of my life, thirty years to be exact, was in the military. From the civilian side of the house, I was a school teacher and also a college president and prior to that time, I was a circulation manager of my father's newspaper in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today's date (laughter), probably it's the 15th, 19-2012 [September 15, 2012]. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're now in my daughter's and my son-in-law's home in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], on the outskirts of Washington, D.C. This is a suburb of Washington-- Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Leesburg, I think, right? Speaker 2: Leesburg, is that it? Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33077 Speaker 1: So, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Lightweight, sure. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: In terms of a dessert, it's bread pudding, homemade bread pudding. In terms of a vegetable, baked beans. And that's it. Those are my two favorites. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, blue. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmastime, I suppose. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Honolulu, Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess my favorite is an admonition to our young people to "Do something good every day for someone else other than yourselves." Speaker 1: Now, there's something else that you say that I heard you tell your son-in-law just before he left. And what was that? It seems like you say that a lot too. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, whenever you see an airborne soldier, your fellow airborne soldier, you say "Airborne," and he's supposed to respond to that and you're supposed to come back and say, "And then some," yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there something else before the "and then some?" (laughter) Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) We can't say it here, right or-- Speaker 2: Well, whatever. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: There's a very close bond, I might add, among all paratroopers, black or white, green or yellow, all over the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33078 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, so we don't get 'em mixed up. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother, first name, Mary, M-A-R-Y, Bell, B-E-double-L. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Oh, I need to get maiden name, I'm sorry. Mary Virginia, Virginia her middle name-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, and Bell, of course, was her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She was born and reared in Albany, Georgia. Speaker 1: And what year was she born? Speaker 2: Nineteen zero five [1905]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history? Are there any stories? Speaker 2: You know, unfortunately, I can't go beyond three generations. And, of course, there's a reason for that. I can go back to my grandmother and grandfather on her side, and I can go back to supposedly, her father, my grandmother's father. She was very light-skinned, and I guess you could say she could "pass", if that's the right word today. Speaker 1: Well, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Stella. Speaker 1: Stella, okay. Speaker 2: Stella Bell. She married a Snyder Bell, S-N-Y-D-E-R. In fact, he was born, oh, I'm guessing, about fifteen to twenty years after slavery. And it's hard to follow them back because--and I'm not so sure I'm authorized to say what I'm about to say. But if (laughter), if you don't wanna show it, don't. But back in those days, and I've done a little bit of research on this, that my color would not be the color that I am if the, the Master, the Master, they called him, back on the farm where most blacks were raised back in those days, if he hadn't taken liberties from my great great grandmother or whatever it happened to have been. I would not be this color today. Speaker 1: Okay, so the great, great grandfather was the Master, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. During my research, that's what I found out, yes. And, of course, my grandparents both came out of Sasa, Georgia and Cusped, Georgia, and they moved to Jacksonville, Florida later. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were gonna tell us something about your great grandfather, your mother's [grand]father, right? Speaker 2: Well, all I can tell you is that he was (laughter) white. Speaker 1: No, that's the great grand--your mother's father was white, you're saying? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother's grandfather and my great grandfather. Speaker 1: Right, right, that's what I thought. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I-- Speaker 1: Now, do you know anything about your mother's parents? Speaker 2: Yes, quite a bit, yes. They settled, as I mentioned in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, yes, you had another question about that? Speaker 1: Well, their names, your mother's grandfather's name was--I mean your mother's father's name was what? Do you know? Speaker 2: Snyder Bell, S-N-Y- Speaker 1: Okay, Snyder, okay. Speaker 2: Snyder Bell, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm missing a generation here somewhere. But I'm not, let's see, 'cause I got your--okay, I've got your, your grandmother was Stella Bell, grandfather, Snyder Bell-- Speaker 2: Oh, my grandmother's mother and father. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: The only thing I know is, as I mentioned earlier, that he was white, and he took advantage of her mother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, I got it. Speaker 2: That's about all I can tell you about that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 'cause I thought I'd skipped a generation, but, you know, but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I might make it--not a real comparison between my paternal grandparents and my maternal, when we get to that part. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 33079 Speaker 1: So are there any stories from your mother's [Mary Virginia Bell] side of the family about life in Georgia in those days and what it was like when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, and it was pure hell. I guess I can say that because of segregation, totally segregation. They lived on the so-called black part of town, and it was just completely segregated. You were nothing. You were thought to be nothing. And that's the way it was. And the laws supported that. That's the bad part about it. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any specific stories about incidents that you can tell us? Speaker 2: Only those that I can remember (laughter). I can remember that, you know, back in those days--and people call it today, mistreatment of your children. But, you know, back in those days, they would, it wasn't too difficult for you to get a backhand every now and then if you misbehaved. And, of course, my grandmother, my mother never would chastise us in that way. And my grandmother wouldn't either. She would refer us to grandfather. And he would say, "Son, go out there and get me a switch off that plum tree out there and bring it in here." And that's what he would beat me around my legs, never really trying to injure you by no means, but making sure that you remember what you were getting that little spanking for. I remember that. My little cousin and I, one of my first cousins, we were kind of mischievous when we were small. One day we went up under the house and built a fire. And, of course, we got our hind parts straddled for that, severely. Another time was, we went out in front of the house on the sidewalk. Back in those days, black people lived in neighborhoods, all sand sidewalks, all sand streets. And we dug a hole about, maybe three-feet deep and spread newspaper over it (laughter). And you know the rest of that story, and I won't tell it. A lady came by, and she sprained her ankle in that hole. And, of course, we were confined to our quarters (laughter) for a long, long time after that. Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you stories about growing up, but I was wondering if your mother had any stories about growing up, you know, 'cause I'm still talking about your mother's side of the family, and did, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --when she was growing up, did she share any stories with you about what happened to her when she was growing up? Speaker 2: The only thing was, I could remember, she went to Albany State College [University, Albany, Georgia] back in those days. It was Albany, what school, what school? I've forgotten, but it's Albany State now. And she used to tell us how difficult the academic program was and how she had to study. And, of course, she studied at night. And back in those days, back in the country, most black people had lanterns. I can see that lantern right now, no electricity. And it was difficult for her to study. Beyond that I cannot think of anything else in her life, other than the fact than she was a good mama, a real Christian-oriented mama. And she passed some of those concepts, Christian concepts along to myself and my two sisters [Virginia Williams Scott and Betty Ruth Belton], which she got from her parents [Snyder and Stella Bell]. And I might say that everyone in my ancestral line, everyone has always been a Christian-oriented person. Story_ID: 33080 Speaker 1: Let's go on to your father's side, and then we'll try to put 'em together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Same as mine, just add, senior [Porcher L'Engle Taylor, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 1900, don't recall the exact date. Speaker 1: Okay, and where? Speaker 2: In Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay, in Jacksonville. Okay, now, what can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: I can tell you a lot (laughter) about that side of the family. My father was one of the early, real early civil rights persons. He feared no one but God. He thought that he should do something about what was going on during that period of time, regardless of the danger in doing so. Therefore, he established a newspaper in Jacksonville, Florida in 1934. And he got his training in order to do that kind of work from the Afro-American Life Insurance Company, which was a very thriving company at that time. And he was made the director of their printing department. So when he got this idea about helping the best as he could by establishing a newspaper, he asked and got his resignation from this particular job. And his mother, who was a wealthy woman, I might add, but without his contract that he had with the insurance company, and he established the Taylor and Son Printing and Publishing Company, which was located in the heart of black Jacksonville [Florida] directly across the street from Old Stanton High School. And I might mention, maybe off the subject here, but Old Stanton High School, which was established back in about 19--I'm sorry, 1870-something, was established by James Weldon Johnson, which you are familiar with. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: In fact, he and his brother were both born there in Jacksonville, Florida. As a matter of fact, they lived around the corner from where I lived in Blackville, if you wanna call it that in Jacksonville, Florida. Okay, back to my father-- Speaker 1: No, that's an interesting story. James Weldon Johnson and his brother, Roseman Johnson-- Speaker 2: That is correct. They wrote the Black Negro Anthem, of course. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Negro National Anthem. I think that--now, there's a story about that, and I don't know if it's passed down in your family. But I believe that Booker T. Washington--the anthem was written to commemorate a visit at the high school by Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That is correct. You got it. Correct. As a matter of fact, we have a museum in Jacksonville, which was established in the Old Ritz Theater, black theater, in my neighborhood, right around the corner from where I lived, was established there. And they have some talking mannequins of both brothers. I mean it's real. It will make you almost cry, as if you're looking at history and look at them. And it's great. And it's been going on now for years. People come from all over the world to see it. Jacksonville is really historical. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: Oh, we didn't finish on my dad, did I? Speaker 1: Now, you told me something else too, that the black community was called Blackville? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, I said that-- Speaker 1: Oh, you just said it. Speaker 2: --(laughter) to identify with you (laughter). Speaker 1: Was there a name for the black community? Speaker 2: Yes, the area in which we lived in was called LaVilla, L--capital L-A-capital-V-I-L-L-A. There were some other sections called Burbidge, Hansome Town, Brooklyn, so all sorts of names. But I lived in LaVilla, and that's where the two brothers were born [James Weldon and Roseman Johnson] in LaVilla, right around the corner from my house. Also in LaVilla, there was the first black hospital called Brewster Hospital. I could almost walk there from my house, about a half a block. It's been torn down now, and was reestablished at a different location. And now, I understand that one has been torn down. I'm not sure of that. Speaker 1: Now, who was Brewster Hospital named after? Speaker 2: Don't know, don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. I was wondering if it was a black doctor or a-- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the first black hospital in Jacksonville? Speaker 2: I suppose, probably in the State of Florida. I would guess that, yeah. Story_ID: 33081 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor, Sr.] again. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he established the 'Florida Tattler' [in Jacksonville, Florida]. That was the name of the newspaper, T-A-T-T-L-E-R. That was named after the 'Broadway Tattler' that was printed in New York. And it was what you call a scandal sheet. The size of it was--the first copy was eight and a half by eleven. I printed it on the printing press in my daddy's print shop. Speaker 1: How old were you when you were-- Speaker 2: Eleven [years old]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I first into, I was called a "printer's devil"--a printer's devil is a person that goes in as entry level and learns to be a printer. And that's where I learned to be a printer. That helped me later on in college which I'll get to later on. But anyway, the first copy was .2 cents and eventually went up to 25 percent [cents] over the years. Now, my father said that if I'm gonna help black people, I've got to get a good motto for this newspaper to start off. And the motto was, "The truth, if it hurts," "the "truth if it hurts." In other words, he was gonna really tell (laughter) the business of all the black people in Jacksonville, Florida. Now, there was a reason for that. He knew that he would sell out every edition if he put scandal sheets in there with an article like, something, "We hear that John Jones and Mary Wynn had a fight last night" or blab, blab, blab, some scandal. Black people will buy that because they like that kind of gossip, but at the same time, he knew that that would make money enough, and he could give the merchants and the city government in Jacksonville hell (unclear), as much as he wanted to because he's got financial support. However, eventually, that ran out. And the paper went out of circulation in 1964. Speaker 1: Now, did--I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, I just was concerned that--now, did running a scandal sheet, well, running a scandal sheet seems like a risky business-- Speaker 2: Oh, no question. He got threatened by the Ku Klux Klan just about every weekend. My mother [Mary Virginia Bell] was always on pins, hoping and wishing and asking God that he comes home, that he would come home safely every night. Absolutely. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: I was afraid. You know, as a matter of fact, (laughter) when I was using the press to print the newspapers, I kept a 32 [caliber gun] in my back pocket, sure did, didn't have a license for it. Although my dad had a license for his, I didn't have a license. Speaker 1: And you were a pre-teen, I guess, right. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And had 32-- Speaker 2: You got that right. Speaker 1: --in your back pocket? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Now, I was also thinking that, you know, it would have been, it was probably risky. There'd be some threats from the black community too if he told all the truth that he heard. Speaker 2: Yeah, only those people that he talked about, like I can give you (laughter) a good example. This guy that worked for "x" name insurance company, beat his girlfriend. He was married, but he beat his girlfriend up. My daddy made a headline out of that. And, you know what? That ex person went around in the city and bought up every one of the newspapers. So we made big money on that weekend (laughter). That was, and that happened all the time. There were a lot of guys that threatened daddy really, but it didn't matter because he was doing something for the community. He was directly responsible for Jacksonville having the first black policeman, having clerks and clerks and jerks, I called them, downtown, ringing the cash registers, working in the grocery stores and so forth. The very first ones. And he had a few white businesses that advertised with him. He could always depend upon 'em, but some of the big, big stores did not. Sears-well, I can't name any. I won't do that. Speaker 1: Well, I mean it's been a long time, you know, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, okay, well, I could tell you. Sears Roebuck, stores like that didn't advertise with him, but some of the smaller white stores downtown did because this is where black people bought their clothes from. Story_ID: 33082 Speaker 1: I can remember when we'd a clothing store, white, right down the street from his office, sold drapes. Do you know what drapes were back in--you don't know. Speaker 2: Drapes, describe 'em. I kind of know, but as I've heard it described-- Speaker 1: That's where they're wide here in the thighs and down the legs, and when they get to the ankles, it's about, oh, maybe 14, 15 inches, and that's kind of tight. That's what a drape was. And that's what we all wore in those days. But we couldn't buy them from anyplace but a white store. But that white store was smart enough to say, hey, I'm gonna advertise in this black newspaper. And it did. Speaker 2: What was the name of the store? Do you remember? Speaker 1: Um-hum. I don't wanna get into that. Speaker 2: Well, it's gone now probably. It probably doesn't exist anymore, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I-- Speaker 2: Well, all they did was sell pants, right? So what (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, there was a little bit of something else about that because I have to throw this part in. Whenever a black bought shoes in Jacksonville, Florida at that time, you couldn't go in the store and try on the shoes. Your mama would have to take a piece of cardboard, put your foot in it, cut out the size of it, and take it in the store. And that's how you bought your shoes. Now, but see, right down the street from the store that I'm talking about that did sell the pants, was a black shoe store. It really wasn't black. A black guy was fronting for him. So that's where we all had to really go and buy our shoes and honor. So that's why I don't wanna mention the other stores up there because--and I won't. Speaker 2: Okay, it's all right. Speaker 1: Okay? And that'll be all right. Speaker 2: Okay, that's all right, that's all right (laughter), okay. I'm enjoying this. You're telling some good, you know--even without the names, these are good stories. So,-- Speaker 1: It was something else, I'll tell you, in those days. We had an unknown person, we called it an unknown person, "The Shadow." And "The Shadow" every week would have something in the newspaper about somebody else, and everybody wanted to buy it. Not only that, "The Shadow" would second guess what the numbers were gonna. You know what the numbers are? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: I think everybody does. And believe it or not, some of those numbers came out. So that gave us more notoriety and more, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay, so he would provide--"The Shadow" provided information and number speculation? Speaker 1: Yes, indeed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes, indeed. Story_ID: 33083 Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I might say here too, that perhaps the newspaper would have been able to really finance itself more because my daddy [Porcher L'Engle Taylor] learned the printing business from his father, which I'm gonna talk about in a minute here. His name was Dennis Taylor, General Dennis Taylor. And I guess he wasn't a general, didn't have any black generals back then. And you're absolutely right. I'll come back and tell you what that meant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyway, his grandfather had a financial interest in The Knights of Pythias, K-N-I-G-H-T-S--oh, you know, you might know about the Knights of Pythias, It's a quasi-secret organization, like the Elks and the Mason. And he had financial interests in that. And they had a five-story hotel. That was kind of unheard of in the South for blacks during that time, right on Ashland Street [Jacksonville, Florida], our main street. Of course, it eventually was torn down. But he had, he owned part of it, so he had a lot of money. He was also a contractor, made big money, my grandfather. So, but, believe it or not, my grandfather could not write his name. He was completely, academically, uneducated. But give him a stick. He'll go out here and rake over the ground and draw a set blueprints that you've never seen before in your life. He did that, and he became a millionaire by doing that. He built hundreds and hundreds of shotgun houses. You know what a shotgun house is? Speaker 1: Yeah, explain it though for those who are watching. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, a shotgun house is normally a five-room house. Each room is right behind one another, and right in between runs a hallway that goes from the front porch to the back porch, just like a shotgun, [phishing sound] straight. Speaker 1: So if you shot a shotgun through there, it wouldn't hit anything. It'd go right out the back door. Speaker 2: Right out, that is correct. That's is correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And now, how did he get into that business? Now, my grandfather was born in North Carolina, between Raleigh and that other city--I've forgotten. Anyway-- Speaker 1: Durham or-- Speaker 2: Durham--. Story_ID: 33084 Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about your [paternal] grandfather, General Dennis Taylor-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were gonna tell me why his name was "General." Speaker 2: Yes, yes. The Knights of Pythias, one of the quasi secret organizations like the blacks have, akin to the Masons and Elks, that type of thing, he was, they had military kinds of rank. And the top rank was general. And my grandfather became a general, and he was called with that title. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what it was all about. Speaker 1: Okay,-- Speaker 2: And speaking of my grandfather, at one time, he and two other black guys owned a whole block of property, right in the heart of where most black people lived in Jacksonville [Florida] in the time, a whole block, not to mention the other ones I told you about that he built. Now, he partnered with his half-brother. His half brother financed the deal and my grandfather did the work with that blueprint on the ground. That's what it was. Now, this half-brother came from North Carolina. He came to Jacksonville before my grandfather. He was an Episcopalian, and he founded the St. Phillips Episcopal Church there in Jacksonville, Florida. This is his half brother, and the church burned down in 1900, the great fire in Jacksonville, that build--that burned just about half of the city. And my grandfather was still in North Carolina at the time. So his half brother sent for him to come back and rebuild the church. My grandfather was Episcopalian also, and a contractor. So he brought him back, and that's how my grandfather got to Jacksonville, met my grandmother [Annie C. Taylor] and married her in I guess, 1919--1870s, 1860s, somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year was the great fire in Jacksonville? Speaker 2: 1900 or 1901, one of the two. Speaker 1: Okay, 1900 or 1901. Speaker 2: Big devastating fire. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33085 Speaker 1: So then, so your [paternal] grandfather [Dennis Taylor] came to town [Jacksonville, Florida] in, during that time, during the time of the fire [approximately 1900 or 1901]? Speaker 2: He was there before that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: He had moved here, and see, well, here again, we're talking about segregation days. He was sent there by the white Episcopal Church--it was a Cathedral there in Jacksonville, to establish a black Episcopalian church for blacks in the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because segregation always produced two things, one for them and one for us, whatever; waste of money, waste of talent, waste of everything. Segregation was crazy, crazy. Speaker 1: Okay, so the white church had to then build two churches 'cause they had to segregate the blacks so that they (laughter)--but they actually helped build the black church? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Well, you know, they were good about that now. They'll build something for you if you--that's the only place you can go. Don't come to mine. The theaters were the same way. We had, over the years, we had one, two--we had the Strand, the Frolic, the Ritz, the Pix. We had about five theaters, black. However, you could go downtown to the theater, to the white theater if you sat up in the crow's nest and don't crack a sound. And you'd better not clap if you see on the screen where some white person had met some sort of death or something or something real comical, and you're not supposed to laugh. You'd better not laugh. That's the absolute truth. If something that was great that they had done on the screen, you'd better laugh, you'd better clap. Florida Theater. I never shall forget, and I'll call that name because the Florida Theater is still there. That's all right, shame on 'em. Speaker 1: So these are the rules. Now, did they spell these rules out to black people or did, were they just kind unwritten rules of going to the show in the white theater? Speaker 2: No, that was legal stuff. All this stuff is by law. That's the only way that the whites could get segregation to work, is the law. I will put you in jail if you disregard the law. I don't care whether it's right or wrong, I'm gonna put you in jail. If the law doesn't do it, then I'm gonna kill you. A lot of my students at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] and at the high schools where I do lectures about four or five times a year, they always ask, say, "Hey, Dr. Taylor, you all put up with all that stuff back in those days?" I say, "Yeah, you know, what? If we had not, if we had not acquiesced to that bad treatment, you wouldn't be here today 'cause there would be no black race. We took it. We swallowed it up, and you ought to be thanking your mother, your grandfather, your great grandfather or whatever that you can remember, 'hey, thank you, thank you for doing what you did', okay." Speaker 1: Okay, but I--that's something new. I never heard that one, though I'm not surprised. This, segregation is crazy, but if you're a black attendee in a white theater, you were forbidden to laugh at white misfortune on the screen? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: That's right. It got down to that, being that bad. Big time. Speaker 1: Now, in the black theaters, did you have the--I know you did, but I just, did you ever go see the live performances of some of the black stars in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Cab Calloway, all the people back during that, those days played in the black theater. But the black theaters were not owned by blacks. They were still owned by whites. They owned the theaters. We didn't. Two theaters, white--black theaters, the whites did appoint two managers. But they were just front men like it was back in those days. They were not the owners. Speaker 1: Okay, so two had black managers. Story_ID: 33086 Speaker 1: Anything else about your [paternal] grandfather [Dennis Taylor]? Speaker 2: Let's see. No, I guess that's about it. Speaker 1: It seems as if-- Speaker 2: When he died, he left my grandmother [Annie C. Taylor] well off. When I say "well off", I mean well off, well, well off. But he failed to really teach her about business matters or how to handle finances and so forth as he did. So consequently, she had to find help. Well, back in those days, where do you go for help? You go to a lawyer, but if you're black, if you go to a black lawyer, you're gonna lose every case in court. So where're you gonna go? Go to a white lawyer. That's what she did, which was the biggest mistake she ever made in the world. He just racked her to death. I can go back to Jacksonville [Florida] today like I did about ten years ago, researching the records. I went to the courthouse and I'm talking about tons and tons of pieces of correspondence, mortgages bought and mortgages sold by this lawyer without my grandmother's knowing about it. They finally caught him. But he had already dissipated all these funds, had already gotten 'em, and dispensed 'em out to his kids, not my grandmother. And the one thing they caught him on, he had to pay only $4,000, $5,000 and that was because of a piece of property that they caught him red handed on. Speaker 1: When did they catch him, when did they catch him? Was this later, much later on in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, much later on, yes. My grandmother died in 1959. This probably happened about--my grandfather died in 1925 so somewhere in between those two dates. And, you know, I don't mind calling his name too, and I'm gonna call it. The reason I'm gonna call it is because--should I say this or not? Speaker 1: Yes. You-- Speaker 2: Nah, okay, I'm gonna put it this way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And without calling his name. My grandmother and my father thought so much of him and his law firm that that's how I got my name, and that's how my father got his name. Now, you figure out the rest of that, all right. Speaker 1: Okay, his name was Porcher (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I would guess his name was-- Speaker 2: Porcher was in his name, let me put it that way. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: It might have been just a coincidence, okay. Whatever. Speaker 1: We'll leave it to the viewers to determine-- Speaker 2: Because some of the people, his descendents are still living. In fact, my son contacted one of his great, great grand kids, not long ago. But that's a new story. Speaker 1: It's an interesting story and a sad one, you know, too. So-- Speaker 2: I have a picture of my grandfather out there. I'll show it to you. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Story_ID: 33087 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Porcher L'Engle Taylor, Sr.], did he go to college? Speaker 2: My father went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and that's how I got to Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After that, he took a law course, correspondence course from La Salle University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], in law. Speaker 1: Now, this is a correspondence course, you said. Speaker 2: That one was. Tuskegee, now, you got to remember, he finished in 1922. That was called the George Washington Carver Class, 1922. And Tuskegee then was not at the college level, at the collegiate level. And there were maybe one or maybe one or two black schools that were. They were all called-- Speaker 1: Institutes. Speaker 2: That too, but another part of it. They were--I'll have to come back to that. I'll think of that. Speaker 1: I know the teachers schools were referred to as normal schools. Speaker 2: Normal, that's the word. Speaker 1: Is that it? Okay. Speaker 2: It was Tuskegee Normal Institute. TNI at that time. You got it right. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: You're welcome. I'll take all the credit (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) In fact, Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] was that too. That school has changed names three or four times. Speaker 1: Which one is that? Speaker 2: Virginia State University, where I was vice president, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, so, okay, now, so he took--so the Class of 1922 was called the George Washington Carver-- Speaker 2: Carver Class, that's right. Speaker 1: --Class. Speaker 2: And you know who [George Washington] Carver was, of course? Speaker 1: Yes, sir, now, he was a great-- Speaker 2: I got a chance to see him before he died in 1941. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Got a chance to see him. Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna hold that story until we get to you in school, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --tell us about why your father's class was called the George Washington Carver Class? Speaker 2: I don't think I know the answer to that. I suppose he might have sponsored the class. He might have. I don't know. I do have, I have a picture of it, I have. That's about all I've got. Speaker 1: Well, it's a good, it's good to know that 'cause somebody can take this clue and find out. But it had something to do with some activity of George Washington Carver who was teaching at the school then, right? Speaker 2: At that time. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: All right, so we'll look that up, but that's good for us to know. Speaker 2: You probably could go back to his museum. His museum is right there on campus and get those answers. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, my first cousin was his Number Two assistant. Speaker 1: Oh, what was his name? Speaker 2: Ralph Stewart. He's dead now, of course, and he was a Tuskegee grad also. And he was Number Two assistant. His first assistant was named Curtis from Detroit [Michigan]. He's dead also. What is the other thing about his- - Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said that your father, now, so your father was a graduate of Tuskegee Institute, and he also took a La Salle University correspondence course-- Speaker 2: Correspondence course. Speaker 1: --in law? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, this is something that today, people don't really have that level of correspondence school where they--I think now they're trying to offer a lot of things online, right-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: --which is similar to the correspondence school model. But there were legitimate lawyers that had correspondence school degrees, right? Speaker 2: I (unclear) he did, I thought, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There were others, I've heard of others, others too who would, actually had passed the bar and practiced law with a correspondence school degree. Speaker 2: My father didn't go that far now. Speaker 1: He didn't, okay. Speaker 2: No, no, he did not get a degree there, no. Speaker 1: I know there was a fellow named McIntosh in Little Rock [Arkansas] that did-- Speaker 2: McIntosh, I know that name. Speaker 1: Yeah, so in Little Rock, Arkansas. He was a lawyer, tried a case before the Arkansas Supreme Court with a correspondence school degree, American Correspondence College of Law or something like that. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: But, okay. Story_ID: 33088 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Mary Virginia Bell and Porcher L'Engle Taylor] met? Speaker 2: How my parents what? Speaker 1: Met, how they met? Speaker 2: Met? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. Not that they related it to us, to us kids. My big sister probably knows. I don't. Speaker 1: Because I wondered if they met at church or they met in some other-- Speaker 2: Oh, it couldn't have, it could not have been in church because my mother was a Methodist, and my daddy was Episcopalian. As a matter of fact, that's one thing I'd like to tell parents today. Try to get your kids to belong to the same church as both parents. It makes a big difference. Now, we were torn between going to Sunday school to my mother's church or to my dad's church. We ended up going to his church mostly because he was the superintendent for about a hundred years or whatever. But I would encourage them to try to have the same religious orientation. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33089 Speaker 1: All right, so now when you think about your parents' [Mary Virginia Bell and Porcher L'Engle Taylor] personalities, their dispositions, their temperaments, their hobbies, their interests, their talents, their looks, how they walked and talked, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I have some of both of them in me. I walk like my dad. I talk like my dad. I have the giving spirit from my mama. She would give the shirt off her back. Well, that's a man--blouse off her back (laughter) to anybody. And, of course, back in those days, you had a lot of poor black people going from door to door, begging. And I mean my mother would let anyone in the house, feed them and the whole nine yards. The word got around, hey, Ms. Mary will, you know, take care of you. And our house got to be almost like a cafe, a free cafe almost. But I appreciated that, and you could do that in those days. You couldn't, you can't let a stranger in your house today (laughter). That just wouldn't work. And I have her smile. I definitely have her smile. A lot of people have told me that. And I got, as I told you before, I got a religious orientation from both of them, although it was two different religions. Speaker 1: Now, is it, I'm thinking, I'm sort of remembering from the research that your mother actually set up a separate room to feed people that she--was that you? Speaker 2: The kitchen. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's where everybody ate. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, in the kitchen, back in those days-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you had a cabinet. You had a wood stove, a wood stove, big time, and a little table in the corner. That was your kitchen. That's where you cooked, and that's where you ate. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 33090 Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Two sisters. One is deceased. Speaker 1: Okay, so can you list all, you and your siblings in order that they--that you come into the world? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And name everybody. Speaker 2: Yes, my older sister, Virginia, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, Anita, A-N-I-T-A, Taylor, of course, at that time. She's a Williams now. Speaker 1: And then you? Speaker 2: Me, and then my younger sister, Betty, B-E-T-T-Y, middle name Ruth, R- U-T-H. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Taylor at the time, of course, Belton. She died. She was on kidney, what do you call that machine, kidney? Speaker 1: Yeah, the dialysis. Speaker 2: Dialysis machine, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33091 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Chuckle) Lots of 'em. Speaker 1: Well, the earliest one? Speaker 2: Oh, the earliest one? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I can remember when I was seven years old. That was eighty years ago. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Well, one big incident that happened in my life. You know, back in those days, there were very few parks that black kids could go to, very few. So you had to entertain yourself in your own backyard. So you and your neighbors would get together, young people your age, and play stick ball or play a little touch football or whatever. And one of the good activities was we would take a long board about fifteen feet long, I guess, and drive a stake in the ground, a post, called a fulcrum, nail that board to the fulcrum, and make a seesaw out of it. And, you know, we did this for a long period of time. So one of my neighbors came over and said, hey, man, let's go seesawing. I'm not so sure he didn't have some plan in mind. I don't know. But anyway we got on the seesaw. And he pressed down on his end. Therefore, my end went up, of course. And he jumped off of his end. What do you think happened? My end came down, and it just so happened, there was a nail, old rusty nail on the inside of the board. And I've got a scar in my head to this day about eight inches long, about thirty-some stitches. And I never shall forget--that's the earliest memory I had. I almost bled to death. Had not been for a neighbor, I would have. My parents [Mary Virginia Bell and Procher L'Engle Taylor] weren't home at the time. So my neighbor, my neighbor took me to the doctor, who was a doctor in our family. And, you know, I said that part about the neighbor. In those days, neighbors took care of one another. You could leave your door open at night. You could leave your windows open in your house. Nobody would dare think about going in there, definitely not. And it's not that way anymore. Speaker 1: Yeah, people don't know their neighbors like they used to. Speaker 2: That's true, true, don't even know who lives next door to you, won't speak to one another. Story_ID: 33092 Speaker 1: So, well, can you describe, you told us the name of the community you lived in [in Jacksonville, Florida], right? It was-- Speaker 2: LaVilla. Speaker 1: Right, LaVilla. Can you describe where you lived, the house you lived in, and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights and smells, okay. As I indicated in my book--did I give you a copy of my book? I will before you leave from here. I've got about a 300-page book that I wrote about Jacksonville in those days. Sights. Everywhere you went, no matter where in Jacksonville, Florida, your neighborhood or some other neighborhood which you couldn't go into unless you were a maid or a cook, they were reminders to you of how inferior you felt. And if any young black kid that came along during my period of time, in this country--not in the country, but in the South. I don't know about the rest of the country, in the South, if they didn't feel as if they were inferior, they're not telling the truth because you had everyday reminders. Back in those days, they had school buses, bussing kids, but not black kids. They were bussing only white kids. White kids get on the bus, pass by you walking to your school, which might be two to five miles away, call you the "N" word and all that kind of crazy stuff. So, but everywhere you went--you go downtown. You go into a store. Every store had a sign that said, "White or Colored"--back in those days, we were called "colored", not "blacks,"--water fountains. So one day I asked my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor], I said, "Dad, is there some difference in the taste of black water, I mean colored water and white water?" He said, no, son. No, he didn't say no. He wanted to say no, but because he didn't want me to go in there testing it because he knew I would immediately be put in jail if I did. But I tested it anyway 'cause I really believed there was a difference, like a fool. And I, but I was--luckily, I was not caught, and I was not put in jail for it. Other signs. Trash pickup. There was an odor in Jacksonville, seven days a week in the atmosphere and it came from a pulp mill. And that pulp mill spout out all this odor over a period of time. I've forgotten exactly when that stopped. I don't quite remember. But that fell over on white neighborhoods as well as black neighborhoods. Now, that part, they couldn't help, but if they could have had that directed over the black neighborhood only, they would have. There's no question about that. Picking up the trash, I can see this horse pulling this wagon, horse wagon, picking up trash on my street, West Union Street, Jacksonville, Florida, which was dirt during that time. And the motorized trucks going to the white neighborhoods picking up trash. Can you imagine a horse and a long box-like structure, picking up trash, very slowly, sometimes getting there, other times not getting there at all, and that trash staying out there in the street. It got so bad until people started burying trash in their yards. If you can go and dig up in my neighborhood, in particular, you will find a whole lot of artifacts going way, way back during the days because that's where they buried the trash. Speaker 1: It'd be a treasure for an archeologist now. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. That was something else. I can see myself now burying trash, even storing it up under your house, that kind of stuff. Bad stuff, bad stuff. Other kind of sights--and, of course, everywhere you went, the white and colored signs were up, the bathroom. And, of course, you couldn't go to the theaters unless you sat upstairs in the Florida Theater. And that was the whole atmosphere at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a sense that maybe it was not so bad some place else, I mean from the movies or the newspapers or the magazines, did you have a sense that if you weren't down there, you would be treated better? Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. I thought crossing the Mason-Dixon Line--I thought once you got across that, things would be all right, but my Northern friends said, no, that's not true at all. We still have it up here also. But it's not legalized. That was the big difference in the South. The law said you couldn't do this. The law said you couldn't do this, sit here, drink here or whatever. Up North, the custom, I suppose, was the name of the game, not the law. Story_ID: 33093 Speaker 1: Tell me about school. Now, where did you, what was your first school? What was the name of it? Speaker 2: It was named Hall's Kindergarten [Jacksonville, Florida]. It was conducted by Mrs. Hall. I don't know her first name. She's dead now, of course. It was founded in the basement of St. Phillips Episcopal Church, the church I told you about earlier, down in the basement. I still have the seat that I sat in. I still have it. I'm keeping that for posterity. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were able to get the seat that you actually sat in. So you have it at home now? Speaker 2: That is--I have, my sister [Virginia Anita Williams] has it in Jacksonville, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's got it there, saving it for me. This school was, was not unique because all black schools were that way back in those days. She taught first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth grade, all in one room, believe it or not, all in one room. How you can teach a sixth grade kid and a first-grade kid in the same room was, you know, unbelievable. But we learned evidently. We learned. Story_ID: 33094 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about school. Now, what was your first grade school, the name of the grade school where you started, elementary school? Speaker 2: Stanton High School [Jacksonville, Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay, so Stanton High School covered all the grades? Speaker 2: At that time. Speaker 1: Yes, okay, well, that's not unusual. I understand. Speaker 2: But they changed. Well, segregation had something--integration had something to do with it. Segregation rather had something to do with that. I went to Stanton in the second, third and fourth grades. Speaker 1: Second-- Speaker 2: And I wasn't supposed to go there because in those days--well, I suppose it's still true today. You had to live in a certain district to go to a certain high, school. And I didn't, but I went where, to my grandmother's, and I used her address. Speaker 1: Okay, so Stanton was near your grandmother's house? Speaker 2: Right around the corner. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me, so Stanton, I'm thinking it was named for Edwin M. Stanton who was the Secretary of State under Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], right? Speaker 2: That's correct. That's exactly correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well, so did you go to first grade at the--kindergarten or what? Speaker 2: No, I went first, second and third at Stanton. Speaker 1: Okay, first, second and third. Speaker 2: Kindergarten at Hall's School. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Okay, first second-- Speaker 2: And third grades. Speaker 1: Third, okay. And-- Speaker 2: And part of fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because then they started tightening up on locations. You're going to the wrong school, boy, you know. So I had to change schools. I went to Old LaVilla School in fourth grade, Old LaVilla. Speaker 1: Old LaVilla School, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hum, in LaVilla district where I lived. See, I didn't live up there where my grandmother lived. There's a story-- Speaker 1: So that was-- Speaker 2: --about that school. I didn't stay very long because about the third or fourth day I went to school, some bully grabbed me out there on the field. And he beat my hind part and took my little lunch money away from me, never shall forget it. Back in those days, your parents would give you ten cents, twenty cents, you know, buy your lunch and so forth. And they would tie it in a handkerchief, and you kept that tied around your finger so you wouldn't lose it. So this dude almost pulled my finger off and took my money (laughter). And my mama [Mary Virginia Bell] said, no, son, we're taking you out of that school. And at that time, a new school had been established called New LaVilla, which was right around the corner from Old LaVilla. Speaker 1: Okay, so you finished the fourth grade at New LaVilla? Speaker 2: Didn't quite finish it there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I continued at this New LaVilla School, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth at that one school. That school is a historical figure right now, still standing, partially, partially. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ninth grade, I went to Davis Street School. That was way, way on the other side of town. Speaker 1: Okay, did you finish high school there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's just the ninth grade? Speaker 2: Right, ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to Stanton High School, tenth, eleventh and twelfth grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you see now how the whole system was all screwed up because of the segregation thing. You couldn't go to white schools, period. Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go back to grade school. First, at Stanton High School, now, what kind of--now, you gave us some indication you were kind of a young guy that got into some mischief, you know, right? Speaker 2: Like we all did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of my comrades, I mean clean kind of hanky panky, not shooting or cutting or hurting anybody, fighting and all that kind of stuff. If we ever did fight, which was very, very seldom, you did it with your fists. And if that young man beat you up, then you get up and go on about your business, and you, you know, that was it. There was no revenge, like you wait till I go home and come back with a weapon or something. It's not, wasn't like that at all. So it was clean kinds of stuff, nothing to hurt anybody. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: I really wanna clear that up because I, kids that came along during my period of time were completely, differently oriented than the kids today, completely. Speaker 1: Okay, was the worst thing you did, was that digging the hole and putting a newspaper across it and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess that was, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's something that--how old were you when you did that? Speaker 2: About eight [years old], about eight or nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, now, I've had some real, something beyond that devilish kind of conduct toward white people. I've seen some guys that I would like to just punch in the face. But I knew if I did, every white within hollering distance of that guy would come to his aid. So I, I said, nah, I can't whip everybody, so I left it alone. And a lot of our black kids had that feeling also. They could do nothing about that because wherever it was, whenever it was or whatever, on a bus. If you decide to sit on the front instead of the back, that bus driver gonna go straight to the police station, and you're gonna go to jail. If he doesn't do that, then the other whites on the bus gonna help him put you off the bus. So it was sort of a, sort of a, something between whites in those days that they cooperated. And I understand that happened all over the South, just that way. Bad stuff, but you know what? It's not that way anymore, thank God. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33095 Speaker 1: All right, so what did you like to do when you were growing up, when you were a little kid in grade school [in Jacksonville, Florida]? Speaker 2: I liked, I love sports. I love sports, tag football, stickball, we called the big game. You get a tennis ball, then cut off a broomstick, and that's all you needed to play stickball with, that kind of stuff. And it paid off for me because I lettered in high school. I also--in the Hall of Fame at Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: For baseball? Speaker 2: Football. Speaker 1: Football, okay, all right. Yeah, now, you were, yeah, you were a football, yeah, you played at Tuskegee, right, and did you play in high school too? Speaker 2: Um-hum, played high school too. Speaker 1: And you were a running back, right? You were-- Speaker 2: Full back. Speaker 1: Full back. Speaker 2: Blocking back, in those days. I don't know what they call a blocking back today. They've got so many new terms. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let me tell you a funny thing about that. In those days, I never used a brand new book in high school. All the books were second hand. They came from the high schools, everything second hand, even the uniforms that we had playing football were second hand, hand-me-downs from the white schools. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, were your uniforms kind of out of date? I mean did you have-- Speaker 2: Oh, they were all mismatched. You'd be out on the field (laughter). The referee couldn't tell which team you were on even (laughter). You weren't dressed like you would make it over there. It was kind of funny. Speaker 1: So you were dressed with the remnants of all the white schools-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that they could collect? Speaker 2: That is correct. And the books, and the books. As a matter of fact, they came up with a cover, some company wanted to advertise their product would print these free for the city. And they would wrap those second-hand books, coming to us as if they were new. But they were not, of course. That was crazy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Not early on. Later, English, because I wanted to be able to speak intelligently later on. When I was coming up, it really didn't matter. But English was at that time. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Now, if I--I used to be good in business arithmetic. In fact, I made all As in that. But I just took a liking to it, and I just believed in a lot of numbers. Story_ID: 33096 Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of reading when you were coming up? Did you like to read? Speaker 2: Well, in high school, you had to make book reports every year. You had to read at least three books every year. At that time, I read voraciously. The last book I read, I remember, a novel, was 'Razor's Edge'. That was the very last book, and that was put out by a guy named Roberson (unclear), I believe, and that's been years ago. I have not done much reading since that time academically. But in terms of all the service schools that I've done to, the [U.S.] Army War College, the Commanding General Staff College, all these other colleges that we'll talk about later, I read every piece of information I could get about those. And I loved to read the funny papers back in those days. I used to like to read 'Little Orphan Annie', 'Dick Tracey', 'Andy Gump', and all these characters which you don't have today. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother--I mean did your mother [Mary Virginia Bell] and father [Porcher L'Engle Taylor] bring a lot of newspapers and magazines into the home? Did they subscribe to-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Remember, now, my daddy was in the publication business. So he needed to do that kind of, yeah. But my mother liked to read. She was a terrific reader, good stuff, good stuff. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the papers? Did you get the 'Afro-American' from-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, 'Afro-American' when it was printed in Norfolk, Virginia. We got part of the 'Chicago Defender' out of Chicago, the 'Pittsburgh Courier'. That was the big one, the 'Pittsburgh Courier', and almost a local paper in Albany, Georgia, the 'Albany Enterprise'. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, my daddy had a short of an exchange relationship with these newspapers. If you send me yours, I'll send you mine for free of charge. And that happened. Speaker 1: Okay. There's one out of Norfolk. Do you remember the 'Journal and Guide' from Norfolk? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, sure do. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: There was one other, the 'Atlanta Daily World'. That was the only black daily paper that we had back in those days. I'm not so sure we have any today. Are you familiar with one? Speaker 1: A daily today? Speaker 2: A daily black paper. I'm not. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, the 'Defender' [Chicago Defender] was, but the 'Defender' ceased publication so that's, I mean it ceased being a daily. It's just like three days a week now. It's every other day, and the weekend. Speaker 2: Until 'Ebony Magazine' came on, John Johnson, who founded that newspaper--you know, as a matter of fact, he was trying to get capital to start that paper. And my dad started to give him $5,000. And I wish he had, but he never did, to help him get it started. But, and, you know that's history now. It's a great publication. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33097 Speaker 1: How old were you when you started helping your father [Porcher L'Engle Taylor. Sr.] in the printing business? Speaker 2: Ten [years old]. Speaker 1: Ten, okay. Speaker 2: Ten and eleven, one of those. Speaker 1: All right, okay, and so did you spend a lot of time working in the print shop? Speaker 2: Um-hum, I wanted to learn the trade. Speaker 1: And it's interesting your father named the printing business after himself "and son." Speaker 2: That's right, and then he put my name on editorial pages as circulation manager, which I was, definitely so. I might tell you one other thing about the newspaper. To my knowledge, and I'm sure I'm right about this, there was no such thing back in those days as a white man worked for a colored man. My dad hired two printers, white. I remember their names to this day, Bob Holliday and Shorty Long. He hired them because the union that they belonged to, which blacks couldn't belong to in those days, they refused to join it. But they had to work. So my daddy hired both of 'em and both of 'em turned out to be the best, some of the best employees he's ever had. And I learned a lot from both of them, a lot from them. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had two white guys doing the printing, and he had you as a circulation manager. And you also were the printer's devil, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: Until I got my wings. It didn't take long. It took me about three or four years to really completely learn the trade. Speaker 1: So when you learn the trade, you get your wings, that's what they call it? Speaker 2: (Unclear) When you get anything, you call it getting your wings. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Okay, so you told us some stories about the paper already. They were really good stories. Do you have any more stories about the paper? Speaker 2: No, I guess that was it. Speaker 1: How long did it last? Speaker 2: From 1934 to 1964. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the year my father died. Speaker 1: Okay, so the paper-- Speaker 2: And you know, I might tell you, I was a major in the [U.S.] Army at the time. I should have resigned my commission and taken over, I should have taken over that newspaper. But it just, you know, all of the assets, people stole the type, the paper and everything. And my sister, of course, she wasn't, didn't know anything about the business. She couldn't do it. I should have really gotten out. I regret that to this day, that I did not. Speaker 1: Okay. So your father passed in '64 [1964], did--what were the circumstances? Had he been sick for a long time or-- Speaker 2: Prostate cancer-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which I have now. Speaker 1: Okay, they say half the people we know have it and don't know it. Speaker 2: That's right. You live long enough, the doc say you're gonna get it. I had it twenty years ago. It's still with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33098 Speaker 1: In grade school, were there any favorite teachers. Did you have a favorite teacher in grade school? Speaker 2: Oh, quite a few, quite a few. In fact, just about all of them, because I call them, in my book, "unsung heroes" because those were the ones that were really and truly contributing more to what we're all about than anybody during that period of time. The teachers and the preachers and the boy scout, scoutmasters. Those three people stand out in my mind, three organizations that is. They really contributed, big time stuff. So I would say just about every teacher I had was totally outstanding. Some of 'em were real disciplinarians. Others were not, but it didn't make any difference. They put some knowledge in your head, absolutely. And I thank them. And particularly, the scoutmaster, oh, boy, I'm telling you. Speaker 1: So you were in the Boy Scouts when you were growing up? Speaker 2: That's right. I made Eagle Boy Scout in 1941. I was the second batch of black Eagle scouts during that period of time. There were about twelve that came in before me in the 1930s. Before that time, there were no Boy Scouts at all in Jacksonville, Florida. In fact, the guy who organized the scouts in Florida was a man named Floyd Dwight--not Floyd Dwight, David Dwight. He's dead now. And he was the first African American to get the Silver Beaver, if you're familiar with that award. Speaker 1: Now, what is the Silver Beaver? Speaker 2: That's the highest award a civilian can get in the Boy Scouts. As far as the scout himself, the highest level is the Eagle Scout, and higher than that is the Distinguished Eagle Scout. There's a difference between the two. And I became an Eagle Scout in 1941, and fifty-four years later, I became a Distinguished Eagle Scout. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To attain that rank, you got have been an Eagle Scout for twenty-five years, a minimum twenty-five years. And, of course, I was an Eagle Scout, when I got it, it was seventy-some years almost to make Distinguished and contribution to the community, big time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did the scout troop meet at the church or at the-- Speaker 2: Always at the church. All of our troops were sponsored by churches and completely segregated. And as far as it is today, in that regard, it's still segregated. The black churches and white churches are still separate. That's the most segregated hour in the country, eleven o'clock on Sunday in churches. Speaker 1: Interesting. And so the Episcopal church housed the Boy Scout troop. Did you have-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, St. Phillips did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got my scouting from Zion AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church. Speaker 1: Okay, Zion AME. Speaker 2: In Jacksonville [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll tell you, the Boy Scouts are something else. You pick up a Boy Scout manual and you read that sucker through and through and try to get those merit badges. Back in my time, there were only a hundred and one [101] merit badges. Now, there're much more than that. And you only needed twenty-four to make Eagle Scout. And let me tell you, you learn things about the world. You learn things about yourself. You learn things about religion, the whole nine yards. And what makes me so mad today is they're trying to destroy that image with the Boy Scouts because a few of the leaders have done the wrong thing with some of the guys sexually, just a few, not a heck of a lot. And they're trying to kill it. They can't do it. The Boy Scouts' boy is something else. I can't give it more praise than that. Story_ID: 33099 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school. Now, Stanton High School, when you were in school, who was the principal? Speaker 2: Professor F. J. Anderson, Floyd J. Anderson. He's dead now, of course. And then there was Charles Brooks. He's dead also. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite teacher in high school? Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs. Griffin. She's dead, of course. Speaker 1: What did she teach? Speaker 2: English. She's proper, spoke the King's English perfectly, and she taught it that way. That's when I mentioned to her that I became interested then in English, away from business arithmetic. She was good. Speaker 1: So this is, okay. So when you started high school in 1938, is that about right? Speaker 2: I finished in '43 [1943] so it must have been what-- Speaker 1: '43 [1943], okay. Speaker 2: --forty [1940]-- Speaker 1: '39 [1939]. Speaker 2: '39, [1939]. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1939. The country was not at war yet in '39 [1939]. It was still in the [Great] Depression, though, right? Speaker 2: That's true, that's true. Speaker 1: Okay, the president was Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And did you see any evidence of the New Deal in Florida in Jacksonville? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can see the, some of the results today. They built bridges. They built parks, particularly, the parks. Just about every park in the South now has the footprint of, the fingerprints on it somewhere in there. And I'm sure it was segregation, it was segregated also. It was patterned after the [U.S.] Army, and I think the guys made thirty, thirty dollars a month and twenty-five dollars of that--no, wait a minute. I've forgotten the split, but their parents got some of that. And that helped to boost the economy during that period of time, giving people work to do. And they had Army-type uniforms and the whole bit. I really wanted to be one of 'em, but my parents [Mary Virginia Bell and Porcher L'Engle Taylor] wouldn't let me. So I, you know, I didn't. Speaker 1: Was that the youth component-- Speaker 2: CC Camp, Civilian Conservation Corp-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: CCC. That was one of his programs [President Franklin D. Roosevelt], one of the New Deal programs. Now, he also had the NYA, National Youth Administration program. Also, the WPA, Works Progress Administration. All of these gave work to help the economy. Without it, I don't believe we would have gotten over the mess that Hoover left [President Herbert Hoover]. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I was only--don't you fill in names there. Speaker 1: Okay, I don't think there's any danger now (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Big time. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, did you take up any leadership roles in high school? Did you run for class office or anything or-- Speaker 2: Not class offices because I didn't have time. I was playing football and practice was just about a hundred percent effort there. No, I did join some organizations. The High Y, for instance, I joined that. Speaker 1: Now, did you play any instruments? Speaker 2: No, I wish I did. That's another story. When I was five years old, six years old, my mother made my sister and I take piano lessons, twenty-five cents a whip. And after a while, the boys at school started calling, "Oh, sissy, sissy, sissy, playing the piano." So I quit, like an idiot, I quit. I wish, I wish I could sit down today and just play--can't do it. I got out, I quit. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, how were your grades in high school? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: How were your grades? What kind of grades were you making? Speaker 2: Very good, weren't excellent or bad, but somewhere within (unclear) very good. Speaker 1: So you're what, As and Bs, Bs and Cs, what? Speaker 2: Oh, As and Bs. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I made, in ninth grade, I made an E, the only E I've ever made and it was in English because one of the teachers--I won't call his name, he always said, "All right, I got mine, you got to get yours." (Laughter) That was prevalent back in my day. And I flunked the path. I don't think I really flunked. I don't think he really liked me. I don't know. But I did that. I came back later on and it ended up being a C minus later on, so I passed. I didn't flunk. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I haven't ever flunked a grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 33100 Speaker 1: Did Stanton [High School, Jacksonville, Florida] have a prom and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep, and a matter of fact, my senior prom, I think was 1942, and the war [World War II] was going on, and, you know, they had blackouts. So we almost didn't have a prom. But we did, didn't have as much fun as anybody else because the lights went out and you had to go home and go to bed. Speaker 1: How did you feel about the war? Now, the war, the U.S. entered the war in December of 1941, right? Now, this is, how did you feel about the war, and how did most black people your age feel about the war? Speaker 2: December 7, 1941, I was on the floor in my living room, listening to the radio. I had sprained my ankle playing football just before that. So I was on the floor, and I heard about Pearl Harbor being attacked. So I asked my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor], "Dad, Pearl Harbor, what's that and where is it?" And he told me. And he said, we will probably be at war very shortly, knowing [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt. He said, we will be at war. And I said, well, you know what, dad, I wanna go. See, they already had prescription already. I wasn't old enough. I was only seventeen [years old] then, going on eighteen. I needed to get into the war. And, of course, my mama [Mary Virginia Bell] said, no, because your parents had to sign if you were under eighteen years of age to go. So later on, after I finished high school, the thought came back to me again that I really wanted to go into the [U.S.] Navy. My dad said, "No, son, you're not going to the Navy. You're going to my school, Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And that's where you're gonna go." Well, back in those days, you paid attention to what your parents told you to do. So I, you know, I, so I really had no choice. That's where I was gonna go. I went up there and looked around the campus. I liked it, and I told dad, said, you know, dad, you know I got a scholarship now to go to Florida A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [Tallahassee, Florida], FAMU, it was called at that time--FAMC, I'm sorry, Florida Agriculture and Mechanical College in Tallahassee, Florida. Now, if you've ever heard of the legendary Jay Gaither, the coach there, probably you haven't. But if you had, he gave me a scholarship. But dad said, no, you're going to my school. So this Navy recruiter came by and talked to my parents, talked to me and said, you know what, the Navy is different now. I said, different, said, I don't believe that. You know, the Navy, the only thing a black or a Mexican or Asiatic, or any foreign person, citizen can do in the Navy is to wash dishes and take care of the officers, wash their clothes, shine their shoes, do everything for them. He said, no, no, no. It's changing now. I said, how is it changing? He said, well, at Great Lakes, Illinois, they have a program going on. And you can go there, you finish boot camp in sixteen weeks. Then you go to a service school for sixteen more weeks, and in that service school, you can learn to be a pharmacist (unclear) mate or a gunner's mate, a boson's mate, a signalman, a quarter master, a radar man, a radio mech--he named all these things that the white kids were being used for. I said, oh, that sounds pretty good. And when he said that, he recruited some boys from Jacksonville [Florida]. Some of those same guys that finished high school with me that were going to Tuskegee or going to Florida A and M, and they went. So I said, hell, I got to go. So that's how I got to Great Lakes, and that's another story we'll talk about later. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33101 Speaker 1: You went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], right, first? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: You went to Tuskegee, and did you play football at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: I left, right. Speaker 1: --all right. Speaker 2: This is where I first came in contact with Tuskegee Airmen. And I was taught, I got in the Reserve Officers' Training Program [ROTC], and I was instructed and taught by Tuskegee Airmen, guys just coming back from the war [World War II] in the '40s [1940s]. And so I said, hey, this is pretty good. I said, I'm going to the [U.S.] Navy now, but I'll be back Tuskegee Airmen. And when I get back, I'm gonna join up with you. And, of course, I did and became a life member of the Tuskegee Airmen and also I established a chapter, founded a chapter of Tuskegee Airmen, Incorporated in Petersburg, Virginia, back in 2004. And-- Speaker 1: But I just wanna get the-- Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: --everything in order here. So you went to Tuskegee first. This was right after high school [Stanton High School, Jacksonville, Florida]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And you graduated from high school in 1943? Speaker 2: Three [1943], right. Speaker 1: All right, so this is 1943. You start Tuskegee, and you stayed at Tuskegee how long? Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't enroll. I said, I went up there-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --to check out because of the football, number one, to check it out. So I went to, I saw Spring practice up there during that time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm getting it right, okay-- Speaker 2: I didn't enroll, no. Speaker 1: --so you didn't really go to school then. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That's when you went back and joined the Navy? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you scouted it out and then you said, I'll be back and (laughter) and went and joined the Navy, okay. Speaker 2: That's right. I intended to come back because I liked what I saw on the field out there. My cousin, as I told you, was Carver's [George Washington Carver] first assistant. So I wanted to get back there because he was there. And my other cousin, first cousin, was playing on the football team. So I was kind of oriented right at the very beginning. Story_ID: 33102 Speaker 1: Okay, so you joined the [U.S.] Navy. Was that in 1943 as well? Speaker 2: '43 [1943], that is correct. Speaker 1: All right, all right. So 1943, you're in the Navy, and, you know, all the people I interview say that in the Navy, they try to make black people clean up the kitchen and cook. Speaker 2: That's what they did. That's, steward's mates they were called, steward's mates. Speaker 1: But you had a different deal, right, when you joined? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: So did the Navy live up to what they told you? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You want me to talk about that part now or later? Speaker 1: Yes, sir, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, okay. So I went to Great Lakes [Illinois], and I took the sixteen weeks of basic training, graduated, became a Seaman First Class, when I graduated. Then I was selected--now the competition was real strong because I told you before that, hey, you could be whatever you were able to be. So, I was fortunate being a high school graduate. Back in those days, that stood high. It doesn't mean that much today, I don't guess. But anyway, I was selected to be, to go to the Signalman/Quartermaster school at Great Lakes. I finished that course, I finished in the top 10 percent, and by doing so, I was immediately promoted to Petty Officer, Third Class. The rank below that is Seaman First Class. So I was promoted to the next rank. And what helped me in that school was my Boy Scout days. See, being a signalman, you deal with flags, semi-fold, dit dot dit, Morse Code. Hell, I learned that back in the boy, my Boy Scout days. We used to talk to the Coast Guard ships going up and down the St. John's River, all that kind of (unclear). Anyway, and so that helped me. I could have taught the class. Of course, I didn't. And, of course, I graduated, and then I'll go over the rest of it whenever you're ready for it, where I went and what I did. Speaker 1: We're ready now. Speaker 2: Is it time for it now? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's time for it now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So this is, the war [World War II] is raging-- Speaker 2: Big time. Speaker 1: --and this is 1944 by now or-- Speaker 2: '44 [1944], right, the first part of '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: All right, it's the tail end of the war, and so you're-- Speaker 2: Well, that wasn't no tail end. '45 [1945] was the tail end, when it ended. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So it was right in the middle then? Speaker 2: They were fighting like hell in '44 [1944] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right, my first duty assignment was Galveston, Texas at the U.S. Naval Frontier Base. Speaker 1: Now, I hate to say it, but it sounds like trouble, you know-- Speaker 2: You got it, babe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was where the Galveston Bay empties in to the Gulf of Mexico and why do we have a base there? We had a base there to protect the frontier. Anything out in the Gulf of Mexico, we, it was steaming with German subs which people don't even know about to this day, a lot of enemy ships. And our job, of course, was to, on the signal tower, to signal these ships and, I can tell you the exact procedure. You sent INT, dit, dit, dah, dit, dah. INT meant interrogatory. You were asking that ship, who the hell are you? Are you friendly of foe? Just in those three little letters. And they would go to a signal book, if they were friendly. And that signal book would give them the right procedure to answer, "Yes, I'm so and so, blah, blah, blah, blah. My flag hoist, what I'm flying gives my call sign." Okay, now, if you give 'em INT, INT and they don't respond or they respond wrong, you blow 'em out of the water. You've got a coastal artillery unit right there stationed close to you. All you've got to do is say, hey, that boy's not one of us. And they'll blast 'em right out of the water, no questions asked. That was our job. Story_ID: 33103 Speaker 1: Okay, now, were any black guys doing that kind of a thing [signalmen; U.S. Navy; Galveston, Texas at the U.S. Naval Frontier Base]? There were seven of us that finished the course at Great Lakes [Illinois], and we were all sent to that one place. That was unheard of to start with. Number One, to have that many blacks, other than cooks or bakers, or steward's mate, stationed at one location and all being Petty Officers. Six of us were Petty Officer Third Class. One of us was Petty Officer Second Class. We were all black, and things went on pretty well. We did a pretty good job there. They didn't want us there, of course. The only other blacks on post, on the base, negative base, was four radiomen. They were in the same type of business as us, signaling, but, of course, they used the telegraph type, dit, dah, dit, dit, dit and the radio. All those guys are dead. I've been able to find about three still living now. Okay, so we worked well. But the posts were still segregated (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, tell people what this means by segregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it, yeah-- Speaker 1: And the Navy was segregated. When you would go to the mess hall, that's where you eat--chow hall they call in the Navy, mess in the [U.S.] Army, you sat at a different table. You went there a different time, so you never ate together, period. The movie, every night we had a movie, you had a night, us, blacks, and the whites had a night to go to the movie. But I'm gonna tell you something about that too. See, I loved the movie. I came up in the movie, in the movies. I would slip out and go to the white night and the black night. And I'll tell you the consequences of that later on as we talk. But anyway, that's what segregation was about in the Navy. But we were well known, we were well known in the City of Galveston. Yeah, these black Navy guys, boy, they are setting some good [examples]. Oh, you've got to stop. Speaker 2: Oh, just move-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Just sit back a little. Speaker 2: Just sit back a little bit. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Just a little bit. All right. Speaker 1: The people in Galveston were, you know, they were pretty good. We would go on liberty. They loved us to death there, but it was still segregated, everywhere we went. One night we got on a bus, which was segregated. A few of us just took over, we commandeered that bus (laughter) and threw the bus driver off. But, anyway, we shouldn't have done that, but we were kind of-- Speaker 2: Did anybody ever catch you for it? Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, no. Okay-- Speaker 2: Well, this is, what you're talking about, now, this is something that is starting to happen, you know, in--I heard the story where Jackie Robinson [American baseball player who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball] was told to sit on the back of a bus when he was in the [U.S.] Army, and he got in an altercation with the driver and broke the guy's jaw. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yes, that's true. Speaker 2: So this is not, this is--there's starting to be something happening here. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: Black soldiers are starting to become a little bit more, they were starting to become different in this situation. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But you know there's another side story about Jackie [Robinson]. He kind of toned down that jump-on-immediately attitude because that's why he was selected to be the first black in baseball. You know that story? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because there were two or three other guys out there that were more talented and everything else than Jackie. But that's a different story. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 33104 Speaker 1: Anyway, back to Galveston [Texas at the U.S. Naval Frontier Base]. About this time, the Golden 13, those were the first blacks to be commissioned in the Navy, Ensigns. Okay, at that time, they had selected these thirteen to go to University of Illinois and at Great Lakes [Illinois] in the V-12 Navy Program they called it. So they did go, they were selected, and they graduated, every last one of them is dead to this day, 13 Golden. That's what we called them. Now, I had an opportunity to go to that school, me and one other guy at Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina]. His name was Valentino. I think he was Puerto Rican or something, but he was going for black, whatever. Anyway, we made high scores. And we never heard from them before to go. We would have gone to that school at that time and become Ensign officers because we definitely wanted to go. So coupled with the fact that I was breaking all of the segregation rules (laughter) by eating in the dining hall and going to the movies, movies and the fact that now, this black boy wants to go to this Ensign school, and he's qualified for it. And we're not gonna recommend him to go. We're gonna ship him out instead, zap. I was gone. The other boy was shipped out to someplace else. At that time, Frank Knox was Secretary of the Navy, and Eleanor Roosevelt, [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt's wife, was saying we need to get our black boys overseas into the fight. And I was heavy (unclear) at that time. Frank Knox didn't like us now, I'll tell you now. He was something else, Secretary of the Navy. So they shipped us out. I left there and went to Algiers, which is across the Mississippi from New Orleans, a little island over there, Algiers. They sent me there for further transfer overseas. I stayed there for a little while, and then I finally got shipped overseas. Okay,-- Speaker 2: And where did you go first? Speaker 1: All right, I got aboard a troop transporter, an APA. We first landed, after going through Eniwetok in the South Pacific, Eniwetok. Speaker 2: How do you spell that? Speaker 1: E-N-I-E-W-E-T-O-K. That was one of the islands that we had just taken. That was one of the first islands that we took, that and Guadalcanal. Yeah, Eniwetok is in the, I believe in the Marianas Islands. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But anyway, we landed at Guam in Agana, Port of Agana, A-G-A-N-A. That's the capital of Guam. Okay, they took us off the ship. They put us in another receiving--they called it "Repple Depple," replacement depot, repple depple. And, of course, this has always been a way that they kept the Navy guy out of the fight. We put you in this receiving station over here, and we just keep you here forever, and ever and won't send you anyplace. You know, of course, as they say, Roosevelt got tired of that, his wife. So they started sending us out 'cause I stayed there, I guess a couple, three months. And that was too long. Speaker 2: Well, the dilemma, now, from what I understand, correct me if I'm wrong, is that the dilemma that the Navy had, and just sit back just a little bit-- Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: The dilemma that the Navy had was that they didn't want black people of rank telling white people what to do. Speaker 1: That is correct. Speaker 2: And so they had to find something else for you to do. Speaker 1: That is correct, that is correct. But they didn't want you to go into battle either, unless you're a cook, okay. Story_ID: 33105 Speaker 1: And, so they [U.S. Navy] finally sent me aboard a submarine chaser, SC-1341. That was the number of it. Now, a submarine chaser is about a ninety-foot boat, something like that, wooden hull, and the mission of it was to chase down and sink Japanese submarines. So, when I reported aboard this ship, you know how you report. You go up to the dock, you jump aboard the ship. You throw your sea bag over the side, clunk, hits the deck. You salute the flag, and ask the officer of the deck permission to come aboard. So, (laughter) the officer looked at me kind of funny as if, you know, what the hell are you doing here? He didn't say anything, but here come the boson's mate. That guy is equivalent to a master sergeant in the [U.S.] Army. He's the big boy. He said, where're you going, boy? I said, I'm going on this ship. He said, nah, you're not. I said, yes, I am. I got a set of orders right here in my hand from the Department of the Navy, and executive office aboard the ship who was a first lieutenant, I believe, first lieutenant in the Navy, he looked at 'em, and said, yeah, yeah, yeah, he belongs here. And, of course, the sergeant, boson stamped, you know, ran on off and gone on about his business. But I got aboard the ship. And he hated me from that day. And there was only one other black on that boat, and that was a cook. He was--no he wasn't, he was an officer's steward. He cooked for the two officers were had on board, from my hometown, incidentally, Jacksonville [Florida], and named Taylor. What the hell of a coincidence that was. Anyway, I got aboard, and he was my only friend for a long while, but gradually, after those guys knew I knew my job, what I was supposed to do, they fell in love with me, to include the boson mate because once we got back--I'm getting ahead a little bit now, once we got back to Pearl Harbor, we had liberty. And we'd go out on liberty. His first question was always, did ya'll go out and see the girls or whatever. He wanted to know if I was out with some white girl some place because, see Hawaii had legalized, sanctioned by the Army, houses of prostitution right there on Fourth [phonetic] Street, okay, or whatever, and some other streets too-- Speaker 2: Now, this is new to me. I didn't know that, that the government actually had approved houses of prostitution to go, that you could-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and legalized them. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, but, but you still had two lines. You had blacks in one and whites in the other because the whites--and this happened all over the world, had told the female population that blacks had tails. Now, people didn't believe that back in the [United] States, but that's the truth. I lived it. They believed that. So they had two separate lines there. Anyway, I've gotten off the subject. So, the war [World War II] was winding down, except for the fact that we had prepared to invade Japan. We were set and hot to go. We would have been in that. Okinawa was the last island that we took, right after Iwo Jima to have air fields close enough for our B-29s to bomb Japan. So, you should have seen Naha Harbor there at Okinawa. Man, as far as you could see, it was nothing but, nothing but ships in the harbor, ready to go. And, honestly, we would have lost, us and the British and the Canadians, in that invasion force of Japan, we would have lost a million casualties. There's no question about it. The Emperor of Japan had told the folk and the admirals and his generals, said, we will fight to the death, men, women, children alike. However, my good role model, [President] Harry Truman, came to the rescue. He dropped that atomic bomb because he knew that we were gonna lose a million men if he didn't do it. We were gonna lose that many. If we did it, a lot of Japanese were gonna die, and there were several hundred thousand Japanese that died from both of those attacks, Hiroshima and Nagasaki. But he did drop it. He got punished, not punishment, but, you know, some Americans say he shouldn't have done that. But he's my hero because he had enough guts to do that. All right, so after the B-29s, after the Enola Gay, that was the name of the aircraft that dropped the bomb. Incidentally, that was named as Tibbits, who was the pilot, it was named after his mama, Enola Gay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Whatever, anyway, it was dropped, and the rest is history. And, of course, we were so glad. We turned around, came on back to Hawaii. Story_ID: 33106 Speaker 1: So you come back to Hawaii [from the South Pacific, during World War II], then back to the [mainland United] States after that or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but while in Hawaii--it's still 1945, now-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --and (laughter), the West Virginian, the battleship, was sunk, you know, at Pearl Harbor, but it had been refurbished and was back in service. So when we hit Ford Island--that's where all the Pearl Harbor ships were hit, coming into Pearl Harbor, the skipper of our ship gave the order to the helmsman, a hard left. Evidently, the helmsman misunderstood him, and he turned hard right, and here comes the West Virginia, right down our throats. We missed that sucker like that. Man, let me tell you. I said, look, I've been through all this war, and I'm gonna get here and be killed by a friendly japers or whatever. But anyway, we survived that, stayed in Hawaii, frequented some of the places, some of the places. And, in fact, I was hospitalized in Hawaii for about two weeks, I guess. And I came on back to San Francisco [California]-- Story_ID: 33107 Speaker 1: You know, at that time, just before that, before the war [World War II] ended, '45 [1945], there was, and I think I'm right, an artillery unit from Ohio, black. They got in some difficulty over there. And they shot up the town almost. I don't, don't print that 'cause I'm not sure about that. That was just a rumor, that was just a rumor. I'm not sure. But I know something like that happened down in--just across the Texas boarder over into Mexico. Speaker 2: Oh, you mean back in the early part of the century. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You're talking about Brownsville-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the 24th Infantry-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a Houston, what they called the Houston [Texas] riot and the Brownsville raid. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, you got it, Brownsville. Well, you know that, so I don't have to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was two of 'em, 1917 and 19--I can't think of the other one. Speaker 1: Right, so that's easy for me to believe that the Ohio artillery unit did do that. Speaker 2: Yeah, there seems to be some altercations that are not recorded in history, that took place in the military in those days, that were, you know, were kind of hushed, kept on the hush, you know-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Okay, we came, we left Hawaii coming back to the [mainland United] States. We docked at Treasure Island, Treasure Island, right off from San Francisco [California], took leave, liberty and all that kind of stuff. Then we moved up the West Coast. We went up and docked in Bremerton, Washington, up near Seattle [Washington] and went into a [U.S.] Navy shipyard up there in Washington Lake, what they called it. And we were just lounging around up there, having a good time, going on liberty and so forth. And I remember one thing that happened. Of course, I told you there were only two blacks on that submarine chaser. This guy bet me that I would not jump off that boat into the Washington Lake, big lake. I said, yeah. That was the easiest five dollars I ever won in my life. I jumped off right in the (unclear). And I was a swimmer, a Boy Scout. I could outswim anybody in the world, whatever. Anyway, so we left there, came back out through Juan de Fuca. That's a little waterway going in from Bremerton, Washington, into Washington Lake, and went back down through, past San Francisco, down to the Panama Canal and came on up the Coast of Florida, and back up to Navy Amphibious Base, at Little Creek, Virginia. But before that, before we got up there, down in Panama, I was, I got the surprise of my life in Panama. We went on liberty, you know, had a good time and so forth on the Balboa side, not on the Colon side and the Panama City side. But there, I went to the bank to cash a check, and there were two lines. I said, wait a minute--we're back in America, two lines, what you mean two lines? They didn't call it black and white or colored and white. They called it gold and silver. So, which is more valuable gold, than silver? So the blacks stood in the silver line and the whites in the other line. Surprised the heck out of me, in Panama City, whatever. Speaker 2: So they had segregated lines in Panama? Speaker 1: Yeah. Ain't that something? Instead of black, colored and white. Story_ID: 33108 Speaker 1: Okay, so we went to the Little Creek Amphibious Base [Virginia] and--wait a minute. I skipped something. The submarine chaser was, what's the term, what's the term, de-- Speaker 2: Decommissioned? Speaker 1: Decommissioned, now, you're going--hey, man, you're all right. Decommissioned at Bremerton Navy Yard. So in other words, we had to get off, get reassigned. I was reassigned to an APA, APA USSA Hockins, Hockins, H-O-C-K-I-N-S. That was a troop transport, on its way back to overseas. I said, ah, man. But anyway, we didn't go overseas, in fact, came on back into the Panama Canal and the ship, and that ship was decommissioned up there in Amphibious Navy Base. Okay, it was about time for me to get out, but I didn't have enough points, and that time, you had to have points 'cause everybody was getting out of the service. But there's a little thing in the Armed Forces that during the war, you would not get drafted if you were in certain businesses, that you was the only son, or whatever. They have a lot of criteria for it. So at that time, my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor] got sick running the newspaper. And I got discharged early. That was in 1946, and here, again, the [U.S.] Navy's still in my blood, my being the Third-Class Petty Officer, I had two white boys assigned to me, and to bring them back to Jacksonville [Florida] Naval Air Station for discharge, my hometown. We went to the train station to catch the train. Two big white police came up and said, what are you doing here? You're supposed to be over there. I said, man, what are you talking about? I just got through fighting a war for you--I started saying your mama, but I said you and your family. And he said, get out of here. The two white kids I was responsible for, I expected them, you know, having been through combat and all, to support, and say, hey, he's gonna stay here with us, 'cause I was in charge. But they didn't. They just kept quiet. So I went on out of the station, but I came back, and I rode in one part of the train back to Jacksonville, and they rode in another. So that was the end of my Navy career right there. That was it. Story_ID: 33109 Speaker 1: Okay, this is, this sounds like a good one. So go ahead. Speaker 2: You know when I told you I was at the replacement at Rupple Depple [replacement depot; Port of Agana, Guam], waiting to be assigned, before I got on the submarine chaser. They assigned me as a guard for POWs, prisoners of war, Japanese. And they sent us up into the mountains. Hell, they still fighting up there. In fact, they fought--several Japanese stayed there for ten years after the war [World War II], still fighting in the mountains. But anyway, we went up there. So we had these POWs in this stockade, barbed wire all around it, had a machine gun at every corner and so forth. So this, boson mate came up and assigned me to this machine gun at the, you know, protecting the stockade. He didn't ask me whether I could fire a machine gun or whether (laughter) I knew anything about it or nothing. And at boot camp in the [U.S.] Navy, the only thing I shot, the biggest thing I shot was a 22 [caliber], and that was on the rifle range. When we marched at drill, we drilled with wooden rifles, you hear me, wooden rifles. But anyway, so I had no training on this machine gun. So he says, don't worry about it. This A-6 or air-cooled machine gun. All you gotta do is pull back the handle (laughter). That's all he told me. All right, so I said to myself, now, God, please help me here because if these Japanese break out of this prison, and I'm obliged to shoot and kill them, I'm not only gonna kill them, I'm gonna kill Americans too. I do not know how to shoot this machine gun. So it didn't happen, of course. No one tried to break out. That was the sad part about it. Sadder than that was, when we first got the prisoners in, the white boys would frisk 'em, which is what you're supposed to do. But they would take some of their belongings. They would take, particularly, pocketbooks and pictures that those guys would have of their wives and their family and their--I just couldn't do that. They would take that DDT--you're not familiar with DDT, are you? Speaker 1: It's a poison that's sprayed for insecticide. Speaker 2: That's right. It'll kill just about anything, insecticide. They used to just dust 'em off, make 'em take off all their clothes and just spray 'em and laugh about it. I could not do that. I just kind of walked away, and I--here again, the first time I ever felt sorry for the enemy because, hell, you know, they had given up. They had surrendered. So they should have been treated properly, but they were not. So that's what I wanted to tell you. Speaker 1: Okay, that's good. I'm glad you did. Story_ID: 33110 Speaker 1: So, when you get back, you're, you get back to Jacksonville [Florida], you--how are, you said your father [Porcher L'Engle Taylor] was ill? Speaker 2: He still, yeah, he still ran the newspaper [The Florida Tattler]. I went back, and I helped him. I helped him for a year. Of course--no, half a year because I went to Tuskegee [University] that same year in '46 [1946]. Here, again, I hated to leave him and go on to college, but my mama [Mary Virginia Bell] said, son, you gotta go to college, you gotta go to college. So I did. But I helped a lot before that, got him back on his feet a little bit. And I might say this too, you know, they treated the veterans a heck of a lot different than they treated the veterans from Vietnam, or from Vietnam and Korea. I mean we were heroes, World War II, black or white. But it wasn't that way for, that, during Korea and Vietnam. I know that, in fact, they gave us the GI Bill, you know, of course. And they sent us off to school, and that's how I got to Tuskegee, moneywise, because of the GI Bill. They also gave you what you call 52-20. If you were a member of the 52-20 Club, and a veteran, that meant that you, the government would give you twenty dollars a week for fifty-two weeks. That's how it got its name, 52-20. Of course, I took advantage of that, got my little twenty dollars. Speaker 1: In those days, that was good money, right? Speaker 2: That's right, back in those days, twenty dollars, big time, plus the GI Bill. Every degree I've got from B.S. [ Bachelor of Science] to Ph.D. [doctorate degree], the government paid for it, every bit of it, out of my GI Bill. You know, so I'm all for it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so at Tuskegee, you join the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Cadet Corp. Speaker 2: That's right. Talk about Tuskegee Airmen. Speaker 1: Now, were you, okay, you said you were gonna go back and do that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and so you did when you got back. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so you were preparing yourself to go back into the service again, once you graduated, right? Speaker 2: Kind of, kind of, but the Korean War beat me to it, and they recalled me to active duty. See, I got a Second Lieutenant's commission at Tuskegee in 1950, stayed in the reserves for a year, and then fifty--1951 when the Korean War started, I was recalled to active duty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's how I got in there. Story_ID: 33111 Speaker 1: Now, you played football-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You played football for Tuskegee [University] too, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did. Speaker 1: When you went back, so while you were at school, you played football and I read here that you were considered in 1995 as one of the all-time greatest athletes at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: They made a mistake there (laughter). Speaker 1: So what did you do as a football player? Now, you were a blocking back, you said, a full back, right? Speaker 2: A full back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know-- Speaker 1: Did you score a lot of touchdowns? Speaker 2: You know, just like, what did we call it then? Third down and cloud of dust. That was a full back's job. On third down, you had to get that first down. So they plowed you right through the middle of the line so evidently, I must have done a good job with it, I guess. I don't know. Who knows? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, well, I think Tuskegee knows, I guess. Speaker 2: I got the Hall of Fame for it, yes. Speaker 1: Well, that's good. Speaker 2: And I've got the certificate. All this stuff I'm telling you, I've got it documented out there. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Story_ID: 33112 Speaker 1: Now, you also, you said you had a chance to meet George Washington Carver. Now, was this before the war or-- Speaker 2: Before. No, not, well, '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: '41 [1941], okay. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, when did he die? '41 [1941] or '43 [1943]? He died in '41' [1941], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: This happened before then. Speaker 1: So you met him just before he passed away? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And, well, we didn't tell this story, so let's tell it now. How did you meet him and was there a story around it? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't go up and shake his hand. He was doing some sort of, with some plants he had on the outside of his building, you know, they--of his museum. It's a museum now. But he was out there doing something with some plants. And I just looked up and spoke to him. He's got a high, squeaky voice, "[makes a squeaky sound], very high, squeaky voice, outstanding man. And that's how I met him. No long conversations or anything like that, but just the fact that to know George Washington Carver. That man was so brilliant. If he had been white, God, all those formulas he came up with. Oh, boy, from the peanut and the potato. You can't beat it. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to go over that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 33113 Speaker 1: Well, any other highlights of your brief college stay at Tuskegee [University]? You're in--what did you major in? Speaker 2: That's where I met my wife. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's the highlight there, one of the highlights, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah,-- Speaker 1: I don't wanna be presumptuous, but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, how did you meet her? Let's tell that story. Speaker 2: This was my first wife. The wife you see now is my second wife. She worked for the campus newspaper. And I used to go by there, and, you know, how eyes meet between male and female. They just met. She was a young, pretty girl, beautiful girl from Birmingham, Alabama. And we just got hooked up, and that was it. She died in 1976, 1976. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wait a minute. That's not true. She died in 1960--damn, boy, you're getting old, 1967. I turned that around, '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: '67 [1967], okay. Speaker 2: That's right, because my present wife, now, I've been married since, what, '71 [1971], something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she was a student at Tuskegee, and she was working on a newspaper. So-- Speaker 2: And pretty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pretty just like Ann Taylor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 33114 Speaker 1: What was your major at Tuskegee [University]? Speaker 2: Commercial industries. It had all kinds of names. They would change it four or five times, but what it was basically about, it prepared you to go into business. You took bookkeeping and all these good kinds of subjects, and for you to go into business, be a manager. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's what it was. That's why they called it Commercial Industry. It's called something else now. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1951, you're called into the service. Now, this time it's now [U.S.] Army, right? Speaker 2: That's right, because I had gotten a Second Lieutenant's bar at Tuskegee in 1949, the year before I graduated. Story_ID: 33115 Speaker 1: Now, did you--since we're on the subject, did you--what did you notice that's different between--the difference between the [U.S.] Army and the [U.S.] Navy? Did you notice any dramatic difference between the two of them in terms of how black people were treated or how they dealt with-- Speaker 2: During segregation days, there was no difference. They were treated alike, and that was separate, completely. But I might tell you this, prior to World War II, going back to the Spanish American War, one-third, normally, one-third of an American ship at that time was manned by black sailors. And they were not cooks and bakers. They were seamen. They were in the seaman branch. Other than that, everything else had been segregated back up to the Second World War. I don't, the severity of it--well, well, yeah, there was a little difference because if you went aboard ship in those days, and you were a steward's mate or a cook basically. So you slept in a different place. Your battle station was a different place. So in that regard, it was different. But now, in my case, on my ship, the big ship, the APA, I was in the navigation branch. So I slept up there with the whites. They couldn't segregate me. They couldn't take a whole ship, a whole room and put me in it. So I slept with them, legally, but I really didn't. I tipped out and went back down there where my black brothers were, which I shouldn't have done, but I did it anyway. So there was a little bit of difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, in fact, the Service could take whole black units. The Navy, well, the only real unit we had were the sailors on the Mason, which was a black destroyer, the first ship. But it's easy to segregate a group, but it's hard to segregate one person. That's kind of hard to do. Speaker 1: Okay. I never heard of the Mason before. But this is a--I'm writing this down. Speaker 2: You hadn't heard of it? Speaker 1: I hadn't really. I'm not up on it, so I'm gonna look it up. Speaker 2: It was a destroyer escort. It was a destroyer, a DD, but I think they reclassified it to a destroyer escort. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At first it had white, some white officers, but later on, they were all black officers and seamen. They had a nice record. They did a lot of escort duty, lot of escort duty. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33116 Speaker 1: So, in the [U.S.] Army, now, so did you go directly to Korea? Speaker 2: '51 [1951], no, went to Fort Jackson, Fort Jackson, South Carolina. They were having an experiment, just like the Tuskegee [Alabama] experiment, just like what the [U.S.] Navy had. Now, the Army is coming up with an experiment. They took, selected thirty-four black Second Lieutenants, just out of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] like myself and integrated them into the troops at Fort Jackson. I was one of those persons. They had a division on post, they had two divisions, the 8th Division which was partially an airborne division. So I really felt kind of at home with them. But they had another division, a 31st, Dixie Division, and it was Dixie. It was Dixie. And they were on one part of the post, and we were on the other part of the post. So in that regard, you still had that kind of segregation going on. But, well, should I say that or not? Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I think the thirty-four guys did well, generally speaking. They left there and went off to bigger things. I was lucky in a way. I became a platoon leader where you commanded, what, 34 guys, 40 guys, then the company executive officer, and then I became the assistant (unclear) of a regimen which was the 61st Regimen. And later on, I became the athletic and recreation department director. And then finally, and this is how I got my nickname of P.T. The Army was in the process of changing one of its field manuals, Field Manual 21-20 which was the PT manual. And they needed some experience to put in a new one. So they selected Fort Jackson to do the experimentation for them. And I happened to be the chairman of the P.T. committee, so it was my job to do that. So we tested, I guess, over a hundred thousand trainees in about a year or less than a year. Yeah, less than a year. And so we provided the input for the new FM-21-20. And then after that, of course, I left and went overseas, went to Korea. Story_ID: 33117 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, you get to Korea [Korean War] in what, 1952? Speaker 2: No, no. My orders were cut for Korea in '53 [1953]. We got there when the war was winding down, and I stayed there until 1955. I became a company executive officer in the 25th Infantry Division. We left there in '55 [1955], going back to Hawaii which was the home station of the 25th. I became a company commander there. In fact, I commanded, I was the first black, if not the only black company commander in the whole damn division at that time. I've got some pictures I'll show you of that. In fact, I commanded what they called the All-American Company. They called it that because it had every ethnic group in the country as soldiers in that company. And I'll show you some pictures of that. You can see-- Speaker 1: Now, what company is this? What's it called? Speaker 2: Company K at first. Then I took over Company A. Speaker 1: Of what division in this company? Speaker 2: 25th Infantry Division. Now, the regimen came under the division, the next one down, and that was the 27th Infantry, Wolfhounds. And I thought I had on the Wolfhound patch, but I don't. That was the Wolfhound, but I'll show you some pictures of that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right, so fifth--you're there, now, any stories about Korea? The Korean War from what I understand, just from hearing the veterans--in fact, I've never met a veteran that hadn't been shot, you know, at least once. I haven't. I haven't met a Korean War veteran that hasn't sustained a bullet. Speaker 2: Yeah, what about shot? Speaker 1: I have not met a Korean War veteran, a black one, that had not been wounded. Speaker 2: Oh, that's not true at all. Speaker 1: I know all of them couldn't have gotten wounded, but all the ones I've met have been. So it kind of indicates that it was a, you know, a pretty dangerous undertaking. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was said back at that time for both of those wars, Korean and Vietnam, that the amount of blacks assigned combat roles was not in keeping with the percentage of blacks in the military. That was partially true at one time, but later on, that was corrected very quickly. And blacks were given all kinds of assignments, not just the combat assignments up on the DMZ [de-militarized zone] or up on the front or whatever you wanna call it. So I can confirm that for you. That was spoken at that time. Speaker 1: So did you-- Speaker 2: I don't think it was totally true, I don't think so. Story_ID: 33118 Speaker 1: So, in Korea, did you, do you think that the transition to desegregate the Army went fairly smoothly or from your standpoint or-- Speaker 2: Well, now, Harry Truman [President Truman] signed that order in 1958-- Speaker 1: No, it'd been '48 [1948] for Truman. Speaker 2: What was it, forty-- Speaker 1: I think he signed it in '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: '48 [1948], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, but it took a long time to-- Speaker 2: You darn right it took a long time. It did not happen overnight. It definitely did not happen overnight because during that period of time, our replacements were being placed individually. So they could still segregate, but later on, your whole unit might have been transferred and--no, I don't, I would say it really didn't take hold, really and truly didn't take hold until about '54 [1954], '55 [1955]. I will say that, and I was there. So I, that part I experienced. I will say that. But now, they can't do it that way now. They really can't. Speaker 1: Right, segregation is over with. So-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Segregation actually, the Army had desegregation before civilian life, right, in the United States in a lot of ways, right? Speaker 2: I didn't get that statement. You said the Army had before, what? Speaker 1: Yeah, the Army desegregated before some of the states in the United States. Speaker 2: Oh, no question. They set the example. No question about that, absolutely. Look at our personnel structure now in the military. Heck, we've got-there are supposed to be ten Four-Star Generals on active duty. Well, two of those ten are black. That's, that's pretty darn good. You've got all kinds of 06s like myself on active duty today. And you've got these generals in spots that they can influence what happens to the Army and what happens to its personnel. So no, it can never, never go back. The only part I'm worried about is the fact that we don't have enough second lieutenants and first lieutenants and majors, black, and lieutenant colonels in the pipeline to move up into these slots. So when these opportunities open up for full colonels and generals, hey, who's gonna be in them. There's nobody back there. In fact, we've had a couple of generals, black generals to get out of the Army because economically, they could do better on the outside, because they're in great demand. And I don't know. I just, I just hope that we can get some more ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] grads. West Point [United States Military Academy] furnished, my son is a West Point grad, in fact, 1976, was in the class with [David] Petraeus. But West Point doesn't fill the gap in terms of numbers of officers. Most officers always have come from ROTC ranks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we need to put some emphasis on ROTC. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But as you know, all the universities cut out ROTC not long, some time ago. But now, they're coming back. Story_ID: 33119 Speaker 1: All right, so you came back to the [United] States [from the Korean War] in '55 [1955], is that true? Speaker 2: No, no, no. When we moved from Hawaii, moved from Vietnam in '55 [1955] to Schofield Barracks in Hawaii, I got this company, Company A. I kept that company a little over a year. Then I got another company, Company K, for, I stayed in Hawaii, part of, even part of '54 [1954], after leaving Vietnam in '55 [1955]-- Speaker 1: You mean Korea, right? Speaker 2: '56 [1956]--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I get the wars mixed up. They overlap, yeah. I'll show you some photos of the companies at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were stationed in Hawaii in '55 [1955], and then when did you go back to college? Did you finish college in the [U.S.] Army or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had finished, yeah. Speaker 1: So you finished your college education in the Army, while in the Army? Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Remember, now, I was discharged from the Navy in '46 [1946]. In September '46 [1946], I went to Tuskegee [University]. I went back, stayed four years, graduated in 1950, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you came out before you went into the Army then, right, full time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33120 Speaker 1: Now, at some point, you got a master's degree, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --from Virginia State-- Speaker 2: Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia], 1961. Speaker 1: Right, so, where did you--well, just kind of walk us through. Now, you're in Hawaii in '55 [1955]. Now, what did you do next? Speaker 2: I stayed there through '57 [1957], right there in that same division, (unclear) 20th Infantry Division, stayed there the same, yeah. I left there in '57 [1957] and went to the Advance Infantry Officers Corp at Fort Benning, Georgia. That was in '57 [1957]. That was a one-year course. I left there after graduation and went to Virginia State University in '57 [1957], stayed there until 1960 as assistant professor of military science and tactics. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, you stayed there till 1960, and you, and while you were there, you earned your master's degree, right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, and you got a masters in science and-- Speaker 2: No, that's an error. It's not in science. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So it's-- Speaker 2: It's in counselor education, counselor, not counseling, counselor education. Speaker 1: And what is it? What do they call the degree, an M, is it an MA or--a MA or what? Speaker 2: Master of Science. It's a Master of Science. Speaker 1: Master of Science, okay. Speaker 2: That science, MS, doesn't mean what you think it does. Speaker 1: Oh, I know what you--I know what it means, yeah, Masters of Science in Counselor Education. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay. I got it, okay. All right, so you achieved your degree in '61 [1961]. Now, what, are there any professors that you remember there at Virginia State that you were-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the most renowned was Dr. Samuel Madden, M-A-double-D-E-N. In fact, he just died, was a hundred years old. He was a great man, great man. Dr. Tom Bridge, who was in charge of the music department there. He was a great guy. In fact, Virginia State University has put, graduated some heavy guys and had some heavy teachers there. In fact, all our black colleges. I don't think there's a one that really had subpar professors. They've all been good, all good, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a pretty good, you had a good education and good experience at Virginia State? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No question about it and at Tuskegee now at the B.S. [Bachelor of Science] level. Oh, absolutely, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33121 Speaker 1: Now, did you teach at Virginia State [University, St. Petersburg] very long, you know, as a-- Speaker 2: My first teaching job was at the high school level, at Matthew Gilbert High School, Jacksonville, Florida. That was my first teaching position. Secondly, I was the vice president for student affairs at Virginia State College for eleven years. Speaker 1: So you were in, let's see, let me just do this slowly. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At Matthew Gilbert High School, you taught there for how many years? From when to when? Speaker 2: Just one year, one year. Speaker 1: One year, okay, one year. Speaker 2: And then I was recalled to active duty, '51 [1951]. Speaker 1: Okay, that's way back, okay. That's before you went--I'm talking about after your master's degree [in counselor education], you know, what did you do after you got your master's degree? Speaker 2: I was still in the Service [U.S. Army]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: I was in the Service from '51 [1951] to '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So I was still in the Service. Speaker 1: Okay, while still in the Service, you were selected to enter a doctoral program at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Story_ID: 33122 Speaker 1: All right, now, the year that you were selected to enter the doctoral program at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] was the same year that Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated, 1968. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, do you remember what you were doing when Dr. King was assassinated? Speaker 2: I was a baton commander at Fort Jackson [South Carolina] so I was soldiering, I guess, yes. Speaker 1: How did people react to his assassination? Was there a difference in the way people responded in the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: Those that I--remember now, my contact was basically with military folk on post. I might tell you this, that one of my additional MOS's, one of my additional jobs was to be the Equal Employment Opportunity Officer as a G-1. I was a G-1, Assistant Chief of Staff, a G-1. And to this day, I think my biggest failure in the military was not being able to eradicate segregation on Fort Jackson's post. I tried and tried, but the whites were so entrenched in their belief and their practices I could not turn it around. And it really, really made me mad. So this was happening, about the time you said about Martin Luther King. And as far as I can determine, the blacks got riled up about it. They wanted to do something about it. And I would suspect that the whites were so neutral as a general rule. I don't know. I didn't have any kind of personal contact with them. I was so preoccupied with failing in that one particular aspect of my job. And I'm not so sure, oh, I don't know. I guess it's better (unclear) today, I guess. But-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so in what ways was Fort Jackson still segregated in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Well, in, on the civilian side now, not the military side. I had no problem with that. I commanded, I could do this, but I'm talking about on the civilian side. Speaker 1: So if you went into Columbia, South Carolina--Fort Jackson's right outside of Columbia, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So if you went into town, the soldiers experienced segregation, is that what you're saying? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you this. Columbia was always a good soldier town. It still is. And at that time, I've forgotten the mayor's name, but he said, there will be no more segregation in this town. He said that. He said, and it happened almost overnight. A lot of things were desegregated. In fact, my wife can tell you better because she was part of it. She was hired by the university to work on desegregation of the university and Columbia, South Carolina. She can tell you more. But it almost happened simultaneous, immediately. That's all I can really tell you about that part of it. Speaker 1: Okay, so segregation's time had come, I guess, around that time. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Did it desegregate around the time that Dr. King was killed, was that it? Speaker 2: That was, he was thirty-nine years old, was he? Speaker 1: It was 1968, yeah. Speaker 2: It was '68 [1968]. Yeah, because '67 [1967], yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33123 Speaker 1: Now, University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. You were selected to enter the doctoral program at the University of South Carolina after the U.S. Army voices a need for officer training in the field of psychological services education. Speaker 2: And education. Speaker 1: Right, so, well, now, this is 1968. Now, how--you've got your degree in 1972, we know that. But what happened between '68 [1968] and '72 [1972] at the University of South Carolina. How did-- Speaker 2: How did I get there? Speaker 1: No, how did things go after you got-- Speaker 2: I need to tell you how I got there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Of course, the Army sent me there, of course. A matter of fact, I kept the same job I had. My family lived on post for those two years that I worked there, which was unheard of in those days. But the general was my friend. Let me put it that way, General James F. Hollingsworth, a real war tactician, excellent commander. He's dead now, of course. He finally made three stars. But anyway, I was sitting in his office one day, and I had already gotten a master's degree from Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia]. So, I said, you know, General, I wanna increase my education here. He said, okay, well, fine. Why don't you go right down here to Benedict College, which is right in Columbia, and Allen University, which is right there near the post. I said, General, I'm talking about a Ph.D. I already have a B.S. [Bachelor of Science degree] and an M.S. [Master of Science degree]. He said, okay, no problem. The next day, he called the Pentagon, and a week later, I was gone, TDY [temporary duty yonder], full pay, still living on post quarters with my family for two years. That's how I got there. Now, that's not a miracle, but whatever it is, whatever you wanna call it. This guy, and I'll tell you, in the Army, you've gotta have a Godfather. You gotta have some senior officer that's gonna sort of take you under his wing--under her or his wing, and show you the ropes, make sure you get treated properly and make sure, most of all, that you are trained. He's not gonna push some stupid guy up to the top now, though he was that kind of a guy. And that's the kind of relationship that I had with him, although he was my commander because when he went to Korea as Commanding General in 1972, in '73 [1973], I was just getting out of [U.S. Army] War College as a student in '72 [1972] or '73 [1973]. And he sent for me. He said, I want this guy as my commander of my special troops command. Now, special troops command during wartime, of course, it wasn't wartime then. During that time, I would have been responsible for over 20,000 troops. So he thought I could do this responsibility. And the War College, when I graduated, they sent me there. Okay, that's about all about Fort Jackson, I guess. He died about two years ago. Story_ID: 33124 Speaker 1: Well, what about the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]? How did you, working on your Ph.D. [degree], how was that? Were you treated fairly well? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely because, as I said, because my wife was hired by them also and by the government. And they were working on some programs, and I had an admiral who was the vice president for student affairs. I had known him before, and he thought I was the best thing since sliced bread. And he took care of me, guided me along. And I did some very good internships. In fact, I interned over at the Manning's Correctional Institution where they had twelve men on death row, and, hey, but this was a great experience here. I went there as a counselor. My job was to--as doctors, you know, go on things like that--to train prisoners to be able to counsel other prisoners. And one of my guys, the best guy that I taught was on death row for twelve years. And, but the university--not university, the institution allowed me to have these guys over at my house in Fort Jackson [South Carolina] on post. Now, these are prisoners. They had that kind of trust. And I think that we did a good job with 'em. I think we turned a lot of 'em around. That guy never got executed. So evidently, we did turn it around. But that's just an aside to Fort Jackson and Columbia. That city has a great relationship with Fort Jackson, and I think it still has. Speaker 1: It does. It's grown quite a bit too over the last few years. Story_ID: 33125 Speaker 1: Now, just kind of tell us, just kind of summarize your activities in the military [U.S. Army] leading up to your retirement, from 1973? You said you were in Korea with General [James F.] Hollingsworth, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So what did you, just kind of give us-- Speaker 2: From that point up? Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: Okay, well, there were only three, four years left after that. I retired in 1976. Okay, I worked for General Hollingsworth. That was a good tour. Now, there, I did make a difference in terms of segregation. In the City of Uiojongbu, see I was a commander of Camp Red Cloud. I guess I was the first black commander. I'm sure I was, Camp Red Cloud. That's an Indian name, Uiojongbu, Korea. "Y"--I'm sorry, U-I-O-J-O-N-G-B-U, Uiojongbu. And I sort of became the Mayor of Uiojongbu. In the military, when there was a senior officer in an area, you partnership with the mayor of that city. And they call you the mayor. And we had very good relationships. As a matter of fact, and I've got to digress a moment, and please bring me back. In Uiojongbu, when I was a kid coming up, of course, blacks could not join the Rotarians, the, what's some of the other ones? Speaker 1: Key Club, I guess-- Speaker 2: That's right. You know the ones I'm talking about, national organizations. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Rotarians and JCs and people like that. I promised my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor Sr.], I said, dad, in your lifetime, I know you won't see it. I'm gonna see in my lifetime. I'm gonna become a black member of one of these national organizations. Of course, it didn't happen for a long period of time because blacks were still segregated. I had to go all the way to Uiojongbu, Korea, 1974, while I was there, '64 [1964], '64 [1964] to join the Lions Club. Speaker 1: The Lions Club (laughter). Speaker 2: I joined them. I've got a book out here. I'm gonna show you, that they published. It has about 10,000 Korean and Chinese pictures in there as members of the international, as you know, the Rotary, the Lions are the international--they've got about 10 million members. There's one little black boy sitting up there with his uniform on, and the words in, what do they call that? Goolosh-Golon [ph.], whatever they call their language and in the English, Colonel Porcher L. Taylor, Jr., I want you to see that. That's my pride. Okay, I kind of got off. Now, get me back to where I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33126 Speaker 1: So, in well, 1976, you retired from the military [U.S. Army], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And you had been in for thirty years at that point? Speaker 2: I had been in for twenty-nine years and some months. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and what was your rank when you retired? Speaker 2: Colonel, full colonel. Speaker 1: Okay, full colonel and now, in--what did you do immediately after retirement? Speaker 2: I went and taught at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] as the vice president for student affairs. I held that position for eleven years, and I retired from there in what, 1989 or '79 [1979], '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1989, okay. Story_ID: 33127 Speaker 1: One thing that's missing though. When I left Korea, coming back to the [United] States, after working for General [James F.] Hollingsworth, here again, I was selected, first of all because of my degree, and because I was a Ph.D.--the [U.S.] Army didn't have too many of them--to be the commandant of a department of Army schools called--it was first called Human Resources Development, but the name changed when I took over. I was the first commandant. It was Effective--oh, come on PT--anyway, it was designed to train Army officers. See, at that time, the Army was beginning to make sure that segregation was gone forever, making sure that a commander had at his disposal, an officer who could make sure it didn't happen, and to do the kinds of things that were thought appropriate at that time. And-- Speaker 2: It's sort of like a human rights office of the-- Speaker 1: Something like that, something like that. If I get the name, it'll tell it all. Organizational, OETU, Organizational Effective Training Unit. That's it, OETC. So the Army was going to train an officer, possibly a captain at every level in every regiment. And that officer would be the confidant and the representative of the commander to make sure this thing worked, right down the line. There was a trend at that time, called MBO, management by objectives. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was part of the training that I was responsible for, and I retired from there and came to Virginia State University. Speaker 2: Yeah, management by objectives was big in the '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, big time. Speaker 2: --urban, I mean cities all over the United States were using it-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and people were using it in all walks of life. Speaker 1: I used to be an expert at it. Now, they've got something they call OE, Organization Effectiveness, now, which does the same thing and twice as good, yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. So management by objective. So, and there were also in the '70s [1970s] a series of--during the tail end of the Vietnam War--a series of disruptions in the military. There's a riot on an aircraft carrier, remember. And there were some, especially in a Navy Ensign Army Post, there were uprisings and remember, a Dr. Charles King that used to do those encounter sessions to-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --help people, you know, try, because there was a lot of tension as a result, I think-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --some of the discrimination in Vietnam and in the military in general. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the biggest thing I taught out there was human relations. That was the big thing in those days and so forth. I was the first commander. Speaker 2: Right, so it was still trying to get over the hump from 1948, even in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 33128 Speaker 1: Now, did you serve at all in Vietnam [Vietnam War]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought I talked about Vietnam. Maybe I was talking about Korea. Speaker 1: No, we never talked about Vietnam. We talked about Korea, but we never talked about Vietnam. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the Second Battalion of the 14th Infantry, called "The Golden Dragons." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were in Viet--I was in Vietnam. We were stationed in Cuchi, C-U-C-H-I. And there's a real interesting thing about Cuchi, let me tell you. Now, I left Hawaii going to Korea--see, I got to Korea again, going to Vietnam, and to establish a headquarters at Cuchi. That's in Tayninh Province, T-A-Y-N-I-N-H, Tayninh Province. And this is the place where the Vietnamese, North Vietnamese, Viet Cong, we called them, this is where they had established tunnels up under the ground. In these tunnels, and in these caves, they had ammunition depots, they had hospitals. They had all kinds of crap ready to fight a war. We hit Cuchi the very first day we got mortared. We lost a lot of people, that got killed. We never knew that our headquarters existed right over this long range of tunnels, right over and on top of them. So every night, we thought we had a tight perimeter. Hey, nobody can get in here. But all of a sudden, here comes a little guy with black pajamas, that's what they wore, black pajamas on, infiltrating. Hey, where the hell are they coming from. We didn't find out until later on. Then what was borne out of that was the Rat, what they called a Rat, the tunnel Rat. This was a American soldier, took a 45, a flashlight and go down in these tunnels and try to route these guys out. Those were some of the bravest good dudes in the world, believe me. You're going down in a doggone unknown place up under the ground. Here's a guy waiting on you to shoot and kill you. And you only have a hand grenade and a 45. But we finally got rid of those. Now, on the good, on the soft side of that, when we left Hawaii going to Vietnam to Cuchi, we took on the ship Palm trees, would you believe it, Palm trees, because that's the, a signal, whatever they call it [symbol], representative of Hawaii. We took radios, we took TVs. We took everything. We were going over there to have a good time, kick the Viet Cong in the butt and come on back home. But it wasn't like that. As I told you, when we first got there, we got mortared. And, but those Palm trees are still there. In Vietnam, and Cuchi, is a world resort area now. People go over there to visit and so forth. I thought I'd throw that in. Speaker 1: Now, what years were you in Cuchi? Was this just before you retired? Is this in the late '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Well, after I left-- Speaker 1: I mean in the--it would have to have been during the war so it'd be prior to '74 [1974]. So that would have been '73 [1973]. It must have been '73 [1973], right? Speaker 2: Let me tell you exactly. I stayed there sixteen months. That was the length of the tour then. Let me see now-- Speaker 1: Was that after you got your-- Speaker 2: No, no, wait a minute, wait a minute. Speaker 1: Was that be-- Speaker 2: '73 [1973], we got out of there. Speaker 1: Yeah, we got out in-- Speaker 2: We got out in '73 [1973], and the war ended in '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I was there in '71 [1971], seventy--no, no, no. Back up, I was there '67 [1967] and '66 [1966]. I was there one year before the TET Offensive, and that was '68 [1968]. Damn, I should have remembered that well. That's when they almost whipped us, man. They almost beat us. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: TET Offensive. Speaker 1: Just before the TET Offensive, okay. Speaker 2: That's right, TET of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: All right, I'm glad I asked that. Speaker 2: That's when it was, that's when it was, right. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 33129 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna go back up and catch up with where we left off. We had, you're vice president of student affairs at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now, who was the president then at Virginia State? Speaker 2: A guy that we called (laughter), nickname, Daniels, R. P. Daniels. We called him Rip, because he would rip you apart if you didn't do your job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Rip Daniels. That is correct. But I served under four other vice presidents, four other presidents there. Tom Law was the last one, I'm sorry, Wesley McClure was the last one. He's president now at Lane University [College] in [Jackson] Tennessee. Tom Law just died this year. The other two are still living, but I don't know where they are. Speaker 1: Now, and, where did you go after Virginia State, after 1989? Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: Did you teach somewhere else after that-- Speaker 2: I just-- Speaker 1: Did you retire then or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I retired then, went and--before that, I was at Virginia State twice. I didn't tell you that, twice. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: The first time I went to Petersburg, the City of Petersburg and worked for the Department of Social Services. That's what it was. I was the admin--administrator, admin manager for the Department of Social Service for a year, about a year and a half. Then I went back to Virginia State. Okay, when I retired the last time, I went to Petersburg and that's where I am today. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were hired by the City of Petersburg in 1976 after you retired from the Service. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, before that. In between the two times I served as vice president at Virginia State. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And I'll mix those years up and I won't even remember, but it was before '89 [1989]. I retired permanently the last time, '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: '89 [1989], yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 33130 Speaker 1: Now, in the years that you've been retired, you've been involved in, well, you've been, you've received a lot of recognition for your services in the military and for other things like the Tuskegee Hall of Fame, and there's a, in--let's see here. In 2005, you received an award from Virginia's Annual Strong Men and Women Education and Excellence-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was an honor that you received in 2005 from the State of Virginia. Speaker 2: They give nine away every year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: People like Colin Powell [former Secretary of State] and folk like that. Speaker 1: And you received a letter from Colin Powell-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in recognition of this honor. And-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? This is in 2005? Speaker 2: The letter, and I've got a copy of it to show you, this is when he was getting promoted from two star to three star. He and I served together at Fort Devens [Massachusetts] in the Second Battalion, 60th Infantry in 1962. We became friends. As a matter of fact, I outranked him. I was a captain then, and he was a lieutenant, but you can see he passed on by me. And we had, and being in the same outfit, he sent the letter and says that, hello, Ann, how Ann is doing, the wife, you're doing great. You've done so great for this country, and you just remember that you were my first role model. Here's this four-star General, now telling me that I was his role model. I said, General, un-un. You were my role model (laughter). But anyway, I'll show you the letter about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, keep going. Speaker 1: No, okay, the letter I have here, I'm sorry. It's, the way this is constructed I guess-- Speaker 2: Where did you get the letter from? Who wrote it? Speaker 1: Here's a portion of a letter that he sent expressing his thanks for you sending him a copy of your autobiography. Speaker 2: Right, that's the same letter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's it, read on down there. Speaker 1: So and that was--when did you write your autobiography? Was that 2005? Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004], I believe. Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004], okay. Speaker 2: I think, around that time. I got the book. I'm a give you a copy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's out there. Speaker 1: And so the letter is dated-- Speaker 2: When I show you the stuff out there, that's gonna explain a lot of stuff. Speaker 1: And what's the name of your autobiography? What did you call it? Speaker 2: 'Damn the Alligator, Full Speed Ahead'. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that came out in 2004? Speaker 2: 2004, I believe it was. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now,-- Speaker 2: I keep moving my big head. Speaker 1: Okay, in 2006 it said that you, that they established an award for leadership at Richmond University in your name. Is that true, is that right? Speaker 2: It's Richmond University? Speaker 1: Yeah, it looks like it may be the wrong thing here. I don't know. Speaker 2: No, I-- Speaker 1: It says Richmond University. I don't even know about that. Speaker 2: No, I established a scholarship fund at Virginia State University in my name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Virginia State, okay, and that's in Petersburg, yeah. Speaker 2: And I'm a member of the Hall of Fame at Virginia State University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Also, Hall of Fame ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Virginia State University. You need to see an itemized listing of those things out there. Speaker 1: Yeah, you have to give us, you gave us a copy. Speaker 2: Did I send it to you? Okay. Well, you'll see the one out there today, okay. Speaker 1: All right. So, okay, in 2008, you were chosen as Virginia State's alumnus of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and then plenty of honors. You're considered a member of the 'Triple Nickel' [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion], too, right? Speaker 2: I'm the vice president. Speaker 1: Vice president of Triple Nickel-- Speaker 2: Triple Nickel, 555. Speaker 1: And do you consider yourself a Tuskegee Airmen too? Are you part of that too? Speaker 2: Now, you gotta be careful with that. And I have to always explain this to people because a lot of people pose to be Tuskegee Airmen. I established a chapter, Tuskegee Airmen, Incorporated in Petersburg, Virginia, okay. Now, I was ROTC Cadet, taught by a Tuskegee Airmen, all right. So I'm considered a Tuskegee Airmen Associate, okay, and a life member. I'm one of the few life members. So that makes a difference. These guys get out here and tell you that they flew and they did this and that. I'm an associate member, and life member and past president of the chapter I established in Petersburg, Virginia--still working with 'em, always will until the day I die. Story_ID: 33131 Speaker 1: When you look back on your career and all the things that you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What would I--a legacy? Speaker 1: Yes, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, hopefully, that I have been, hopefully, a decent, a good and Christian father to my five children and that that will be their legacy, period. And also the fact that I'm one of very, very few Americans still alive that fought in three wars, major wars, Korea, Vietnam and World War II. That's what I would like my legacy to be, those two things, definitely, because God has been good to me. He gave me a beautiful wife. I asked for three children. He gave me five. He overdid it. But that's all right (laughter). And that's my legacy right there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 33132 Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, once again, sir, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could change it? Speaker 2: Do differently? That's kind of hard to say because (laughter) there're a lot of things I would have done differently, absolutely. Well, one thing I would have gotten, and I have, I would have gotten murder out of my soul. Let me tell you that, what I'm talking about. On my second tour to Korea, this was during the bombing of those poor little girls in Birmingham, Alabama, 16th Street Baptist Church. Speaker 1: That's 1963, yeah. Speaker 2: I was on my way going, so I had to leave my family some place. Luckily, and by the stroke of God's will, I found a place for them at the Signal Depot in Pennsylvania, I've forgotten the city. But it's up in the Pocono Mountains. Now, if I had left them in Birmingham, where my wife was from, they would have been in the church that day, Sunday school. And they might have been killed. I (unclear) myself then. Bull Connor was the safety director. I would've sought out that man and I would have killed him, and then asked God for forgiveness. So, I would have done that differently. I would have left it up to the Lord to do it, and, of course, they never did it. They found a guy that did it, but he was the lead guy. He was in charge. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. They convicted finally a guy named Bob Chambliss, but he was real old by the time they got him. Speaker 2: He died, yeah. That's right, that's right. One other, damn, see. I have to tell you tearful things [emotional]. In Vietnam, oh, but let me tell you a good thing about Vietnam. I looked up one day, and a, the girl up there standing in front. I said, what you doing way up there on the battle line? That girl was the redhead girl. She's still a pretty girl. She was with the USO [United Service Organizations]. With her was the heavyweight champion, boxer of the world now. Who was that, Holmes? Speaker 1: Larry Holmes? Speaker 2: Whatever his name was. Speaker 1: I know it was [Muhammad] Ali, [Joe] Frazier, you had-- Speaker 2: It was Holmes, I think at that time. Speaker 1: George Foreman. Speaker 2: Foreman, that's the one, George Forman, the guy that got that stove out. And he was there with her, with the USO show. So after that we named the combat outpost out there, in Cuchi [Vietnam], up on the battlefield in her name. And I'm gonna have to ask Ann to tell me that name. She was a Hollywood star, great girl. Speaker 1: Ann Margaret? Speaker 2: Ann Margaret, you got it. Man, you're all right. You got it, you got it. Fine, but I tell you that to put you back into Cuchi, to a tearful kind of a situation. We had just gotten into Vietnam. And a minefield, we got tangled up in that minefield [pause] [emotion], and we lost a lot of people, my first sergeant, and some other folk. But, you know, and he died in my arms, and he had already, when I got to him, you know, we had to probe to get up, you know, in the minefield. And, of course, he had both his legs already cut off, decapitated, and he had turned white. He was in charge, good sergeant. You know, the only thing he asked me when he in my arms [crying], he said, sir, have I lost my, you know, I would say his family jewels, but you know what I'm talking about. And, of course, I kind of laughed and said, no, son, you haven't. That's the first time I've ever lied to one of my soldiers. He had lost it all. But to think about that, he's thinking about his family, about having children and so forth. And [crying], and (unclear) that was bad enough, but dammit, it was a friendly minefield, friendly minefield, and I won't tell you the unit that failed to clear it before they left out of it. In combat, when you put out mines, you got to mark it, and you got to tell everybody in the world where it is. And the unit did not do it. I guess if I had found that commander today, I'd probably shoot him too. But anyway, that's enough of that. Now, go ahead on with the interview. Story_ID: 33133 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family, your children and, you know, you've been married twice. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've got five children. They're all doing fine. My son was a [United States Military Academy] West Point graduate, Class of 1975. Speaker 1: He's Porcher [L'Engle Taylor] the third, right? Speaker 2: Porcher the third, that is correct. He's now, he just made, got promoted to full professor at the University of Richmond [Virginia]. One of my daughters works for the Federal Reserve Bank in Chester, Virginia. She's doing well. I have one daughter that used to work with autistic kids, and she loved that field. But now she works with the mentally retarded, and there's a word for it now, it's intellectually, something, I don't know. I've forgotten the word. But she's working with it. She loves that. I have another daughter who's working with a firm here in Washington [District of Columbia], not a firm either. It's the [Department of] Homeland Security. She is one of the vice presidents and doing well. And my wife is retired as a counselor. She still gets kids to come and talk to her from time to time, saying, you really put me straight. And she was a hard-boiled teacher. But she took care of the kids, particularly those on drugs. She really took care of them. And that's about it. And I've gotten myself involved in a whole lot of stuff. And let me tell you why. I might have told you this before. If any person, black person, ever tells you that he or she did not at one time, if born in the South, suffer from inferiority complex--did I tell you that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I did, okay. So did I, so I was determined, I was determined to make a place in this world to make it better. So I over, overly achieved. I got myself involved in, and you saw the organizations there. I've either been on the board of those organizations or been a member or the president. The Petersburg Symphony is an example, Downtown Churches United, which we raised over a half a million dollars that I personally honchoed myself, a lot of things like that. So that inferiority complex, I've overcome it. I've overcome it, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything else we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I guess that's it. Other than me thanking God for being so good to me because I certainly didn't deserve all of that, no way, no way. Good parents and good kids. And they're still living. My oldest daughter is sixty-one [ years old], and my youngest daughter is forty, youngest kid. So, that's unusual, you know. Normally, and I'm eighty-seven, at that stage of life, you've lost half of your kids normally. So I thank God for that. And I hope, I hope that I've left some sort of mark back here, particularly, with the VSU [Virginia State] University [Petersburg] students because that was during the time at the university when colleges were just rebelling, strikes and walking out and raising hell and so forth. I hope that my little guidance and example, example helped them out. I hope so. That's about it. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Last question. Story_ID: 33134 Speaker 1: Oh, last question, well-- Speaker 2: Was that it? Speaker 1: You just answered it, actually. Speaker 2: Oh, did I? Speaker 1: The question is actually, 'cause I was wondering in my mind, did I ask it because you were answering it. The last question is, or I'll pose it, and then you can-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The last question is, Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who first of all kept the Ten Commandments, and, of course, I didn't--I don't think anyone ever does. Hopefully, I came close to it and that I will improve upon that (laughter) and get them all because I'm still hung up on the one that says "Thou shall do no murder," and when you try to equate that with being a soldier, it's pretty hard. And, of course, I'm sure God doesn't see killing in combat for the right cause murder. So I hope I can overcome that. And I hope that people will say that P.T. Taylor, you made a difference in this world. That's it. Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: All right, all right, man. Story_ID: 33135 Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna add that, something else that probably never happened in history. In the State of Virginia, I was fortunate enough to be selected by the last seven governors in the State of Virginia as their military aide-de-camp, the last. As I mentioned, not the current one, he did not reappoint me. I want those known, okay. And I know of only one other black who have been nominated--well, not nominated that many times, but at least two or three times, never before in history. Speaker 2: Okay, the second one is the Noel F. Parrish Award, you see right over there. I've got it around my neck, and it tells you what the award is all about. He was the first commander at Moton Field in Tuskegee. That's where the Tuskegee Airmen first trained. And what makes it so significant is the fact that there were no white officers at that time, aviators, that wanted to come to Tuskegee and teach black soldiers. We were soldiers then, you know, Army Air Corp. It wasn't Air Corp, it was the Army Air Corp. And his, he's dead, incidentally. He was a brigadier general when he died. He was a captain then and later on got promoted. But his wife was determined, after his death, to perpetuate his legacy because here was a guy who stood up, did something that nobody else would do and he was the cause of the Tuskegee Airmen being graduated, doing a good job and the whole nine yards. And she wanted to perpetuate that legacy. So she developed this medal, gold medal, and along with a $500 stipend to give this out every year. She has given out now about twenty-four. I'm the seventeenth recipient of it. And I wanted to make sure you knew that. Okay. Speaker 1: All right, thank you. Speaker 2: And this is the highest award that the Tuskegee Airmen, Incorporated can give to any of its members, okay. Speaker 1: Noel F. Parrish Award. Speaker 2: Noel F. Parrish, there's the name on the plaque over there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, thank you. Story_ID: 33136 Speaker 1: Please tell us about this picture? Speaker 2: Oh, that picture here. If you remember, I told you about General [James F.] Hollingsworth, at Fort Jackson [South Carolina], this general on the right replaced him, General Coleman is his name, and, of course, yours truly is in the middle. And my wife, Ann, is on the left. And he's presenting me with a accommodation award, meritorious service medal, MSM. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, wow. That was a great day. That was an article in the 'Army Times'. I was a young captain then, and that indicated the names of the people that were, that had made regular Army. You know, in the Army, they've got reserves, so forth and so on, but this was regular Army. It was hard to get in those days, and I had just made it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a great day in my life. Speaker 1: This is an award that's given. In fact, there are nine every year, and it indicates those persons who have committed themselves to being very useful in the community in terms of volunteering for, to help people less fortunate. There were nine out of the State of Jersey--I'm sorry, oh, I messed that up again. Speaker 2: This is one of my classes that I normally give to high school kids. And I try to put it down on their level, and they eat it up. And most of them have not heard about the Tuskegee Airmen, nor the Triple Nickel [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion]. Speaker 1: This one, of course, is one, as you can see an aircraft is there. That aircraft is there because the merit badge that we're talking about is won in aviation. And I am, I became and still am, a merit badge counselor. So I'm talking to these kids here in terms of a merit badge in aviation. Speaker 2: Honoring the Triple Nickel. Of course, that's our nickname, the Triple Nickel. On the right there is the National president of Triple Nickel, of which I am the vice president. Next to him is General David Petraeus. Of course, you know him. And next to him is the first, first African American to jump out of a military airplane. Morris is his name. And, of course, there's Taylor there on the left. Speaker 1: This was a calendar that portrays persons of, who have been useful to the community, and if you flip it over to the other side, you can get the other portion of it. That was for November 1992, I believe it was. And it comes out every year, of course. Speaker 2: Okay, the first one, the upper left-hand corner is when I was a little baby in my mother's arms. As a matter of fact, I weighed almost 12 pounds when I was born. That's big time. Speaker 1: Wow, that sure is. Speaker 2: The picture next to that is when I made Eagle Boy Scout, back in 1941. The next one is in the [U.S.] Navy. I was eighteen years old, just got promoted to Petty Officer, Third Class, as you see on the arm. And the next one is in the Navy also, a couple of years after that. And the one in the center, those football players at Tuskegee [ University], if you notice, they have on jackets. This is when we won our letters. The first young man is Smith. He's dead. He was burned up in a fire. I'm the next one. The next one is Sweetie, from Atlanta, Georgia. He's dead. Next one is George--okay, should I stop? Speaker 1: No, go ahead. Speaker 2: The next one is George Dickerson. He lives out in Indianapolis [Indiana] now. The next one is Singleton. He's dead, of course. The last one is dead, Hayward Simpson. We all played on the Tuskegee University football team back in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: On the bottom is when I first made captain, without a mustache, and the next one is when I was employed by Virginia State University. The last one when I was a brand new, First Lieutenant. And that card indicates Taylor and Son Printing Company, Jacksonville, Florida, my dad [Porcher L'Engle Taylor]. Speaker 2: Okay, the one on the back is when I first made major. I was on the general staff, Army General Staff. The second one when I received the Legend of Merit Award. The next one down is the Commanding General of the Rock Corp, in Korea shaking my hand after I had become a member of the Lions International Club. The other one, let's (unclear) with the two hats, that's my being congratulated by the president of the University of South Carolina, who incidentally, was an excellent president. I was the first or second to make a Ph.D. [degree] at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. I say second because I don't know who walked across the stage first, me or the other guy. The one in the middle is Ann and I. We were honorary chairmen of a Boy Scout troop in Korea. The one on the left, I don't remember. And the other one is a member of my family right after my daughter with the white on, got married, in Columbia, in Petersburg, Virginia. Speaker 1: As I mentioned before, I was the first black to gain colonel at Fort Jackson, South Carolina. Speaker 2: That one is the Uiojongbu [Korea], and I told you about, the Lions Club. I'm holding that up, and I did wanna show you the pictures. You need to really get that one and the book. Did I bring it down here? Speaker 1: Well, we'll have the book. So. Speaker 2: Oh, you're have the book? Speaker 1: Well, we will. Speaker 2: Okay, good, then I'll show the page where that picture is on, the little black boy sitting up there. That's all about education there. That's when I was vice president for student affairs at Virginia State University. And that's just an article about what had went on that particular week. Speaker 1: That next one there is graduating day when I was Battalion Commander of the 5th Battalion, 61st Infantry, the "Go Devils," that was our nickname at Fort Jackson, South Carolina. Oh, well, I guess that was about 1978, I'm guessing again. Speaker 2: This is a member, a picture of the school board in Petersburg, Virginia. I was chairman of the school board there for a total of six years. Most of those members on there are dead, incidentally. I've forgotten their names. Speaker 1: That's the one that I cried about. He died in my arms. I won't talk no more about that. Speaker 2: The guy over there, that's not the guy that was in my arms. He was the G-3 at Tan Son Nhut Air Force Base in Vietnam. And he awarded me the Bronze Star. Speaker 1: Oh, there's the book. Speaker 2: That picture of you in the Lions Club. Is that the one you talked about. Here it is. Speaker 1: Do you see the one, see that little black boy sitting up there amongst all those Koreans. Speaker 2: Make sure you get the one on the left because it shows my name on it, among all that Korean--okay. Speaker 1: This all sounds like I'm bragging, doesn't it? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm just stating the facts like it was. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. Speaker 1: That was at my book signing that we had in, on the campus of Virginia State University. Speaker 2: That's a picture with Colin Powell on the right and my wife in the center and yours truly on the left. That's a great general. Speaker 1: That's my baby picture there, weighed in at almost 12 pounds. Speaker 2: God, 12 pounds, and your mother [Mary Virginia Bell]-- Speaker 1: She suffered (laughter). Speaker 2: --was like fifteen. She was fifteen years old or something? Speaker 1: Oh, no, no. Speaker 2: Didn't you say she was born in 1905? Speaker 1: Yeah. But I'm 87. Speaker 2: He was born in '25 [1925], right? Speaker 1: '25 [1925], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was fifteen if that was the case. [1905-1925 is twenty years old] Speaker 1: No, she wasn't fifteen, couldn't have been. Well, I don't know, maybe, no, maybe it'll add up. I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay, get my dad's picture now, over there too. There he is over there. Speaker 1: Okay, was that your mother we just saw? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my mother. Speaker 1: And what's her name? Speaker 2: Mary Bell Taylor. She's dead now and my father is dead. His name is the same as mine. He's a senior, outstanding, fearless guy, afraid of no one or anybody or anything...