 Story_ID: 70614 Speaker 1: Okay, today is September 5th, 2002. And we have the honor of interviewing Dorothy Tillman, Chicago alderman. I'm Adele Hodge, the interviewer, and our videographer is Matthew Hickey. And the observer in the room is Quinn Dixon. And now, I'm gonna ask you to give us your full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Alderman Dorothy Tillman, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, T-I-L-L-M-A-N, Third Ward, city of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, and your birth date and age? Speaker 2: 5/12/47, that's May 12th, 1947. I'm now fifty-five years old. Speaker 1: And tell us where were located. Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: 1900--1900 S. LaSalle. Speaker 2: Oh, 1900 South LaSalle, oh. Speaker 1: Okay, they--they like to have the, the interviewee say where they're located. A lot of times I'll ask you something, and I'll ask you about the time period, because later, you know, the reference to time, people won't be sure--oh, when, what was she talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 70615 Speaker 1: And now we're gonna start with what we call our "People" magazine questions as openers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish, any seafood; I love seafood. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: I love colors. I like red. I like blue. It depends on what mood I'm in. I think that's what come--some days I want black. Sometimes I want yellow. I just like colors. It depends, but I love red. Speaker 1: Great. And your favorite saying? Speaker 2: What is my favorite saying? I have so many. I'll have to think about that one. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sure it'll come to you as we move-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --move along. Story_ID: 70616 Speaker 1: Give me--we're gonna start with your personal life, when you actually came in the world. And I'm gonna ask you first about your grandparents. Give me your grandparents' names. Speaker 2: Well, on my grandmother was Ms. Julia Lee White, who's now deceased. Speaker 1: From? Speaker 2: She's from Alabama, Montgomery. I never knew my grandmother on my father's side because she was deceased before I was born. My aunt was like my grandmother on my father's side. Speaker 1: And your grandfathers? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather name was Major. He's also deceased. Speaker 1: And he's from Alabama too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Same area as your grandmother? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: What kind of stories do you remember about your grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, I was very close to my mother. I don't--didn't know my father's mother. We had a--I guess our families was like two, but we're like--our families are like one. In the South when you married, you married your one family. But my grandmother, I was very close to my grandmother. I went everywhere with her, everywhere. Anywhere she went she carried me, 'cause I had a very young mother. My mother was a teenage mother, which meant that my grandmother was Madea, so she was Big ma, so she carried us. In fact, it was my grandmother who really was the first one to carry me to see [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King at nine years old, so Speaker 1: So you were not--what year was that when you went first to see him? Speaker 2: Oh, I grew up in Montgomery. I'm from Montgomery, Alabama, so. I met Dr. King at Hope Street Baptist Church when I was nine years old--I don't know--sometime in the late '50s [1950s], '59 [1959], '58 [1958], '57 [1957]--I don't know. Story_ID: 70617 Speaker 1: At, at that time, what kind of stories did you hear your grandmother, and, and her friends, and your other relatives talking about as far as the movement? Speaker 2: It wasn't like that. I guess we--my family was always very involved anyway, but it wasn't like that. I think living in Jim Crow in the South was just kind of a little different than just--I guess in the North you lived it every day. Certainly, in Montgomery was like the city part of Alabama, where you--we, we wasn't in the rural part. We was in the quote-unquote city with all the prejudice that grew up--that you grew up with and you know segregation with the buses and all. I remember going to--when we would take the Day Street bus, and I could never sit on the front of the bus, and I could never--every time I would go to the front of the bus to sit, my grandmother would pull me back. And I could never understand why I couldn't sit on the front of that bus, and all the little white kids could sit on the front of the bus. The little girls would be the long--this long bench along the front seat waving. And I would always be very clean, 'cause my grandmother made my clothes. She would straighten my hair and had me so pretty in my little pleated skirts. And I felt--in my little patent leather shoes all shined from the biscuit and I thought I could sit in the front of the bus, and she never would allow us. She would always snatch us back. And I said when I get older, I'm gonna do something. She said I know you will. And so when Rosa Parks sat on the front of the bus, I understood why she sat on the front of the bus. I understood it because I felt she stood--she sit there for me or Mrs. Parks sat there because I wanted to sit on the front of the bus. And you know, we were a very close community, you know everybody. So word got around that she had done that, and I was--I think I would have been devastated had my parents not supported the bus boycott. And that's why I tell parents today that you have to be very careful what you do in and around your children because you can have an everlasting effect on them. When I was--if--when, when Rosa Parks sat on the front of the bus, and there were people talking about she shouldn't have done this, or it's wrong, or I'm not gonna get involved, I'm scared, and when my father and my, and my people decided well, we're gonna get, get involved, I was happy. I mean I was excited. Had they said no, I probably would have been destroyed. But they were involved, and we all walked and we did all the things. Story_ID: 70618 Speaker 1: And my grandmother took me to the Hope Street Baptist Church, and I met this man. I mean, this man came in there and he took his hat off, and he went to the pulpit and he spoke, and he spoke so strong. And it--my grandmother said so, something made you shut your mouth, huh? And I was really intense. I don't remember the speech, but I'll always remember the feeling. And that man was Martin Luther King, Jr. I never knew that I would be working on his staff as a field staff organizer, but I knew I would be involved. And as I grew up, history, you know, it's--you know, the rest is history. I became a field staff organizer, but walking in--and we created--as children, we created different little songs, "boycott the bus till they respect us", things like that. And when--every time my parents would walk to go downtown, I would always wanna go 'cause that gave me an opportunity to walk. That was the proudest moment of my life, to be part of the group that walked downtown. I would just walk--"can I go"--I just walked, walking for freedom. And it was just awesome. My church, the Bell Street Baptist Church, and if you'll--if you was to read history, they would find that Reverend [Uriah J.] Fields was my pastor. Reverend Fields was a very a activist, a very strong activist; in fact, he was one of the contenders for being the leader of this movement. Dr. King, of course, was a young minister who was there from another city who had come to, to Montgomery. And everybody was talking about this, this pre-minister who had came to pastor at Dexter Avenue. And of course, my, my church was Oak Street. Dexter Avenue was downtown, and--everybody we go this young man. But because before Dr. King, it was I think Vernon John. I can't remember his name, but he was really a great man. And now that I'm older, I understand what he was talking about, 'cause I would hear people talking about he was really economic development for black people. And he was really trying to teach that church a lot about what we need to be doing, and they thought he was too militant, and he was just too common. And they wanted--the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church is downtown right from the capital, you know, if we're gonna Negroes or colors down here, we colored people gotta act right or we gotta get us another kind of (unclear), and they brought Dr. King. And they probably never knew what he would end up being, you know, from a proper church from Atlanta (unclear)--you know, a graduate of Morehouse, just this, this great man. And now we don't have to have this ignorant Dr. John. Of course my pastor, Reverend Fields was very active in the movement. Our church got bombed, the Bell Street Baptist Church. It was a little white wooden church. And after the church was bombed, they did--they meant it for badness, but we ended up getting a britch--a brick church, and we thought it was really wonderful to have our brick church. Story_ID: 70619 Speaker 1: So I went to the Bell Street Baptist Church, and it, it's a lot of things, you know, we saw. I remember like the Klansmen riding around with hoods and stuff and just so many things. My father--my family wasn't frightened. I came from a family that was not very scary, but--and they really did try to scare us a lot during the Bus Boycott. They would ride through, and my father always told me the reason they had hoods over their face was because those was the same people that we went to the stores and shopped with and bought things from in those same homes that our parents and stuff went to clean up in every day. You know, they'll let 'em come clean their houses, and have them to nurse their children, cook their food, and called them nanny, or Annie, or Mary in the daytime, and, and pretend everything is all right, and at night get on horses and put sheets over their head, and destroy the black family. So I just got a lis--a lesson very much, 'cause I was always a listener and observant. I always asked why this, why that, what, what, what, what, you know. I always looked for answers. But I truly was a, a daddy's child, and I was also a grand-person. My grandmamma was my life, my heart. I loved my mother. She's still living. I love her. I had one of the greatest mothers in the world. She's sweet. But my grandmother, Madea, was like, you know, she was that balance. And she would always take me with her, Dorothy Jean everywhere. And they always called me the old lady. You know, they would always call me Mama Dean after my great-grandmother, whom I knew. And I just found out recently, and I thought we were all from Montgomery [Alabama], but I just found out recently that she's--they was really from, from New Orleans [Louisiana]. And it's really interesting because going to Africa and Senegal and stuff, I see a lot of the features, but I never knew that I had any New Orleans connections, you know, 'cause a lot of folks from that way came here. I thought I was always--everybody from Montgomery. But recently, talking to my Aunt Mabel I found out that Mama Dean was from New Orleans, 'cause they didn't talk that much. People never talked about where they were from during that time, so I really didn't know. But getting involved and trying out some information, now I know. I certainly love my Aunt Mabel on my, on my father's side. I love Aunt Mabel. She's just my--like my grandmother, love her to death. She was my daddy's oldest sister who kind of watched after them, so I just loved her a lot. So my families--I was never--even when my mother and father separated, it was never like they were separated. We always had a lot of love and like, like one family. Speaker 2: Did you have any sisters and brothers? Speaker 1: My brother--I have fi--it's five of us, but-- Speaker 2: Okay, name them-- Speaker 1: --growing up-- Speaker 2: --in order for me, and, and give me their-- Speaker 1: It was five of us, but I have--my brother's about eighteen months older than I am. And--but I have sisters under me. I have three sisters, and I'm old enough for their mother. They are the same age as my, my children and my brother's children. In fact, I have some children older than my baby sister, you know. So I have my brother James-- Speaker 2: Could you name your sisters and brothers in order? Speaker 1: Yeah, I have James, my oldest brother, and then there is Audrey Faye, who's next to me, there's Precious Elaine, and there's Tammy. Those are my sisters and my brother. My mother had one boy. He's no good; he's rotten, 'cause my mama loved him to death. He's the only boy, the only one. But I have one brother that's on my mother's side. On my father's side, with the second marriage, I have five sisters and brothers. Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear)-- Speaker 1: I might try to name 'em: Alvin, Gwen, Linda--Linda, Alvin, Gwen, Harold, and I'm missing one. Story_ID: 70620 Speaker 1: What, what kind of child were you growing up on a day-to-day basis? Speaker 2: Active, I mean, always asking why, always into something, always being nosy, always listening, you know, being--I was real nosy. I was very much like my grandchild is now. I look at her and laugh. I mean I was nosy, and I always wanted answers. I would never take no for--and I wanted answers. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But I guess I--at the same time I was very spiritual. See, I was always a different child. My parents--my, my family always treated me like I was different. You know, they always felt I had a different gift, and they would always treat me different. And that's why they never really denied me things that I have wanted to do. They would leave me alone if I--if I say something a certain kind of way, they just said okay, leave her alone, let her do it; you know, they let me go. But I was very playful, but I, I always like to think that I was a very spiritual person. That's the side of me a lot of folks don't know. That's why they called me the old lady and they always called me Mama Dean, because I was so stuck up under my great-grandmother, my father's grandmother. And I would be up under her all the time, and I would always listen because she was a lady that everybody came to see. Now I understand why, because she was from New Orleans [Louisiana]. Everybody came to see Mama Dean, and I could never see--understand why everybody would come see Mama Dean. And I would always be in there. And everybody wanted to hear what Mama Dean had to say, Mama Dean was almost like the counselor I guess of the elder. She was a beautiful, strong, tall black woman. I don't ever--she was--she lived to be real old, but she never bent over. And she was real strong, a Senegalese type looking woman, like she's somewhere from around there. When I went to Senegal she reminded me of those women, but I couldn't understand why, and I also saw a spirit until I just recently last year found out where she was from. So I would always be--and I always stayed around a lot of old people. Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: I was always under a lot of old folks. Speaker 1: That's where you get that. And your intuition was sharpened-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --by the wisdom--hearing the wisdom of the older people and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I stayed up under them all the time and listening. And I would sometime--a lot of time I would understand most of the things they were talking about. Story_ID: 70621 Speaker 1: What about elementary school years? What was that like for you? Speaker 2: Well, I went to two elementary schools. One was Daisy Lawrence in Montgomery [Alabama] before my parents--and you probably read about--you read me on the Net, right? So you got-- Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: But before my parents separated, I went to Daisy Lawrence in, Montgomery [Alabama]. And well, first let me go back to the Southern schools was very segregated. And now that I think about it, it wasn't good in terms of the resources, the way did, and how they taught us. But the good part about it was that the teachers had another kind of interest in us, and they taught us things that children don't get today. And in spite of what the curriculum was supposed to be, that the whites society and the white power structure gave them to teach us, they would always teach us something else on the side. I don't think the children are getting that today. I think they're missing that. So I had to learn--I grew up reading "Little Black Tar Baby," you know, and "Brer Rabbit," you know, and things like that. And, and, and they, they always--they taught us very demeaning--we had to learn to read, but "Dick and Jane," you know, you saw "Dick and Jane," and after you get through reading "Dick and Jane," then you'd have to read "Little Black Tar Baby." And "Dick and Jane" you got this little nice little white family and the dog, Spot, you know. You remember Spot, the dog, yeah--Spot and Dick and Jane. And they'd say you--so when they made you put that down, then they take you to "Little Black Tar Baby." And who wants to be a little black tar baby. You wanna be like Dick and Jane. And, and so that was a psychological thing. And it was another book we had to read, where this boy--what was his name? And he'd put around and around in a circle that turned to butter. He chased his tail till it turned to butter. I'll think of his name in a minute--and Brer Rabbit, you know, how slick Brer Rabbit was in the briar patch. They always had all those little things they taught. Our schools was very segregated. I think one of the things I used to like about going to school--it's really interesting--Krispy Kreme just now getting up here, you know. Krispy Kreme is a Southern donut made in Montgomery, Down South. I would always remember the taste of the Krispy Kreme donut and milk, a little thing of milk. I always remember that taste because those donuts would be so hot, and it would come in little bitty cellophane bags (unclear). That was like a little treat at school that they gave us, so I always remember that taste. But our teachers, I just always remember how our teachers taught us and things they would tell us. Speaker 1: What--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And they also would tell us, you know, even though they taught us things about who we were, different little things, what we needed to think, then they would also tell us things about our--to help us be safe. You know, and that's the thing, because living in the racism and the prejudices, they had to teach us how to be safe, but in spite of all the prejudice that was going on, still telling us we were somebody too. One of the things I remember more than anything growing up as a child is that the caste system in our community was not that bad. We didn't have a big caste system, and I think that helped our growth and development. You know, you would have a teacher maybe married to someone who just pick up cans or, or a barbershop, maybe a man can't read or somethin'. But they all came together, and they built for the good of the community. So I--we were kind of protected, based off of the segregation, kept us together, and you always had something to strive for and to look forward to. Story_ID: 70622 Speaker 1: I just kind of remember how the protectiveness of the teacher and during the Bus Boycott how everything was. Even the teachers and stuff would always encourage us to have our parents be in it, you know. So any movement that went on in the South in school, the teachers, the black teachers, was very involved, unlike here and unlike now, any movement that we had, even with Dr. [Martin Luther] King. I mean when I was marching and in the Civil Rights Movement as a teenager, you know, teachers wrote freedom on the board and then erased it off real quick or just--we would know--they know we're gonna walk out, they'd write on the board go, go, go and erased it off but couldn't do anything about it. So we had a--there was a whole another level that the teachers, both in, in elementary and high school, they understood their roles as educators, to teach us to be able to make it in life, but also teach us who we were, how to survive. And our teachers was not cowards, and that's what I remember most of all. They were not concerned about their jobs. They was concerned about, about the people, about the race. And they always told us that, that you are black, you're a Negro, you're colored--not black, but you're a Negro and you're colored and that remember, I don't care how good you are, you gotta be ten times as good as the white man. If you gonna make it, you gotta be ten times as good, and you gotta always strive harder because, because you are colored. It's gonna be hard and that when you do make it and when you go someplace, you remember that you always represent the race, you always. And those are the things we were taught. Maybe it's not taught anymore, but that's, that's why as a black, when one black person does something wrong, you all get embarrassed, because don't you know better than to embarrass us like that? So we were kind of taught it was different. So I remember school, with elementary and high school, where our teachers was involved, even when we got to--and then I went to Daisy Lawrence. And when I moved to--my mother and father were separated, divorced, and my mother, in order for her to get married, had to moved 'cause my father wouldn't let her get married to nobody else. So when she met my stepfather, Willie Struggs, she moved to Pensacola [Florida], which is nothing but Northern Florida. It's like two hours away. I drive that we can drive in an hour and a half, two hours back to Montgomery [Alabama]. So I went to Jet Lee Pickett there, who was kind of the same environment, that family, all that environment. So when you go to the Southern parts you would see that same environment. When-- Speaker 2: Who, who was your favorite teacher? Speaker 1: I used to like Ms. Hicks in my sixth grade teacher. Ms. Hicks, my sixth--Ms. Duncan, I really like Ms. Duncan, 'cause she would take us all over to her--all over to her house, and we would make these candied applies and sell 'em, little red candied apples. And we would make--take the apples and put 'em on the brown paper and thing. But while--but they--I found out later, it wasn't just making the apples, she would always be teaching us outside of the buildings while we were at her house, telling us things and giving us books to take back, things like that. Speaker 2: That's great, that's great. And in high school, did you have a favorite? Speaker 1: No, except my--oh, well, I shouldn't say that--my cosmetology teacher, Ms. Brown. Well, you know, we had, we had this little thing Down South, they said--and I think we had--they had vocational--it was very high on there that if, if, if a kid said they don't wanna go to college, they immediately put them in vocational training. So, it was a group of us, we said we--and you get out early. We were gonna do this to get out early. They, they had, they had tailoring, nursing, cosmetology, cooking. You know, even all the youth and stuff even did the cooking for the, for the, for lunch. In fact, one of my classmates now, he's a real huge caterer in Washington, even catered for the White House, John, John Bonham (ph.). But, so I took cosmeto--in fact, I finished cosmetology at a very early age. But Ms. Brown, I, I just liked her because even when we were doing hair, she was--she would teach. I remember when Kennedy got killed, I was in her classroom. And in fact, I was one the picked the phone up, and I gave the phone to her, and then she said that he had gotten shot. I always remember that day. That was this kind of crazy day. But she was pretty good because she used her classroom--'cause it was so many of us in there, even as we did hair--to teach us. And because we would do hair cheap, all of the, the people in the community would come get their hair, and you know, we would talk to them. So I liked her because she gave us an opportunity to get a lot of sharing of--and I also liked my gym teacher, my homeroom teacher, Ms. Foster, who was my gym teacher. We moved to--so my last year of high school I went back to stay with my father, and I was--and I went to Booker Washington in both places. You only had two schools in the South, Booker Washington or George Washington Carver; those was the name. So in both places I went to Booker Washington. Story_ID: 70623 Speaker 1: And I can't remember a favorite teacher in Montgomery [Alabama]. I remember the principal. I mean he was terrible. Speaker 2: In what way? Speaker 1: Well, because he'd always did the bidding of the white man. He always--whatever [George] Wallace said, that's what he did. You know the structure of government in Alabama was a little different. You know, the sheriff and the governor ran the, ran the state and the, and the counties. We just happened to be--I'm from Montgomery, Montgomery County. We had a county sheriff, but because it was the, was, was the capital, the governor had more of a hand on Montgomery than he had outside, which was Wallace. I should have brought you something he gave me. I'll have to get it back to you. But anyway, so, he was--Mr. Smiley was really--he had no, no guts and that's why I didn't like about him. And then when the movement was going on, and we were very involved in the struggle, the principal at [George Washington] Carver [High School] allowed the students--they was involved. Mr. Smiley, oh, no, he burned my diploma. I mean I had a few weeks to go before graduation, and he, and he was told by [George] Wallace that I was creating--when they, when they identified the--I was a student leader, and we would march and we were doing everything. We was tearing Montgomery up. We was doing everything for freedom, and they said you gotta stop it. So he said--I mean we, we, we was through grad--the first semester all the, the graduates had been identified. So, we really wasn't doing that much, just moving around. I had more than enough credits. And so he said--we had planned this big walkout that day--and Dorothy Tillman is wanted in the office immediately. So I just moved around and moved around till we got all our people in place. And when we got everybody in place that knew what to do, what we do is said when the fire--we pulled the fire alarm, you walk out and you keep walking. You just go straight down Dexter Avenue, and you go and join the march. You don't look back. So everybody knew what to do. So I, I went to his office, and he said, I understand you're gonna have another walkout in my school. I said, sir? And he said, either you're going to call this off or you won't get your diploma here. I said you can't keep my diploma. He said, oh yes, I can. And I say--he said, are you gonna stop the, the march? I said, Mr. Smiley, you should really join us. And he went on to tell me how Dr. [Martin Luther] King was a troublemaker. He went on to say how what we were doing was gonna lead to no good, how I was ruining my career. I was--you are a very smart girl. You got a bright future, you know, you're getting mixed up with these people, just--you know, and why are you doing this? And leave that alone. You're too smart to be mixed up with this. You're bright. Use your brain--(unclear)--just this whole lecture. And he said, now, and are you gonna tell me what you all up to? What time are you gonna walk out? What's going on? Are you gonna call it off? I said no, sir. He said Dorothy Wright, if you don't call off that march, there is no way you will ever get a diploma out of Alabama. And you're not gonna get one from here. And he pulled his drawer open. I, I could smell that cigar. And Mr. Smiley was a, a tall mulatto man. He kind of about Colin Powell's look, but real, you know--so his little privileged self. And so he took his--he pulled out his--out the, out--my diploma out his drawer. He took that cigar, and he dumped the ashes, and then he just set it to fire. And I got up, and I said thank you, Mr. Smiley, but one day you're gonna respect me, and you're gonna love me 'cause I'm gonna free you too. And I walked out of his store. And the alarm went off. The rest is history. We walked, and that was--it was--so that's what I mean I'll always remember that. But it's interesting because before he died he did see me, and he congratulated me on all the things. But, you know, I just looked at him. And it's interesting, because when integration came Down South with the schools, those kind of Negroes was the ones they got rid of first, so he lost his job, you know. But most of the principals and people who was working with us, they kind of found a way to put them in the system. They was scared to touch them, which is a lesson in that too. Speaker 2: (Unclear). What-- Speaker 1: And then we went on--let me say for the record, 'cause somebody said--then when we--when Dr. King brought me to Chicago, he brought, you know. There was a group of us got in--got that--he made sure that all the students who they would not give diplomas to receive diplomas. Some folks ask me, well, did you ever go on to get it? I said yeah, I went on. But we went to--or when I went to Central I came up here, and he--they had arranged for me to--when my records and stuff came--it was Central on Wacker--used to be on Wacker. (Unclear)--and they had arranged that, to look to see, get my credits, and I did whatever I had to do, and my--and I got my graduation out of that. Story_ID: 70624 Speaker 1: So you finished school. You did not go into beauty work. That was just a means to an--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, let me just say, at this point, the whole i--Dr. [Martin Luther] King movement was made up of youth, and I was a student leader. I got assigned to Selma [Alabama]. I was one of the first ten people to go into Selma. I was among the first ten to sent--be sent into Selma to fight for the right to vote. So, in terms of taking the students over in Selma and back and forth and then getting--you know, I was all wrapped up in the movement. The movement was what I felt when I was nine years old at, at the Hope Street Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Why is it you think we have--we don't have that generational interaction that we had then? The, the youth today they're not as close to their senior adults. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we don't--the senior adults are staying younger longer and don't have time to even share. They're so busy, you know. Like I spend a lot of time with my grandchildren. And usually we're too busy to spend the quality time with them. Secondly, I think that a, a gap came, because I always say that even though we struggle and we fought to open up doors, people walked in the doors with no, no means of responsibility. They didn't have a connection of being responsible for the--all of the fighting, everything, the struggle that went on to make sure they make it. There was a separatism. It's like, I made it because I am who I am. So there was no need to pass the information down to the next generation. It's: get away from this, go, run; we're gonna send you to the best schools, and you can be everybody but who you are. So we put that there because we was trying to push our kids away. You know, it's another level of--you know, how a lot of things we don't know when people are talking to us--we talking to old people, and they don't wanna talk about slavery. It's too painful. Oh, I don't know anything about that. That never happened to me. Well, when you have a black parent today, whether she's an executive, whether she's an Oprah [Winfrey], whoever she--whatever she is, they don't wanna discuss with the children that just thirty years ago or twenty-something years ago, they couldn't have sat at that place. And they want them to always think that they were these people, and it's too painful to talk about: this is what it was, and we couldn't do this regardless of what we had. But because there were people who fought, these doors are opened up for you. So you have a responsibility to give back, and I wanna teach you and show you. So the children, they are disconnected from the struggle so they don't understand. And I think it's really the first generation since slavery that's been this disconnected from the struggle. And it's really our fault, because more doors was opened in the last thirty years than ever in the history of this country for blacks, and we didn't know what to do. And because we didn't, we are participating in the demise of the struggle. Story_ID: 70625 Speaker 1: Let us go back for a moment to your environment growing up. What are some of the sights, sounds, and smells that come to mind when you think of growing up? Speaker 2: My environment was full of love, and fun, and dancing, and--what should I say--fish fry with mustards on it. I love mustard and vinegar, and people drinking corn liquor, and having a good time and partying, and then going to church and you know, really--you know, black folks had to do so many things to keep away the pain, at the same time to keep a closeness, because things was not open. There was always a way where you had to deal with it, you know, so I don't know. When I think of--I think of--always think of Sunday school, always think of church 'cause that was a given. And I just think of--like I said, we were happy people. I think of happiness. I mean, one thing I wanna say in this is that I wanna thank--I thank my mother and my grandmother for, for all the love that they gave. My parents and the people around me gave me and my people so much love that I didn't even know I was poor. And I told my mother last year, mama thank you for giving me so much love that I never knew I was poor. I mean, how can you give a child so much love that they never look at their circumstances? I thought everybody drink--at buttermilk and cornbread, or, or peas and cornbread, or slept on pallets, or lived in shotgun houses and things like that. That was no big deal. You know, you had two rooms and a kitchen, or three rooms, it was no big deal. You know, if we had serve--al--aligiser (ph.), which I eat now. I love aligiser; that was--(unclear), and, and, and some of Madea's flapjacks or hoe cakes and bread. I thought that was it. I mean buttermilk and cornbread, that's it, anything like that, so--or, or going to get some greens out of the garden and cooking, that's it. I never knew anything about being poor. I didn't understand that I was poor, and a parent never discussed poverty with a child, and they never told a child you don't have this, you don't have this, you can't--it was always you can do this, you can do that. And one of the things everybody--well, I think parents put too much on children--we--mother don't have nothing. And it's really because black parents are beginning to raise their children the way Europeans raise their children, and that's the danger. We cannot raise our children like Europeans; it's two different ways. And when I was growing up it was like, the way I would treat my mother and the way they would treat their mother, I would have got the backhand. And you could always tell a European child on the black child, but you can in terms of attitudes. And, and one of the biggest difference is the black child just cannot be raised as a European. You cannot be raised the same way because the circumstances are different. Our being is different. Our coming here is different. The environment is different. The world is different. A black boy will get stopped and beaten by a police officer much, much faster than a European child. And if that parent don't tell that child that, that child don't know that. You can have your degree and you're gonna get fired quicker than anybody else, you know. You just don't see the world and the situation is different. Nine times out of ten your education environment is gonna be different. So we have began--we've taken on the ways and not--we have the ways but not the protection. And the reason a black child cannot be raised the way a European child can be raised, because society does not protect a black child the same way it does a European child. Story_ID: 70626 Speaker 1: Okay, we'll go back to now you're getting--you're out of school, and you're like knee deep in the movement. Trace that path for me and how you incorporated that into your personal life coming into-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, first-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I think Dr. [Martin Luther] King and James Bevel--James Bevel was my teacher. I, I studied under Bevel. I--Bevel was, was over the Direct Action part of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. We had several different functions of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]. We had the board; the executive; we had King; and you had field secretaries; and under the field secretaries were staff members. So Hosea had a, had a group; Andy--everybody had groups. We was Direct Action. Hosea was the cleanup crew. We went--we always advanced Dr. King. We tore up everything, and then we moved on, and Hosea--Hosea Williams I'm talking about--they would come behind us and do the cleanup. That's why we was among the first ten to go into Selma [Alabama]. That's why Dr. King brought us here and so on, and so on, and so on. So SCLC was really structured. That's why the government destroyed it so, and nobody really talks about the structure of SCLC. Because our structure was such, we were very structured and we could do anything. I mean we were really sound, and we were some of the best, and we are some of the best organizers in this country. We were trained by the best. We didn't--the staff didn't just go and do things, and that's what people don't understand. We were trained. We had to read. I mean, that's why I read a lot now. We had to study. We had to understand. We had to do reports. We had to sit around and discuss the books. I mean, when I, when I, I read the "Guaranteed Annual Income" at seventeen--sixteen and a half years old. I mean that's a great book. So, to study at that age on why, why America should give every citizen a guaranteed annual income, and then to read that and digest that. I read "Dark Ghetto" by Kenneth Clark at sixteen and a half years old. Can you imagine reading those books at that age and analyzing? I mean that's when I realized what a ghetto was, because before then I was thinking a ghetto was slums, not knowing that a ghetto was where one group of people are. And that's when I learned about the Jewish ghetto and all that. But Kenneth Clark wrote a book on dark ghetto, a must-read book. The kids should be reading that now, you know. And, and, and, and, and it was just a lot of things, a "Conspicuous Consumption," we had to read books like that and analyze it. We had to read economics books. We had to read all kind of books. That was a must if you was on Dr. [Martin Luther] King's staff. We had to read (unclear). So, it was really--it was--couldn't--even though I was out of school, it was a continuation of school. We had to read philosophies. We had to read--when I came to Chicago [Illinois] we studied over at the University of Chicago on economic planning, you know, how do, how do a city work if we're gonna end the slums. So we worked over there with the University of Chicago, and then we also worked with the union, UAW [United Automobile Workers], in terms of how we would organize the city. So it was really--people don't understand our structure. They didn't understand the staff. And I laugh when people say well, what did you learn? The stuff I learned under Dr. King they would never get. We went on retreats at the Pleasant Valley Farm. We went up there all the time when we was here. Duncan YMCA Camp, we went out there. We went everywhere when I was in Chicago [Illinois]. But we had to study, and before we went into a situation, first thing we did, we had to ascertain everything that was around us; we had to analyze. Story_ID: 70627 Speaker 1: We had to know all different things; we understood, but we always knew and felt that we would die. Death was always on us, and we always--that's why we loved each other so much, 'cause we never knew who was gonna die next. And everything we did, we did for our people in love. That's why God blessed us, and that's why we was able to move mountains. We was able to be those Daniels in all of that. You know, we know--I know what it is to be Daniels in the lion den. So when I talk about God, I tell people I'm not talking about something somebody told me. I know about God, and I know what can happen if your truth--we had to deal with truth, and love, and to move out. I mean you cannot deal with the lies if it's--I don't care who it is, you have to deal with truth. And if it's the truth you can speak it, and I don't care who's around you, and we had to deal with truth like that. So, my, my training under [James] Bevel I wouldn't--I like to tell people I'm, I'm a nonviolent scientist, and most folks won't even understand the essence of nonviolence. They think it's turning the other cheeks, and that's not true. You hit me, I'm gonna knock the stew out of you. It's not just turning the other cheek, but also you have to ascertain if you are struggling, then do you--I would--if you hit me now and I was in a group, I certainly would not jeopardize the whole just because of my feelings, because it's not about me. You know, it's about dealing, and loving, move forward. But as a nonviolent scientist, see, most of us-- Speaker 2: How do you define it? Speaker 1: Nonviolent--let me just say, most of Dr. [Martin Luther] King's staff was basically, we were--the field staff, we was some tough people. We were almost near violent. We, we really didn't play, but the field staff, we were real tough. We was tough as nails. But nonviolent as a science is, is, is not the absolute truth, but it's an experiment with truth. And one of the things we were taught by both [James] Bevel and Dr. King is that--'cause Bevel and Dr. King was almost like one--that when you're a nonviolent scientist, and I am a nonviolent scientist, that you have a responsibility and an obligation to deal with truth. Now, if you don't, you can't come up with an answer, or you can't come up with the solution, and you can't liberate your people, because you're not being a scientist. You're on some other agenda, doing some other things. As a nonviolent scientist, if I'm working and working on a proposition and you give me some more truth, and I ascertain it to be the truth, I have a responsibility as a scientist to alter my course, 'cause no true scientist will stay on a collision course if they know better. And that's what's funny because most folks will learn about me, they talking, but they don't understand you gotta stay with truth, and you gotta stay on your course. You just can't--so those are the things. And we truly loved each other. It was love that lifted and brought us as we moved because we had each other. Story_ID: 70628 Speaker 1: You know, I was on Edmund Pettus Bridge on Bloody Sunday when blood flowed like a river. To the left of us was the Alabama River; to the right of us was the Alabama River; behind us was Brown Chapel; and in front of us was all the troops. And they did something different that day. I was in the center, almost toward the back. Speaker 2: When was this--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: This was blood--this was in 1965, March, the first Sunday, whatever date that is. I'll have to think of it--the first Sunday of March 1965 was--it was, it was interesting because you know in the Protestant Church we drink the blood of Jesus. You know, I always (unclear)--you know, take these crackers; this is my body. Take this blood and remembrance of me. Well, that was some deep blood on the 1st Sunday. I mean that was truly the blood. There were these--you know, the Protestant said I know it was the blood. I know it was the blood. I know it was the blood that saved me. That was the blood on that Sunday, first Sunday. And usually they would always let half of the, the, of the marchers get across before they start beating us. And I was always in the middle or the back, 'cause the middle part is the roughest part. But they did something different this time. They started beating people when they hit the bridge right at the front. They started beating people in the front part of the bridge. And that's how [HM] John Lewis got his head cracked open and all of that. It was really a--it was mad, but we--and blood flowed like a river. Speaker 2: How were you injured that day? Speaker 1: Well, you know, I was hurt. I got different little scars and (unclear)--I guess not bad enough to go to the hospital. Speaker 2: What were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Too busy--what was I thinking? Speaker 2: Yeah, what was going through your mind--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, to--you know, when you're SCLC staff, field staff organizer, you're all--you're on automatic pilot. You know, you begin to try to save people. What can you do? How can you pull folks back together? How can you get in line? How can you get 'em in order? Because if we stayed at--if we had of stayed together, less people would have gotten hurt. And our job was to calm people and, but if they scatter, you'll get hurt. And that's how it was. People just started going mad at this point. And so I guess--I thought that I was gonna die, you know, that this is it. But I didn't die. I'm still here, 'cause God had some other purposes for us. Speaker 2: And when it was all over that--on that day-- Speaker 1: I don't-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --remember anything about when it was all over that day. I can't really remember that. It was like rope. I can't--I--it's, it's really difficult for me to focus, because I look at it as all and all--'cause see, a lot of things that happened. Reverend Reed--Jimmy Lee Jackson had gotten killed, so don't forget that. So it was so much stuff. And my grandmother used to tell people, you know, Dorothy Jean is like a person who's coming from battle or some stuff. It's like, you know, you be somewhere else. We were really in a battle, so. So many things had happened. That was just one in a series of things. It's like they, they--we gotta come back. We gotta go back. I mean remember they had been--they beat up some individual when he was trying to go get--march. We was already encountering a lot of violence over and over again, so that was another piece of violence. So you don't separate that particular violence from all the other violence, from Jimmy Lee Jackson getting killed. And remember a few weeks before that they had beat people up standing around the church in Prairie County. So I mean, we had had so much violence going on around us that that was another piece of a series of violent. Now the world was watching, that's what made the difference, is that they took the cameras and they started breaking these cameramen cameras, and they beat up the cameramen that day. And because they beat the cameramen up and the reporters, they got super angry, and the whole world watched the cameramen bleeding and everything. But keep in mind that we had already experienced lynching all through--I grew up in an environment people got lynched and all that. And then we had also experienced during the Civil Rights Movement--down while we were in Selma [Alabama] we had experienced people getting beaten, murdered, so it was just some more in a series of violence toward fighting for liberation. So, Selma was traumatic and is a turning point in our movement, and a lot of folks relate to that Bloody Sunday. But it was part of all the other blood that had been shed and things, but it just so happened that was the blood today that the world, who takes sacrament--the Holy Sacrament was drinking the blood of Jesus, grape juice, and we were shedding blood on Edmond Pettus Bridge--two different things: you drink grape juice; we shed blood on Edmund Pettus Bridge. So if and when Jesus was pierced, it was real blood that came, not grape juice. So some people was even drinking the real blood at that point--I mean different point of view. I should-- Story_ID: 70629 Speaker 1: (Unclear)--and so what was--what happened in the ensuing days and weeks after? Speaker 2: Well, you know, even before Selma [Alabama], before Bloody Sunday, Bevel had been--we didn't know where Bevel was, James Bevel. They had taken James Bevel away from us. And they said all kind of things--oh, he had left us. And we didn't know where he was--he was dead; he was this. And they didn't have hospitals for blacks to go to. They had infirmaries where little old ladies would keep people. And Bevel was at--I don't remember the lady's house. I'll have to get the name from Bevel. And that's where he was, sick. They had beat him up so bad, and he was, he was there. I guess they was trying to get him together. And Jimmy Wilson, he just passed. Jimmy Wilson had gotten beaten to death, and they thought he was dead. And they took him to the infirmary where Bevel was, and they was getting ready to put a tag on his toe, and take him in that back room for the morgue. And Bevel, Bevel jokes and say--he say Lord--he did say it, and he said Lord, raise Jimmy up from the dead. But Bevel said Lord, how am I gonna go back to Chicago [Illinois]--'cause Jimmy Wilson was from Chicago--and let this boy's mama know--how I'mma call this boy's mama, Lord, and tell 'em he's dead? I can't do that. And Jimmy moved his toe, and the, the ladies realized Jimmy Wilson was not dead, and they worked on him. So that's how we found Bevel. At this point, Jimmie Lee Jackson had already been killed. It was Bevel who called the march on the bridge. And Bevel came to the church. I don't remember his sermon. I'll have to ask him. He preached--he came in. He was so weak. He had the blanket around him. I'll always remember that night. You could feel the tension in the room. It was like it was getting ready to blow. Everybody--nonviolence had was going out the window. People was--I mean it was just a lot of energy. And we were singing freedom songs, and all of the--the posse was across the street, because they were would deputize posses. They said, "You hate niggers?" "You got a horse?" "You got a gun?" "I'll deputize you, come on." They used go throughout the counties and get all these whites. We used to call 'em Jim Clark and his posse. So, you know, it was--Jim, he had a, he had a, he had a huge posse, and they were all out across the, across the street. So there was a lot of things going on. And then Bevel came in, and he preached the violence out of people, the fear out of people, and he said, "We're going across that bridge. We're gonna take this to [George] Wallace. We're gonna leave here and put this in Wallace lap." And we would march at night. A lot of times people used to see us march at night. We marched at night to break the fear from people. It was a fear breaker, 'cause people were scared. And you need to march again at night now--people frightened again--but we used to march at night. And so Bevel--we--that's why we went--Jimmie Lee Jackson is the reason why we went across the bridge, because we had to take that energy and do something with it. Speaker 1: Just for the record, would you define James Bevel, and just tell us what they did, you know. James--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: James Bevel was a field staff organizer, and he was a field--he was over Direct Action. He was a field secretary for Dr. [Martin Luther] King. I would like to think of him as being one of Dr. King's brains. I mean you can't even read about Dr. King without reading about James Bevel. In most of the movements that Dr. King did came out of James Bevel's head. I mean the housing movement, the right to vote movement, the Birmingham, all of these things. He was one of the leaders of the student movement in the sit-ins, so he goes way back. Story_ID: 70630 Speaker 1: I worked under him at--under Direct Action; in fact, it was he [James Bevel] who went to tell my grandmother that Dr. [Martin Luther] King wanted to take me to Chicago [Illinois]. And my grandmother said what? And he said well, I'm telling you Dr. King want her. She gotta go. And Madea let me come to Chicago in advance--first we did the tour, and then when I got reassigned to work here, he told Dr.--he told her then I was gonna get assigned, and then she let me come. And he said we're gonna take care of her we promise, and that's what they did. Speaker 2: And you were about eighteen and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, I was seventeen. Speaker 2: Seventeen, okay. Speaker 1: When I got here. I made eighteen on my eighteenth birthday here, 'cause I went home reg--register to vote. I flew home to register (laughter). Speaker 2: And so when you got to Chicago [Illinois], then things changed for you personally too, is that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, when I got to Chicago [Illinois]--first I came to Chicago in the summer of '65 [1965]. We did a Northern tour to determine what--we, we did a Northern tour to determine what, what city we were gonna work in. Of course, if I had known any better, we couldn't have toured because the fix was already in. Already everybody had, had lobbied Dr. King for us to be here. But we went to New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Washington [D.C.], many other-Cleveland [Ohio], many Northern cities, and of course Chicago [Illinois] was chosen. But when I first came to Chicago, I had never seen dog mess on the sidewalk. That was the first thing. I said my God! I'd never seen dogs in people's house until I came to Chicago. It was unheard of. I thought it was the nastiest thing in the world. I called my mother, said people have dogs in their houses, and there's dog mess on the sidewalk--country girl, dogs outside, right. And I--and all the buildings looked gray. I said how these people know their houses. They all look the same. I couldn't even figure out how they would figure out--this was the first time I'd ever been North. How do you know where you live? And I really didn't know--so we came and we did the whole march in Grant Park, and we organized it. We went on to Cleveland [Ohio]. We got to Cleveland--House of Wills Funeral Home. Mr. Wills picked us up. But before we left, there as a message man that said Dr. King was very uncomfortable--from Andy Young--and said that Dr. King was very uncomfortable with Chicago, 'cause we would come organize, mobilize--he'd come on, we go on to the next city, and he wanted his field staff back around him. So we had to come back here, and we stayed here until after the big march. That's how I managed to be in the march here that they had in Grant Park. Other than that, we wouldn't have been in that march. We hit and miss and go on. And so we came and we stayed by his side, around him, through that march, because he was more comfortable with the field staff and went on to Cleveland [Ohio]. But when Chicago was chosen, and I came here, I was assigned here October 31st, 1965. And I told my mother--it was dreary day during that October. For two days the sun didn't shine; it was dreary. And I called my mother and told her the sun don't shine in Chicago. And she said baby, God let the sun shine everywhere. I said you should see this place. And I drove down--we drove down the expressway, and I said ooh, [James] Bevel, what is all those factories during in the middle of the city? He said those not factories. I said what are they? This is terrible, all these big old tall buildings. And he said people live there. I said people live there? You expect us organize them? He said I'm afraid so. And that's how--and that was my first encounter with the Robert Taylor [Homes]. I never knew God would at some point have me here to represent this particular community, but he was preparing me. Story_ID: 70631 Speaker 1: (Unclear)--what did--what was it about Chicago [Illinois] that made Dr. King uncomfortable? Speaker 2: When we first came here? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: I guess in the end you can really see. I didn't know then he just wanted his staff back. He was uncomfortable when we first got here. This is before we were assigned. This is when we was touring. But I know when we came here to stay here, after we was assigned, we had never gone to a city where ministers and politicians, black folks, told us to leave. That was a first. Even when we went to other cities and black folks was frightened, or they didn't want us around, they kept their mouth shut. And went out of the way. But these people had a press conference, some of your major politicians. And a lot of 'em are still in office and still around now. Some of your politicians and all of your ministers, the majority of the black ministers, they held a press conference. And they said for Martin [Luther King, Jr.], they wanted us to go back, that they didn't need us here, and we wasn't nothing but some troublemakers. That was really troublesome. And I remember telling Dr. [Martin Luther] King--and I told him I wanted to leave. I didn't like this place. I, I tried everything I could to leave. Send me to Cleveland [Ohio], do anything, send me home; I don't wanna be here. I want to go back to Alabama, anywhere. I'd never seen people like this before, never. And they were all stuck in a ghetto. They couldn't move. They, they couldn't--evidently, they wasn't that happy 'cause soon as we got open housing, they all scattered. So if they was so happy where they was, why did they scatter? But Dr. King was, was--I said though, you know, "I don't wanna stay here;" and I said that. I--you know, they, they called me the movement baby, and it was very--I must say that I was raised by men, and that's probably why I've all male friends not men friends now, but I was--that's why I probably respect black men, and I knew that black men can make a difference. Some people don't understand or haven't experience, but in the movement it was a lot of black men, our leaders. So I know that black men can fight. And you know, so when I said, you know, "What--why are we here, I wanna go"--and they were very protective of me. I must say they really protected me. And you know, so a lot of say they have not been protected, well, I, I was protected by the black men in the movement. And they always listened when I would speak, and I always got answers. I mean we would never just, "No, you don't know what you're talking about." And I said to Dr. King, "I don't wanna stay here," 'cause see, he wanted me here. I was trying to really get reassigned. I said, "They don't want us here. Why do we need to stay here? They don't want us. What are we gonna do?" And he said, "We have to stay here." I said, "Oh," and he said, "These some strange kind of Negroes in Chicago," he said. "The Negroes here are very strange. You think about the plantation in Alabama, but Daley's plantation wipe out Alabama plantation any day." Story_ID: 70341 Speaker 1: He [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said that you think the plantation out South was somethin'. The Daley plantation is worse than the Southern plantation--said some strange kind of Negro. They're like overseers; these are nothing but overseers trying to keep the Negroes in line in the fields. And he said but, if we crack Chicago [Illinois], we can crack the world. He said Chicago is such that whatever you do in Chicago will move like wildfire. And I always remembered that. That's why the reparation movement--once it moved in Chicago, it moved. So he said so you see, we have to stay. Let's give it our best shot. And I remember Daley saying--Richard J. Daley--he said when he met with Dr. King, he told him that the way you won Down South is that got your head beaten, and you was put in jail. We're not gonna put you in jail in here, and we're not gon' beat your heads, so you just as well go on back. And I remember we was on the Westside, we was painting in the slum symbols in the street, and they arrested us. They got us out of jail in two minutes. Commander [George] Sims was on the Westside. He didn't even lock us up, had us in the there waiting, and then Daley told him to let us out of there. When we were in Gage Park, now the police officers never touched us, but because it was their communities, it was their wives and their children, I had never seen nobody up in the trees like monkeys, throwing bricks and--you know, we had never--the viciousness in Chicago was greater than any viciousness I saw Down South or anywhere we had been. Speaker 2: Even the bridge experience? Speaker 1: Oh, worse. They hit us head on. See, Southern white people are different, and Southern white folks are more honest than Northern white people. They come at you straight on. They're not sneaky, with except for that hooded stuff, but even in terms of--Northern whites, you know, they'll pretend they're with you, and they'll wipe, try to wipe you out another kinda way, and that's the way it was, or they'll send those strange kind of Negroes after you. And then when you meet with 'em, they'll say I don't' know why they doing that to you; why are they doing that? So, anyway, so and the rest is history. I ended up staying here. Yes, I did, I met and--when I went on my first assignment, the picture you're gonna look at is I was assigned to the North Side with Corey Bryant and Audrey Woodridge. I don't know whether you know them. You're a history maker person. That's a great woman to know. Ms. Woodridge still live here. Corey Bryant lives out of Cabrini Green; some of the original organizers in Cabrini. We organ--and I was assigned to help them get rid of Ms. Chuchac (ph.). My Freedom House, in case you wanna film that, is 3309 West Monroe; it still stands there. That's a Freedom House that we, we lived in. We ended up in a church, the Warren Avenue Congregational Church, is a Baptist church now. it's on Warren Avenue and Albany or Kedzie, not far from Ef--Edna's restaurant. Edna knows where it is. So, we ended up there, the white minister, Bill Briggs, and he gave us Freedom House. We had some other Freedom Houses. I met Edna from Edna's restaurant when I was seventeen. We opened her restaurant up. She used to feed Dr. King's staff. We were her first client. They was cooking greens and bringin' 'em to the, to the, to the restaurant. And Daley gave them--sent the inspectors after them because they was feeding us. So, I, I met Edna for long. She fed us. So Edna been around me for a long time. So it was--I met Jesse [Jackson] in 1966. He became a part of our staff in '66 [1966]. Mm-hmm, at CCO office. Al Raby--not Al Raby--Clay Evans brought him to us, to be a member of our staff, so. Story_ID: 70342 Speaker 1: And how large was the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at its greatest? Speaker 2: Well, it depends 'cause-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it depends on how you, how you do the numbers. I wouldn't really know. We have staff and then we had people. We were organized. Everybody was part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], but you know, so you--I don't know. That's something you need to get from the SCLC office. Speaker 1: How did the work you were doing with Dr. King stack up against what was happening with Malcolm X and Elijah Muhammad and-- Speaker 2: Malcolm [X] and Elijah [Muhammad] and Dr. [Martin Luther] King was best of friends. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: It's just that--what we have to understand is we're--since this is history-making, and we're talking about history for black people, that we're not monolithic. And the difference during that time was all black folks was fighting on behalf of black folks. We just came down different roads, but the end result the was the same; we met at the center, and it was on behalf of black people. Malcolm [X] and--I remember Malcolm [X] came to Selma. And he and [James] Bevel met, and they talked for a long time. And we already knew when Malcolm left that he was gonna say, you'd better be dealing with Dr. [Martin Luther] King because an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. You strike me, I'm strike you back. And this, this got blown all up. Malcolm is in con--Malcolm was not in conflict with us. So, you know, Dr. King--and Dr. King and, and, and, and Elijah Muhammad had great respect for each other. Dr. King understood very clearly that Elijah Muhammad was working to pull the minds of black folks, to make them look at an economic base for black people. So, I mean, we were really--we had, we had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]; we had CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]; we had all these different groups. So it wasn't just--I mean, yes, we get the credit for the movement, but it was all of us who changed the lives of black people. We all did different roles. We all were important. Every element, every component of that movement was important. CORE was just as important as SCLC. SNCC was just as important as SCLC. Malcolm [X] was just as important. All the other organizations--but collectively, we were all working for the health, interest, rights, and needs of black people, and to change our conditions. Speaker 1: We seem not to have the variety of approaches anymore. What do you think of that? Speaker 2: Well, I won't say we don't have 'em. I think they're laying dormant, or sometime we might not understand because, just like our history during slavery and pre-Civil Rights Movement, how, how the, how the power structure made sure that we didn't know our history. They've taken this generation and, and not lettin' them know their history. They--the power structure or, or the Europeans who do the history knows that we were one. But they would have our people say, oh, Dr. King was this or Malcolm was that. So they try to make sure that, that the younger people don't know that we were all one, that it's all right to be Malcolm, Dr. King, or anybody you want, just work for your people. And that's the message. So we--it's laying dormant. It's how we do it. One of the things [J. Edgar] Hoover said when Hoover--you know, we was under surveillance. I mean I've probably been under surveillance since I was young; I'm still under surveillance. I mean, the just--I went to--I came from, from the airport in Pensacola [Florida]. They took all my stuff--I'm an elected official--and just laid it on the darn table and, and went through everything I had, laid all my clothes out, which is--you know, I just looked at 'em, because now they using it as an excuse to make sure the movement don't pop up. And I know it's based off of my position and who I am and things like that. But Hoover said, once he cracked the movement, was that he would never, ever allow us to organize massively anymore. That was in a document. He publicly said that we gonna use the television; we won't let any groups get together. So there's a, there's a controlled effort, and there's a strategic move to keep those components separated. Story_ID: 70343 Speaker 1: And you also got to know that we are experiencing a backlash, because during the movement of the, the white women, and their children turned on the white men who was in power during those times. And they for first the time in their life was confronted by their children and their wives, and said that you were wrong; they had never been confronted like that. And they said daddy, you were wrong or honey, you were wrong, and we're gonna join this movement. That devastated him, because he had for once had to be faced with the truth from his children and his wife. So now what you have is a backlash. They--this man have not forgiven us for that, that's why they brought all this crack and everything in our community, and that's why you see the devastation with our, with our children now. Because they didn't wait. They got--they did this in my generation, not another generation. I mean you--I mean when you look at Viola Liuzzo, this is white woman, whom I really have a lot of respect for. And I knew her, came from Detroit [Michigan]. When she saw Bloody Sunday, that's what happened. We mobilized--and a lot of the children and the women came, because they knew it was wrong. See, women have another kind of sense about things sometimes, and children are more open than somebody who's older and settled. So the youth, the white youth, rebelled. So Viola Liuzzo said I'm gonna go to Selma [Alabama]. She had five children, and her husband was a, was, was an organizer, was a UA--I think he was a union person. And he didn't want her to come, but she said I must go. And that woman was killed because she was there fighting for the rights of black people. Now, what happened to her children I always wanna know, because they were raised without their mother. And the question is did they tell--do they understand how great they mother was, that she did give her life? They said no greater man than those who would give their life or lay down their life for another man. And she gave her life so that we could have rights, and you can't forget things like that. Or Reverend Reed, he was a white Unitarian minister, James Reed, who they beat his brains out. And we flew him to Birmingham [Alabama], and he still died. So it's a lot of things like that. So we're dealing with a lot of--they study history, and they try to make sure it don't repeat itself, and then oppress us and keep our kids cracked out, and have all these other kind of laws they're making. So we really are dealing with a lot of things we haven't--and so that's why we have an internal/external struggle to fight. And it, and it's really something. Story_ID: 70344 Speaker 1: But how have you really been able to reconcile your, your person as a--as an active person. I mean that's just part of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Let me say--I like to tell people first of all that I'm a mother-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a woman, and a leader. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, I have five children. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And they all grew up and, and, and, and, and I've, and I've really taught them a lot. I met and married Jimmy Tillman, who's a great blues musician, he's a playwright. He write for the Black Ensemble. He's a teacher. Of course, we're divorced, but we're very close. We have five wonderful children, so my children are first. All my--family's the most important thing to me and in my life. And because they're so important to me, and my grandchildren, and all the other children, because they're important to me, I tried to make life better for them and all the other children. So most of my being is based off of what's not for me, but for them. So that's, that's kind of how I pull this thing together a little bit. I'm fifty-five, so I don't have--I'm not making a way for me right now. It's for that generation behind. Every race does that. Every group does that. But we've been taught don't do that. We live for the moment, as a people, and it's because of slavery that we live for the moment. And the reason we, we live for the moment based off of slavery was, of course, we never knew if we was gonna get lynched, we was gonna get killed, if not lynched, just killed some other way, whether we was gonna get sold, whether our families was gonna be separated, whether we was gonna get raped, or what. So it was like, we'd better enjoy this moment while we have, because this song that says, "This may be the last time. I don't know." We take that literally. So slavery have made us live for the moment. That's that Post Traumatic Slavery Syndrome, that psychological effect. So we have so many battles to fight, the, the, the Post Traumatic Slavery Syndrome is real. The psychological effect is real. Even those of us who are conscious, we suffer too. I suffer from Post Traumatic... like everybody else. There's no way in the world you can be totally--a white--you should be totally void of any of them. We all got some. Speaker 1: Which one of your sons and daughters, which one is most like (unclear) as far as public--(unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I think all of 'em have a piece of me. Jimmy Lee's just very active, Ebony--they all have a piece of me. I have an--my one son is an artist. He's like his father. My oldest son, this boy he took African History and Education in school. He's a very sensitive child. He really thinks about his people. I think him watching his mother go to jail when I was fighting for the schools really bothered him. He don't want nobody--he's--I can't have my boys around me too much when I'm doing things, 'cause they don't want nobody to say nothing to their mother. And as their own protection, I kind of keep them away. (Unclear)--where the boys? It's me. See, I keep them back, 'cause you say something to mama, they get very upset. I remember when he was little I'd be going to jail, he'd be on TV: Leave my mother alone, leave my mother. So I think they all have a piece of me; they all are outgoing; they're all real deep. Jimileecha's (ph.) just very--Jimileecha just got the glamour; she's this, and then there's Ebony--I haven't--I got with, I got one with curls here; I got one with dreads; I got one with this. I got it all. So, you know, and I taught them and I always buy--I've always given them books. And I have my grandchildren. I have four grands, mm-hm. Speaker 1: What is the age range of the grandchildren? Speaker 2: Ebune [ph.] is five; that's my youngest, then my oldest granddaughter--and Gimoaki [ph.] will be two in November. Jimmy's 12, Jimmy Tillman [III] the third, and Jogay [ph.] is three. My son have to boys. My oldest son and my oldest daughter have two girls. Story_ID: 70345 Speaker 1: How did you decide--what made you decide to run for alderman in the Third Ward? Speaker 2: I didn't decide it; it decided for me. We were very involved in the school struggle, did a lot of things. I really was happy being a mother, for the first time out of the limelight, not struggling, loving my babies, baking bread, make sure their diet is healthy, going to the schools, doing everything. And the school was failing, and I got involved in the school struggle. And then we organized all of these schools all over the city, and, and the demand got pretty high, and we couldn't get the, the elected officials to deal with the educational question. And we decided we had to run, run some people. And I couldn't get anybody to run against Kinnard. Everybody was scared, and I was like forced into it. That's how I did it. I lost by a hundred and something votes. Fine, but the I was--then turned around and appointed by Harold Washington after he went to jail. So I really didn't want to. I did it reluctantly. I just couldn't find anybody else to do it. Speaker 1: And, and I remember in those hectic school years that you were on TV all the time. That, that was your old self coming out. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was interesting because Jane Byrne said to the press, she said, "I've done research on this on this woman. She's not just a parent, she's a professional organizer." It frightened her. I worked with--I worked to--in area B to get Jane Byrne elected 'cause I thought we needed a change, and she got in and she turned on us. And I worked just as hard to get her out of there because she, she lied. And--but I was very involved in the school struggle, worked very close with Mayor Washington, even to get him his Congress, as a congressperson and then as mayor. So, I kind of got thrust into it. In fact, I didn't even call for the boycott. It was another parent saying, "Let's boycott." I said, "Do you know what you're talking about?" "Yeah," but she really didn't. She didn't know the extent. So then I began to put all my organizing skills into play for the parents, to make sure that the boycott worked, and that's how they elected me to head it up because I knew it was gonna work. We need to take--(unclear)--freedom school because parents needed to have some place to send their children, knew you was gonna get the boycott broken, and you had to call it at a certain time. And we called it during the, during the Christmas break. It was easier to keep the kids out than to pull 'em out. So the parents had to send 'em back. Story_ID: 70346 Speaker 1: Well, on our, on our way to more of your illustrious and very challenging and active career, let me stop and ask you about the hats. How did you come to have the hat as the trademark? Speaker 2: Thought you would get--I thought you would never say--let me say, when I would go with my grandmother as a little girl, she would always put me--she said well dressed women always wear a hat and (unclear) had her hats on. Dr. [Martin Luther] King wore hats an awful lot. He always put a hat on his head. You just never seen it. And I always thought he looked so handsome in those hats. I always have covered my head more or less, that's why people used to think I was a Muslim. In fact, you got a chance to see my hair today, the first time you realized I had some. Speaker 1: And that's (unclear) too. Speaker 2: Most folks think I don't have any. But when I was a--I always have worn hats, but I would never wear 'em all the time. In the summertime I let my hair get some air. When I was appointed alderman, it took forever for them to confirm me. And the day of my confirmation, had on this white suit and a white hat--but I've always worn the hats on and off--and the Sergeant-at-Arms came and told me that I was not allowed to--he was really angry. "You're gonna take your hat off in this city council. Hats are not allowed on this floor." Well, the day I was confirmed, the city council was packed. And they said, "Leave Dorothy alone." And they hollered, "Do take off your hat. Don't take off your hat." And I got all of these letters, "Please never take off your hat." So they kept writing all these stories about my hat, and I couldn't take the hat--I took it off one day and the lady said, "Where is your hat?" So I got stuck with the hat all the time, so that's how I got--I've always worn hats; I always loved hats, but the to wear it all the time, you know. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Now I take my hat and put on some glasses people say, don't I know? Speaker 1: They think you're Mrs. Gardner, Betty Anne Gardner-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear) Chicago women. I knew her always. Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a lot of respect for Mrs. Gardner. She's a wonderful woman and so is her husband, who was very supportive of me all during the struggle when, when they wouldn't confirm me. Mr. Gardner said if you're not gonna confirm her, I'm gonna give her a salary that a city councilmen would make and put her children on the insurance, and he did that. Mr. Johnson have been a very supporter of mine, John Johnson, "Ebony." I've known him since I was a young girl, and he's been very supportive. So I've known a lot of great black men who really have been very supportive and really supported me tremendously and have made me strong. Story_ID: 70347 Speaker 1: Now, we know you have a whole, another half, coming up that's gonna really mark your path as you walk this way, and that's reparations. But before we get to that, can you give me a little bit of the sense of city hall and, and Harold Washington movement from your perspective? Just paint that picture. Speaker 2: Well, with Harold [Washington], I must say the government truly belongs to the people. It was the first time the black folks felt like government was theirs, and they came down. When Harold died they stopped coming. Harold Washington was a person that, that loved his people. He had no problem with say, because I love mines, don't mean that I don't like anybody else. I just love my people. And he was a fair mayor, and Harold Washington opened up this city, to not just black folks. A lot of people were shut out, so he opened it up to a lot of people. I was fortunate to be appointed by him and be in city government with him. I'm one of the senior alderman in city council. There's only three black alderman that was there with him. That's Alderman Beavers, Ed Smith, and myself, we're the last three. And Alderman Schiller is the white alderman that's there. But when, when Harold became--first of all when he became mayor, it was to be part of the twenty one and the twenty nine. It was something, but we had to learn government. We had to know government. Because in order to help him, we had to understand the rules. We had to understand how to be out there and quarterback him. And that was one of the biggest things, going there with Harold, is that we did have to understand government. It was--just as we began to understand it, and just be--I think if Harold had still been here, he would have got a handle--we had a handle on government and you'd seen even more. It was Harold Washington. Most of your programs you see Daley carrying out to day--Richard J. Daley--is based off of things that Harold had put in place. Lake Shore Drive, that was Harold's program. Harold did that, and he had the architect, [Walter] Netsch to design, and he had a whole teach together, but, but Richard J. Daley carried it out; he finished it. The infrastructure program was put together by Harold. Harold was the first one to put together a bond issue to make sure that we got our streets and our sidewalks and things. Harold Washington--so Daley, Richard J. Daley, has continued to carry it out. The Harold Washington Theater and Culture Center on 47th Street was started under Harold Washington, was carried on by Sawyer, and now finished by Daley. The Blues District was started under Harold Washington, carried on by [Eugene] Sawyer, now finished under Richard J. Daley. So a lot of Harold's programs--even when, when the cab, when the big cab incident was out with the medallions and things, that was started under Harold. But Daley continued some--a lot of those programs. Harold Washington opened up government like never before. Harold was concerned about the neighborhood. He believed in link development. I mean if the big people was gonna work downtown, they had to put something in the neighborhood. That's one program I wish that the mayor would pick up of Harold and I'm always hollering at him about, you know, at least try to get link development, link development, executive order in terms of contracts, and a lot of things that he did. So Harold was a people's person. He loved Chicago. He worked so hard, and people always complain that he couldn't, he couldn't be there, but he was everywhere, and he did all he could. I was rough; it wasn't way, but Harold liked a challenge, and he was very strong. I would like to think I played a very major role in the selection and the election of Harold Washington as mayor of the city of Chicago. Speaker 1: And, and give me--illustrate it for me with the story and the process of We Want Harold. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I think that--let me first of all say that when we elected Harold for governor--I mean for--govern--for mayor--we could have elected anybody that year, because the people was ready for change; they had began to get so involved; and because of all the things we had done. We, we went to several people to get them to run when Harold--we thought Harold wasn't gonna run, but he decided to run. And Harold--but Harold was a person for this job. God knows that he was the person, and that's why he was chosen. You know, it was like--I think it might have started over in Robert Taylor [Homes]. (Unclear) used to say "I love you, Harold," and people just began, "We want Harold." We just--and it kind of developed as a slogan, and at the end, after he won, or as we kept going around the city, people say "we want Harold, he started saying, "You want Harold? You got Harold." And as he would say that, it kind of caught on. But one of the interesting thing was that the tree at 47th and [Martin Luther] King Drive that we light ever year. We light it in remembrance of Harold Washington because just before Harold passed, we put that tree there, and we were going to light the tree there while he light the one in the Daley Center. And I was gonna use a cell phone--you ready in the hood?--yeah. And we was going to hook up and light the tree for the kids in the hood. Harold died. The tree stayed dark. I cried. I didn't know what to do. So after we buried him, I came back, changed the sign, and put in memory of Harold. And I said every year we would light this tree in memory of Harold, because we would go from Harold--we want Harold to Harold who--how is Harold to who's Harold. And then one of, one of the things I found out, that the young people had gotten away from who Harold is, here, again a piece of us. So what we do every year is that, in my ward, all of the schools have to write something about Harold. And we give out four prizes. We give them a U.S. Saving Bonds and a book on Harold, and we light that tree in memories of Harold every year. Story_ID: 70348 Speaker 1: Your--the political challenges in your ward, you've been able to weather them. And have you, have you been challenged as far as running competition--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'm challenged--well, let me just say that-- Speaker 1: --and how have you met the challenge? Speaker 2: Well, we just deal with truth. And I just believe that my people understand the truth. We work. We don't take anybody for granted. A lot of times my ward is there's hidden hands in my ward, because I have one of the best wards in the city of Chicago, the best transportation. Over the next ten year more, more money will be spent in my ward for development than anywhere. And we've said very clearly to all of the people over there that we in--that we intend to make a few black millionaires. We initiated the 70/30 Plan that people did not like. We put a hold on all of the land, and people start--that city owned. Speaker 1: What is the 70/30 Plan? Speaker 2: Seventy percent African American, thirty percent others. And I think that's very liberal, 'cause the city's at 25 percent minority, and you're lucky if blacks get one. And then when you go to the white community, you'll find that you don't find any blacks getting any kind of developments, so 70/30 is--was very liberal. A lot of people said I shouldn't do it. Now, the white developers accept it. They come in, they said this is my sev--even if they got something, they know they gotta have a 70/30. And they come in and we're moving thirty percent other people, but we're trying to make sure that at least seventy percent of that land that's developed by African Americans. We've lived there, we've weathered the storm, and we have a right to make money there, and that's what we're working on, the 70/30 Plan. So what you have is a lot of developers now say oh my God, look at that community down there! We want it. So you have a lot of hidden hands in our community. If anybody, is, is really, if anybody is really after us, it's because of outside people. Speaker 1: And, and the 70/30 Plan, that--I mean, well, not the 70/30. But you have a challenge in having now a large group of have and have-nots in your area. How do you meet that challenge? Don't answer yet. We're gonna change--or how--what do (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: I may still have a-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --couple of minutes. Speaker 1: How do you handle the challenge of now with gentrification happening? Speaker 2: Well, let me say that the Third Ward had never really--we had poverty and the poverty rate was real high because of our development, but the Third Ward is where all the old rich money was and have been. A lot of people didn't run away. I have eighty-five percent of my old ward. I have gone--I'll go down to 14th Street, and I've got back some, some of my old ward in northern. On the northern, all I do is try to make sure--I think that blacks, the haves want to be even though they might have--they have jobs. They want ownership, and I think black folks understand economics, and we're talking about economic development and economic ownership for black people. And if they don't--I mean I can't see them being against that. A lot of them come to my office every day looking. They can't get contracts. They can't get certified. They should be blessed, and they are happy to have someone who's gonna fight on their behalf. In terms of the have-nots, I think that the, the homelessness in--have grown not only in my ward but in this city because of the demolition of public housing. I try very hard to keep public housing up. I fought real hard, and I couldn't get any help. So now they've--they're going down. I've been trying to make sure that even now we negotiate with the developers, that African Americans would at least be involved in the redevelopment of that and the affordable housing. Story_ID: 68217 Speaker 1: Oh, I was just saying that the, the haves, the so-called have, is one paycheck away from poverty, and they live--might live in lofts apartments or have a nice apartment. Their rent is so high, you know, they're looking for someone to help them too, because they too have a right to, to, to enjoin in this development and really making money. They too want contracts, you know. They open their refrigerator, there's no food in it. That's why, you know, it's an--and so they, they're looking for the same thing the have-nots. So I think black--there go that caste system again. We gotta help each other, you know. No black child should be hungry. We have a responsibility to make sure that child is fed. So I'm, I'm not gonna have a problem with my new ward. I'm looking forward to it. I just inherited some of the northern end. I got to 14th Street, and I'll have to deal with trying to see what I can do. And I've talked to a lot of people down there. So I think that the have--have-nots and the haves are on the same boat just different ends of the boat. One is at the one that's tilted, that's nose first, and the other one is at the other end. They up high and don't realize the boat is tilted till it start going down. You understand? Story_ID: 68218 Speaker 1: Let's talk now about the issue that has really put you on the national map really in a different way, reparations. How did you become so passionate about reparations? And tell me what you see. Comment on what you have done and what you see you want to do in that direction. Speaker 2: I've always followed it, reparation, and as I told you, my path, with how I grew up, all the teaching. It's a natural progression when you go from where I came from in the South, and the teaching, and what was taught to me. And as an elected official, I ran for office as a springboard or as a platform for my people. Let me just say that black elected officials, the only reason for being in office is to make sure they enhance and make things better for their people. That don't mean you don't represent all your constituency, but you got a responsibility to fight for black people. First of all, whites don't need you fight for them. No other group need to just exclusively for them because they have the presidents; they have the corporations; they have everything. We're the only one that don't have anybody fighting for us. We get in office, we say I can't do that 'cause I have to fight for everybody. No, you do what's right. The right thing is you fight for your people, and you're gonna--I'm not saying do anybody any wrong, but you have to fight for your people. They say black elected officials. Then if you don't need to be in that fight, if black folks don't need a voice in government, why do we have to fight for the right to be in government. But we get in office and we stop. We need to fight for an economic base. Other people have no respect for you if you're sitting in office and you're representing a constituency group, and you're not in their fighting in their behalf, how can you get any respect? I'm not gonna respect a group who don't fight for their people. I can't trust you to help me if you're not gonna help your own people. So reparation was really a natural. If we--a reparation and the economics is--and education are the most important things for black people right now, and economics is tied into reparation. And I, I wanna thank Randall Robinson and all of the people that's involved. Our whole community have to get involved in the reparation struggle. And this struggle is just not a black struggle. Other folks are involved in the struggle. And that's how America is gonna be really shocked when they find out how many other people are involved in this reparation movement. But I got involved when I introduced, I introduced this resolution. I was already involved, but I think the resolution meet--really took us someplace else because Chicago [Illinois], once again, as Dr. King say, "So goes Chicago, so goes the world like wildfire." Chicago how--became the first body--government body to ever hold a hearing on slavery, where people got a chance to get it out. You know, and I have to thank my colleagues, both black, white, and brown for the support of that. Because first of all, they told me that when they came to the hearings, they came out of courtesy. But once they sat and the saw the facts, and they heard the truth, they had to vote for it, which tells you if we can get the truth out, people's minds will change. So we don't have to run from that. We have to have reparation. Reparation is due us, black labor, white wealth. Nobody been treated like us, but you gotta teach people. People think we just want a welfare handout. They'll make--well, you getting welfare. More whites on welfare than blacks. If people in need, the government's supposed to help them. What's wrong? You help everybody else. But we don't get the truth out in terms of what happened to us. I mean, they didn't know folks been just barbecued. What human being gonna take body and burn it and barbecue it? And then you cut pieces of meats off. You know, it's, it's--the thing that happened to us didn't happen to nobody. What have happened to us didn't happen to nobody else in the whole world, what happened the descendants of enslaved Africans in America. We was treated worse than anybody, and we need to tell the truth. And we're the only ones say don't talk about it. Don't talk about it. But I was told talk about it, talk about it, talk about it. How can you heal? How can the healing begin? How can the healing begin if you don't talk about it? And restitution is due us. Story_ID: 68219 Speaker 1: So when we, we begin to talk about it, then my colleagues they all voted for it. And it's because of their votes too that it could--it propelled this whole city. And then on Thursday on, on, in, in the 12th of, of September in 2002 having a hearing--we're gonna have a hearing in city council on the insurance companies when they was mortgaging slaves and stuff like you do cars, like you do a house. It was a disgrace. So we're gonna be discussing that with Tom Hayden, Senator Hayden, who's white. He was, he was, he was the--he came--he comes out of the movement, Jane Fonda ex-husband. He was the first one to introduce a bill to tell these insurance companies that they had to open up their books, and it passed. We worked very closely with him. We salute him for that. We're gonna have his secretary here to, to testify, so this movement is going. So, I'm very passionate. I know if we don't get reparations, it's all over for us. If we don't have economics, you cannot--we need an economic base. We need to rebuild our communities. We need to look at a Marshall Plan. We need to look at how America rebuilds cities all the times and rebuild communities. Our community need to be built. And we're doing it. We don't do this, we leave nothing for our children. Speaker 2: How did you convince Alderman [Edward M.] Burke to put this on the agenda? Speaker 1: That wasn't a convincing. Here you go, nonviolent, you deal with truth; you speak it. I don't play with them. They don't play with me. There's a respect thing. I'm an elected official. I'm an alderman, and I have a right to have that on the ballot. I didn't get any--I, I, mean on the agenda. I had no problem, sure; in fact, sure, alderman. He's--his office been working very close with my office for this particular thing that's coming up next Thursday. So, you know, he--sure. That's, that's knowing government, having respect. I don't play. When it comes to my people, I don't play. Speaker 2: So, do--so then Alderman Burke's cooperation is an indication of a big change of heart for him as part of the 29. Speaker 1: Well, I think that we are all elected officials. We respect each other. We have to, and we have a city to run and our ward to run. There's politics, and there's a city, there's government, and the people who live here. I think that when we were in--when we did the reparation resolution, I saw him change. He was comfre--he was confrontational at first. When the facts got laid out there, he kind of calmed down a little bit. I think the facts changed a lot of people. You know, the Irishmen had a hard time too when they came to this country, so I mean when you look at their history, they had some problems. So don't talk to me like we shouldn't deal with our problems, 'cause you know the Irishmen had some serious here--problems in this country that they had to fight. They fought, so we have a right to fight too. But I think that the facts--see, they--when you lie and you're playing with somebody, nobody respects you, then you can't get anything. But facts are facts. If you watch the C-SPAN channel, any of 'em, they're always having discussion on slavery. I was watching C-SPAN last Sunday, and they had this whole discussion on Mark Twain. It's the most interesting thing I heard, how all of his writings came from--he took his first stuff from slaves and wrote it down and, and went and, and released it, and how he hung up under him, his dialect, and how he had slaves and stuff laying on the floor to put the, the coal and stuff in, in, in the stove, and how--it was really interesting--and how he had this contradiction, because inside of him, he didn't like having the slaves around. And so--I mean he, he had a--he had confusion about knowing they had slaves and all the thing. So most of his, his, his writings and his thing came about based off of hanging up under the slaves, even his first piece that he wrote. And this one white professor was really telling the truth, and you had another one was trying to pull back. She didn't want the truth out. So its truth will always come regardless who it's coming from. It blew my mind. I was listening to this Mark Twain piece. I said maybe that's why I like reading Mark Twain, huh? So it was really interesting. And they always having a discussion about slavery. They always got something in their discussion about slavery, about this, about that among themselves. They always having this, this debate and this discussion, but we've always been left out of the discussion, and it's like for a small group of them to talk about. We're in the discussion. We're gonna stay in this discussion, and we're gonna fight for reparation. Story_ID: 68220 Speaker 1: Do you think the reparations battle will gain sufficient ground within x amount of time to show a real direction in getting some legitimacy? Speaker 2: I think it has. I think have gotten that. I think, for once, that man on the street is talking about reparation. The man in the suit is talking about reparation. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe my question is that how long do you think it'll take before there is some decision made and then some action toward that decision? Speaker 2: Dr. King would say how long? Not long. Well, let me say that we do have lawyers headed up by Ogletree, Johnny Cochran. We got a whole group of lawyers that work on our legal piece. Each piece we do is a piece of that. How long is it gonna take gonna determine on the black community. If the black community decide tomorrow they want reparation, we'll get reparation totally. We just got to concentrate on it. I think the momentum is there. We gotta know and understand that we deserve it. Reparation is repairing the damage. We have to admit we've been damaged and go after it. And we are--I--the education among our people--we gotta educate our people, because the pain is so deep they don't wanna talk about it. Speaker 1: One big question, we have done an interview with Lerone Bennett last week. What-- Speaker 2: Love him to death. Speaker 1: --(unclear). One big question was he couldn't understand why it is taking so long to get any real movement toward reparation. Speaker 2: Well, I think you gotta small group who was dealing with reparation, and they kept it in a small group and alienated the rest of the black community. And the reparation movement don't belong to a small group. It belongs to all of us. And what you've seen is that the reparation movement have come to the mainstream. I mean you had one little group and they kept it like it's just some group. Story_ID: 68221 Speaker 1: And let me just say about reparation. I wanted give my depa--definition in terms of why am I different form Conrad [Worrill] and some of the rest of 'em, I mean even what they--as far as I'm concern, you know, I don't particularly like what they did in Washington [D.C.], but I--you know that's a whole another story. I mean you go--you got that, you got that, that whole--the whole world's watching you deal like that. It's not about dogging people. It's about dealing with the truth. I can't dog the cameraman any worse than I wanna be dogged just because he's white. I gotta deal with him in truth, you know. But I think that, that the--with Randall, with Randall Robinson book, he got the average person with the suit on looking at it, what we did, 'cause all these different groups now begin to look at it. But the difference that I differ with some of the groups, and I think the descendants of enslaved African America will identify and move with us when this is explained. Black folks are not interested in the African part of the reparation. Now, America will not pay Africa reparation. And I think what happened to us as the descendants of enslaved African in Americas, we can make that case, and we can make America pay. But every time we make it global, then we push ourself back. That's what--that's when you can say no for us here. It's gonna take longer. But there is no way in the world America can deny that we built this country--black labor, white wealth--that they raped our women, that they did not, denied us access to education, that--I mean all the things that happened to us America cannot deny that they did it to the descendants of slaves. But when you make it much broader than that, then they use that as a hole to slide down. They go right in their little hole like a little rat and say we're not gonna do this. So what we've done is narrowed this to the descendants of enslaved Africans in America, blacks who are descendants of enslaved Africans in America. I was on a radio station, a national radio show, and they said should Michael Jordan receive reparation? I said yes. They said why? He's rich. I said he would have been even more if he was not black. They said should Colin Powell receive reparation? I said no. They said why? I said in America, Colin Bow--Powell is from Jamaica. We're talking about the descendants of enslaved black Americans, those of us who was descendants of enslaved. Now, in the Caribbeans, they need to go back and organize. In Africa, Sericor (ph.) need to talk to the French. There--the Ghanaian need to talk to the British folks. They need to go back and deal with that. But in America, the descendants of enslaved Africans in America, those blacks, that's something different. And when I'm talking to black people, for all walks of life, when I explain that to them, they understand, but our people can't understand all of this other stuff. You understand? It seems too far away--even if we have to be connected to African brothers, because that's where we are from. We know we're from the continent. We don't know what country. But we do know that America's our home. This is my home. We built this country, and I'm not gonna give it, and I'm not gonna--I mean, look, Dr. King died. This is ours, and we're, we're not gonna give up our fight, and America's gonna pay us. These companies who worked us for free, they're gonna pay us. The stock market was started on the backs of blacks. A lot of companies are still in existence because of slavery. No, we're gonna rebuild our community. We're gonna be able to get a Marshall Plan like a lot of these other countries have gotten, because once we educate our community just what we're talking about, it'll be all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you see the difference? Speaker 2: I do. I do. Speaker 1: And that's not to say--those who wanna deal globally should go do that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I don't think we should stop that. And those Africans or whoever in Africa Amer--fine, but don't box in the descendants of enslaved African Americans in that. That's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: It's more strength in focusing. Speaker 1: It's gotta--we have to be focused. America can't deny what they did to us. My mother's mulatto. You think she was born--you think she came from Africa looking like that? Some rape somewhere down the line, you know. So it's, it's a lot of stuff. Story_ID: 68222 Speaker 1: What would you like--what do you like for your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That I care for my people, that my whole life was dedicated to try to make things better for them, and I love the children and tried to provide a better way for them and a better world for them to grow up in. Speaker 1: And what do you believe to be your biggest accomplishment in life to this point? Speaker 2: Being a mother. Speaker 1: And finally, what do you think you'll be most remembered for? Speaker 2: My hats. That's unfortunate. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(unclear) .That's great. Now, is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know. I just, I love being a mother, I really do. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: I love it. I love children and I love seniors, but I love the babies. I think that--I tell women have babies, have babies, have babies. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you. We're gonna do these-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --and we're gonna let you out. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 68223 Speaker 1: Well this is prob--this in the summer of--this is during the summer of 19--spring of '66 [1966], 'cause I got on a trench coat. I was 17 years old, and we were over at Cabrini Green. You see that--Jenner School is on there, Jenner. You got Jenner? You don't have Jenner do you? Bring it down. See that word Jenner? Jenner School is over in the middle--it was in the middle of Cabrini. I was assigned to work with Ms. Chute--with Cora Brown and Audrey Woodridge, two great black women. And we were to mobilize them to get rid of Ms. Chuchac. That's Jimmy (ph) on the guitar, who was part of Dr. King's staff, our field staff. You probably saw him on "Sesame Street" at some point playing music. Speaker 2: This is Jim Kai (ph.)? Speaker 1: Jimmy Kai, he was our--we were singing freedom songs. He's got on an End the Slum button. You can see the End the Slum button. The "End the Slum" button is the button--I got on one too. That was our slogan. We came to Chicago to end the slums. The circle--the "V" stood for victory and there across the bottom, "Victory Over Slums" circled together, "We Could End the Slums," so--and then James Orange, who's from Birmingham, one of our field staff--yes, he's, he's there. James Hearns Orange is in Atlanta now; in fact, James Orange is the one that--have been the one that organized the King celebration every year in Atlanta--was from Birmingham. He's part of the advance team too. We were all part of the advance team. And the--that's--we call him Ghetto Charlie, he's from Chicago. He's a local person. And behind me is Jerry Herman. Jerry Herman went on to work--that little cap back there--right here. He went on to work for American--he's, he was with American Friends Service. I think he just retired from them. He's in African Affairs. Speaker 2: Dr. [Martin Luther] King said, "Oppressed people cannot remain an oppressed forever. The urge for freedom will eventually come." And I said, we must all join forces to continue Dr. King's work in the 21st century by aggressively pursuing our freedom and justice through economic education and reparation. Speaker 1: What year. Speaker 2: This? It was last year in the commemoration--the birthday of Dr. King of two--this year, January 2002. Speaker 1: Look like Jimea (ph.) huh?--my middle child. Speaker 2: This is when? Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy--'69' [1969] I guess. That's in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 2: Occasion? Speaker 1: Well, when I went to San Francisco [California] I was married to the artist, as you know. We moved to San Francisco when I was pregnant with my second child. And there was no bus service for the poor people down in the Alemany. And I got so tired of walking up the hill, and I said when we get through we're gonna organize. And (unclear) Reverend Cecil Williams from Glide Memorial Church--you know Cecil? I got some pictures of him too. We went to--we fought and went to jail. We got bus service, mobilized a whole lot of stuff there. Speaker 2: Did they take you to jail here? Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to jail. Speaker 2: You spent an ov--overnight or what? Speaker 1: Probably. I've been in so many jails. You know, I--in the Civil Rights Movement, you know, went to jail a lot. I think if you're gonna go to jail, it should be fighting for freedom. Speaker 2: When was this? Speaker 1: During one of my--when I'd--automatic cleanup. You know we cleaned up the--well, I inherited a community that was so dirty, so messed up, and we had to really clean it up. We spent all those years cleaning it up. And he came to visit one of our cleanup campaigns. We was out there cleaning up, that's why I got on my cleanup t-shirt. He came to visit the site and brought us a lot of equipment and things out to help clean up. Speaker 2: Was this on the campaign trail or after he was in? Speaker 1: That was really two months before he died. It was October, just before he died. We were broke ground for the Grand Boulevard Plaza. If you go if there you'll see a plaque that I have when you enter there, dedicated to Harold. He gave me the money. That was the first--one of the first neighborhood tiffs when we built the Grand Boulevard Plaza, and we broke ground for that. He died a month later. Speaker 2: And that's Nelson Mandela when he came to visit Chicago [Illinois]. We had a great time. We had been together all day, went different places, went to PUSH and different places. And we almost look alike. He remind me of my mama, my family. He got the same cheekbones. Many of my daddy's people came from Senegal--(unclear)--'cause he got a lot of my family's--my mother's features. Speaker 1: That's a beautiful hat. Who did that for (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Is it a hat or a wrap? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a, a hat like. Speaker 1: Well, you know, I really wish I should have brought some other ones to you too. That's Mrs.--that's Ms. Carr, she's one of the original--over people over here. No, that's Mrs. Coretta Scott King. Yeah, she was one of the original people from the MIA, the Montgomery Improvement Association, one of the seniors in my lifetime and in Montgomery who, who helped mold me as a child. A lot of the seniors helped us get in the movement. So I was a member of the Montgomery Improvement Association as a teenager, and she was one of the members too. She was one of the seniors who was there when Dr. King first came, and helped got Dr.[Martin Luther] King started in that whole Rosa Parks--the one when we, when we boycotted the bus system. Of course there's Mrs. Parks. Well, you see me with the hat on, but then there's Mrs. Parks, yes, un-huh. And I think--I don't know where--I forgot who that was. But the next person is Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King. And up, up there is Doris Crenshaw. Doris and I came from the Civil Rights Movement together. She's from Montgomery. Doris also worked under the Carter Administration in a Small Business Association. She also advanced Hillary Clinton at one point. Speaker 2: What year did you say this was? Speaker 1: Think '95 [1995]. It's in "Jet" if you wanna get it, the picture. You know what you need to get? There's a picture in "Jet" in 1995 with me when--I'm trying to find it--with the Rosa Parks when I was speaking, when they honored me. And the bus sitting in the back of me, that's when they had the, the history, I think the 50-year history, whatever the year history, and they asked me would I come down to honor me as one of the children who came from Chicago and who is still fighting. I'm one of theirs. And I was in Montgomery, and that's that...