 Story_ID: 651470 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Clarice Lynn Tinsley Giles, although professionally it's [HistoryMaker] Clarice Tinsley: C-L-A-R-I-C-E, T-I-N-S-L-E-Y. My married name is G-I-L-E-S. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 31st, 1953; Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am an anchor reporter for KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas], Fox 4--I'm a broadcast journalist. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: March 6th, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Dallas, Texas in the Fox 4 studios. Story_ID: 651471 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have a favorite food? I love Chinese food, I love Italian food. If it's one particular food item, probably fruit. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I'm pretty Zen when it comes to weather. But I like, I like winter, I really do, I love winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: We, my husband [Stephen Giles] and I went to Africa last year, and safari absolutely stole my heart. I love safaris--it was a photo safari. And seeing the people in Zambia and South Africa was just incredible because they have such big hearts, and they're so open. It was a wonderful experience. So, for me, world travel is essential. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter): copy that. Do you want it kind of all together? Speaker 1: Well, however you want to tell us. Speaker 2: Let me think, let me think of a couple. Okay, a couple of my favorite phrases are: copy that; stay great--I'll say that to the crews when we're going out, stay great. Not be great, but stay great. I'm hip--I think probably those are the three. Story_ID: 651472 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Clarence Tinsley] side, but separately so we can, you know, keep 'em straight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Janet, J-A-N-E-T, Pauline, P-A-U-L-I-N-E, Lampton, L-A-M-P-T-O-N, Tinsley, T-I-N-S-L-E-Y [Janet Lampton Tinsley]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 9, 1925; Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: All right. So, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace her side? Speaker 2: Let's see. My mother's side originated from Centerville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, her mother, Leona Wells Lampton, L-E-O-N-A, W-E-L-L-S, L-A-M-P-T-O-N; and her sisters and brothers were born in Centerville, Tennessee. My grandmother's brother, Dicky Wells, is a very famous jazz trombonist. He had a terrific professional career. He started in Centerville; and then played in New York [New York], in New Orleans [Louisiana], very extensive career in Europe. And New York City was always his home. So, we wouldn't see Uncle Dicky very often because he was always working and traveling. He played with Count Basie, Count Basie's band. He spent time with Duke Ellington's band; and then he recorded on his own. Speaker 1: Okay, that's-- Speaker 2: He died in 1985. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Any stories about Centerville that are passed down? Now is there any other place of origin for your mother's family that you know of, or? Speaker 2: You know, beyond Centerville, I can't, I don't know about beyond Centerville. But it was my grandmother Leona; her sister Georgia [Georgia Wells O'Neill], who was my great aunt; Uncle Dicky, their brother; Uncle Charles [Charles Wells] was another brother; and Aunt Texas. Although there's a really colorful story that they told about her that was very tragic. She was very, she had a temper and was very fiery. And one day she just decided to get on this horse and--riding. And the horse bucked her and threw her down, and she fell and hit her head and died. So, that was--she was kind of a firebrand, which I think was very unusual for a woman back in the day, back like early 1900s. Speaker 1: Is there--so, her name was Texas? Speaker 2: Texas. Speaker 1: Texas Lampton [sic.]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Texas Wells [ph.]--no, she would have been Texas Wells. Speaker 1: Wells, okay, all right. And so, are there any stories about her personality other than, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a lot of, yeah, she was-- Speaker 1: --about why she got on the horse? Speaker 2: She was just like (snaps fingers) you know, a ride or die kind of girl. Unfortunately it was literal, but she just was very much a firebrand. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, what did your mother's people do in Centerville? Speaker 2: I don't know, probably a little farming. But in terms of what the occupation was, I wouldn't be able to tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know for Uncle Dicky it was always, always music. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Always music. Speaker 1: There any story about how he got started in music? Speaker 2: He was a trombone player, but I think he also like early started kind of with this big drum. And he'd go around kind of beating the drum, but then got into the wind instruments. And then he was in the band at his school; and then just struck out on his own and pi- you know, picked up with other bands and just moved around the country. Got experience, learned his craft, learned his art; and then just kept moving up. Story_ID: 651473 Speaker 1: Now, your mother's parents, I suppose at one point moved to Detroit, right, from Centerville [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Fr- yeah. Aunt Georgia [Georgia Wells O'Neill] may have been the first one. We may be getting ahead of it, but my grandfather was from Louisville, Kentucky. And so Nannie [Leona Wells Lampton], my grandmother, and Granddad, my father's--my mother's father is Edward Wilkinson Lampton, L-A-M-P-T-O-N [Edward Lampton]. So, they married, and then they were in Detroit. And then Aunt Georgia was married. Her husband, Wolf [ph.], died very early. He died before I was born, so I never met him. So, she was a widow for basically, I mean decades. And she died when she was ninety-nine years old. Speaker 1: Okay. But they moved to Detroit first, you're saying? Speaker 2: Uncle--it's, I think Aunt Georgia moved first with her husband. And then it was Nannie and Granddad. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And then Uncle Charles [Charles Wells] was in Detroit as well. So, Uncle Dicky [Dicky Wells] was the only one who wasn't in Detroit. He was in the world, and then was based in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your grandparents do in Detroit? Speaker 2: My grandmother, my maternal grandmother, was a homemaker. And she had three children: my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley]; Uncle Charles [Charles Lampton], her younger brother; and then Uncle George [George Lampton], and he was the eldest. Both of the brothers are deceased. My mother is the only living sibling. So, my grandmother was a homemaker, she was a fabulous seamstress. She would make dresses, she made dresses for me. That was when women, you know, did that kind of work in the home. She made beautiful hats. I always got a new Easter bonnet from my grandmother. She was really very special, very loving, and a beautiful woman. And my grandfather was the chief engineer for Detroit Bank and Trust Company [Comerica, Inc.] in Detroit, Michigan. And it was a big deal, because we would go downtown and see Granddad, and he'd be working. And he was the one who directed the guys to keep the heat on and the air conditioning, and just keep that, that bank building running. We were very proud of him. Story_ID: 651474 Speaker 1: So your mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] grew up in De- Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did she grow up on the east side, or the west side, or? Speaker 2: Let's see. Now, it would be con- it'd be con- well, she was born on the east side of Detroit. Yeah, she was born, I believe it was Joseph Campau Street. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And she was born at home. Because her brothers would always tease her, "Oh, you're the one who was born at home." Because Charles [Charles Lampton] was the baby, so he was born in the hospital. But Uncle George [George Lampton] and my mom were born at home. And when I learned that I was like--I don't know, maybe I was eleven or twelve--and it just seemed so prehistoric to me, that my mother would have been born at home instead of born in a hospital. But, you know, different time. But I was a kid then, so I couldn't really grasp how different things were back then. Speaker 1: Now, unless I'm wrong, I think Joseph Campau--that's in like what they call Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan] (unclear). Speaker 2: It used to be Black Bottom, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: Now it's been redeveloped and everything. It's not, no longer exists as Black Bottom, but-- Speaker 2: Paradise Valley [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: And Uncle Charles' [Charles Wells]--my great uncle, my grandmother's brother, Uncle Charles's wife, Marsetta Wells, owned a nightclub, the Three Sixes in Black Bottom, Paradise Valley. And that was, you know, long before I was born. But my mom said it was always like the best of the best: very elegant; beautiful crystal; really crisp, white linen tablecloths; fabulous sterling silver. People really got dressed up to be able to go out and have a dinner and be entertained at the Three Sixes Club. She was one of the owners (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three Sixes, now this is, you know, we're getting into the biblical 666 and all that now. Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was one of the owners, yeah. Speaker 1: So, this is, if you're looking for trouble, it sounds like the Three Sixes would be the place. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The Three Sixes nightclub, okay. And that was, like you said, Paradise Valley was one of the entertainment centers of the Midwest, you know. So, did she have like, I guess, popularly, nationally known entertainers there, and that sort of thing? Or did she (unclear)? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I know Uncle Dicky [Dicky Wells] would play in the Graystone Ballroom, which no longer exists in Detroit. I don't know if she had national entertainers. It may have been more, more local. And I don't know that I've ever heard my mother say Uncle Dicky performed in her club. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, there were a lot of musicians in Detroit, especially in the '30s [1930s] and the--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, great music scene in Detroit. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 651475 Speaker 1: Now, what did she say about growing up? I mean, what did she--did she have any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: My mom [Janet Lampton Tinsley] was--let's see. I think--no, it was a very--for her it was a very peaceful time. Because I would say, you know, well what about racism or segregation? And it did exist in Detroit [Michigan] when my mother was growing up, but it wasn't to the point where it impacted her world directly because it was very much a neighborhood kind of thing. All the kids--and it was, you know, it was black kids, it was Jewish kids, it was Polish kids, it was Italian kids. People back then tended to mix more because that's where they were living. And so, the kids would walk to school. I mean, they would walk miles to get to school, and then walk miles to get back home. Speaker 1: Now, did she actually grow up on the east side? Speaker 2: Um-hm. She grew up on the east side. So, everybody just kind of hung out together. And she said it wasn't like, "Well I don't like you because you're a different race." It's like, "You're just not a good kid." So, people she said mixed fairly easily in her neighborhood where she was growing up. And she said, you know, they'd do things like walk from her house to Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan], walk around Belle Isle, spend the night at Belle Isle because when it was so hot, they didn't have air conditioning back then. And she said the mothers would take their children and they'd walk to Belle Isle. And everybody would have like a blanket or a cot, and they literally in the summer would sleep outside--totally safe, nobody ever bothered you. And it was just a very idyllic kind of childhood. She also says they would walk across the Ambassador Bridge to get to Canada, and then just like go buy candy or go to a park or whatever, walk back over the bridge, and then walk back to the east side. I said, "You guys were like walking marathons, like every day." And she's like, "Yeah, but that's what we did." So, she went to, she graduated from Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan]. And she has really fond memories of a very strong black community--that people really cared about each other, they looked out for their neighbors, they looked out for neighbors' kids. It was a very loving, loving kind of time, and a very cohesive situation when she was growing up. Speaker 1: Now, there's one--Cass Tech is a famous high--still exists, though they built a new building for it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, yeah, it's a famous high school in Detroit--one of the more famous ones. But, now, she was around, she was a teenager, from what I reckon, in 1943 when they had the big Detroit race riot, which started on Belle Isle back then. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, did she have any memories of that? Did she talk about it? Speaker 2: She said that she was aware of it, but they didn't really--it, you know, today like social media and the TV and everything, it would be all over. She knew about it, they were shielded from it and protected by that. But she said she did remember hearing her parents [Leona Wells Lampton and Edward Lampton] talking about it, and wanting to make sure that she and her brothers [George Lampton and Charles Lampton] stayed home, stayed on the block and stayed away from that. Speaker 1: Yeah. And this was like unlike the riots of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] in the black community. These were riots where white people decided to attack the black community. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which is the way riots used to be prior to the '60s [1960s], you know. So, yeah, it made headlines. Story_ID: 651476 Speaker 1: She graduated from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Did she go on to college? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She majored, she wanted to be a surgical nurse. But her parents, my grandparents [Leona Wells Lampton and Edward Lampton] didn't have the money to send her south to a black medical school [HBCU], or black nursing school, because there was segregation dealing with education, higher education in Detroit [Michigan]. And they weren't able to get the funds to send her to the South to go to school. So, what she did, she did the next best thing, she got into education. And I remember when I was young, probably like eight or nine. And one day I just said, "Hey, you know, Mom, Mommy, what did you, what did you want to do? Did you always want to be a teacher?" And she says, "No, I wanted to be a nurse." And I said, "Well, why didn't you?" And she said, "Well, because of economics and because of segregation you know, your grandparents weren't able to do that, so I just did the next best thing, which was become a teacher." And in my opinion, she became an educator, not just a teacher. But I remember feeling outraged and really angry as a little girl, that she wasn't able to do what she wanted to do because of external societal forces. I mean, it just made me livid. And she said, "Well, you know, you just learn to do the best that you can in life, and bloom where you're planted. And I wasn't going to sit in the corner for the rest of my life and say oh, this is so unfair, I can't do this. I'm going to pick it up and do the next best thing." And that was a, that was a learning experience for me, too. That was one of the first times I realized that there were forces outside of your family that might prevent you, or could propel you, to do something. She loved teaching. She has students--she's eighty-nine [years old]--she has students who call her to this day, who come and visit Mrs. Tinsley [Janet Lampton Tinsley]. And one of them lives in Dallas [Texas]. And Deanna [ph.] is grown up, she's in her forties, she has two children, she's married, and she views my mother as her adopted grandmother. And Deanna was one of her students. And so, it's so, it's just, it's wonderful. It's so gratifying to know that my mom, as a teacher, had that kind of impact on so many young people who grew up to be adults who still remember her and the lessons that she taught them--really lessons about life and dignity and caring about other people. She was a second and third grade teacher. And that's a beautiful legacy. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And where did she teach in, what were the schools? Speaker 2: She taught at Couzens Elementary School [James Couzens Elementary School] in Detroit; and then Ilene Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. I believe those were the two schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651477 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side, then I'll try to get them together. So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clarence Lamar Tinsley: C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, L-A-M-A-R, T-I-N-S-L-E-Y [Clarence Tinsley]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 2, 1921; Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Not very much. His mother died in 1941; and her name was Alice Almond, A-L-M-O-N-D, Williams Tinsley [sic. Alice Andrews Tinsley]. And my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] never met her. And then her f- her husband, my grandfather, Sam Tinsley [John Tinsley], T-I-N-S-L-E-Y, he was born in Forsyth, Georgia. And my, my paternal grandmother was born in Georgia, but we don't, we don't know where in Georgia. Speaker 1: Forsyth, Georgia. Now, this is interesting. Do you know the story behind Forsyth? Or do-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: There's a--well, it's a place where they actually at some juncture, in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s], told all the black people to get out of the county [Forsyth County, Georgia], you know. Speaker 2: Ooh. Speaker 1: So, they all had to leave. So, they were famous for not, and they--until just a few years ago, of not having any black residents (laughter). Speaker 2: My goodness, wow. Speaker 1: So, if he, so, if Sam Tinsley moved to Detroit [Michigan] or something, I can see why. Speaker 2: No, no, he stayed in-- Speaker 1: Did he stay in Georgia? Speaker 2: --in Georgia, yeah, he was in Macon. That's kind of like the mystery of our family, too, because we're just not sure whether he was white or a very, very, very light skinned black man. They had blue eyes, I mean, really, really light. And my father's mother was very, very dark. And so, my dad had one sister, Cleon, C-L-E-O-N [Cleon Tinsley]; a brother, Willie Lee [Willie Tinsley]; and a brother Harold [Harold Tinsley]. And Cleon was very dark like her mother. (Laughter) And there's a story that my grandfather was with his daughter in a store in Georgia, and they thought he was white. And they said, "Well, your maid can't come in here. She's going to have to stay outside." So, my fa- my grandfather, used very colorful language to tell them that that was not his blank blank maid, that was his daughter, and she was going to go wherever he was going to go, and that was it. He was a master bricklayer, my grandfather was. Story_ID: 651478 Speaker 1: So, your father [Clarence Tinsley], did your father grow up in Macon [Georgia] then? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And did he have any--are there any, well, okay, did he serve in the war? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was in World War II [WWII]; he was in the [U.S.] Navy, honorably discharged, on the USS Mount Vernon. And he was a cook and then a chief petty officer. And that's where I get my love of the ocean and water, because I would grow up hearing stories from my dad about what it was like to be on the ocean during the war, and how beautiful it was, but also very violent. He had really very vivid and very horrible memories of how bad it could be when there were storms on the sea. I mean, just really, just terrifying stuff. Speaker 1: What kind of vessel was he on, do you? Speaker 2: It was, it was not a warship; it wasn't a battleship. I believe it was a ship that would transfer supplies. I think it was a transfer ship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he went all over the world. He went extensively in the South Pacific. He was in South Africa, he was in the Maldive islands [Maldives]. I mean we grew up hearing about all those ports of call. And I was really, really proud, because my dad, when he was, (cough) excuse me, in Cape Town [South Africa], it was during, it was when apartheid was in existence. And he and some of the guys had shore leave. And I guess, like, kids would come to the ship and try to sell the sailors stuff, or take them on tours, right. So, this kid named Dennis [ph.] walked up to my dad and a couple of his buddies and said, you know, "I'll take you and show you guys around Cape Town, Table Mountain, and all that stuff." Well, my dad became friends with this young boy. And then they became pen pals. And so, when my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] and father got married, my dad told my mom about Dennis, and they would correspond with him. And they would send him, they sent him a subscription to Ebony magazine. And Dennis wrote back that the township was so thrilled to get that, because the apartheid government was not letting them know about the rest of the world. And so, to see that there were black people who had good jobs and good homes, were moving up in society, was just like this eye opening experience for them. So, they were so grateful to get the Ebony subscription. But then a couple of months later, Dennis wrote back and said, "I'm so sorry. The government has labeled this as contraband, and they have ended the subscription, and so we can't get it anymore." I was really proud of my father and my mother for taking that stand, and sending them something as simple as a magazine subscription that we could get just going to the drugstore in America. But the apartheid government was so threatened by that, because they didn't want black South Africans seeing how black Americans lived. Speaker 1: Did they ever hear any more from Dennis? Speaker 2: (Coughs) Oh, yeah. They stayed pen pals for the rest of Dennis' life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dennis ended up moving to England with his wife, had children; and Dennis died several years ago. Story_ID: 651479 Speaker 1: So, your father [Clarence Tinsley] during the war [World War II, WWII]--so he went from Macon, Georgia to the war, right, effort (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: When he came back he ended up in Detroit [Michigan], right? Or is that, that right? Speaker 2: Very interesting story. Came to Detroit to see a buddy, and ended up at an equestrian riding stable in Canada, where he met my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley]. And they were both riding horses. And my mom was there with a riding group, and my dad was there riding a horse. And that's how the two of them met, in Canada surrounded by horses. And I'm allergic to horses, I'm allergic to hay. I didn't get that gene from my parents. Speaker 1: Okay. So, in Canada--so this is outside of Windsor [Canada], or is it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Outside of Windsor, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's, this is, one of the more unusual meeting stories, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I have a picture of the two of them at the riding stable. It's black and white, and it's one of those great like 19--you know, forty- late 1940s pictures. It's really very cool. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, did they ever talk about what drew them to each other you know? Speaker 2: Oh, I think for my dad it was love at first sight. And I think my mother, probably was the same way, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so, now, did they go together a long time before they got married, or? Speaker 2: I think they did. I think I--well, no, not a long time. You know, I don't know how long their courtship was. Story_ID: 651480 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Clarence Tinsley] worked as a supervisor for the City of Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) City of Detroit, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But you know, he worked his way up. Because when I was born, my dad worked on the paving crew for the City of Detroit. And when I was little, I can remember we would go downtown, and he was working on one of the crews that would do the tarring of the streets. And I remember I'd get that smell, you know, of the tar. I was like, "Where's Dad, where's Dad?" And then there would be my father, working on one of the pavers. Very proud of him, and he took a great deal of pride in doing that kind of work; and then just worked his way up to being a supervisor, you know, throughout the years. But my dad was more than just, he was amazing. He was a renaissance man, my dad was an artist. And he had so many varied interests. He was a lifelong learner. He loved to read just all different kind of things--very big on world events, wasn't so much of a sports fan. My memory of him is not like baseball or football, he was more into individual sports like boxing, not golf, skeet shooting. He was a member of the NRA [National Rifle Association]. I grew up around guns and, you know, totally understood about gun safety and the use of weapons. He did art and he--oil paint, did oil paintings. He built his own kiln and fired his own pottery. He worked in metal, he made artwork out of metal objects. He was a gourmet chef--I grew up eating all kinds of cuisine, from French to Spanish, Jewish, Hungarian, lots of Chinese. He would make that himself and have these dinner parties for our family and relatives to come over. He played saxophone. He loved to do work around the house like painting, a little electrical work; cement work. And he was a, he was a man's man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I grew up more--I was supposed to be (air quotes) a boy: Clarence Lamar Tinsley. So, I was a tomgirl [sic.]. So, I loved my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley], but if you saw my dad, I was around my dad. And I found it interesting when I was little that when my mother's friends would come over--they tended to be teachers, or maybe some of them were nurses. So, they would talk about first of all their children, because they were mothers and everybody had kids. So, they would talk about us, the kids. And then they would talk about their work. But when my dad's friends would come over, they would talk about world events, current events, I mean sporting things. And to me I found that so much more interesting. And I can remember sitting under the table in the dining room, or we had a full basement. And he--they had a bar, he had a standup bar. And I can remember sitting under some of the barstools. And the guys would always keep it clean when I was around. But I just loved to sit and listen to what they were talking about, because to me it seemed they were talking about the world, and that was just really fascinating. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what their talents were, their interests--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I'm a hybrid of both parents. My father was very artistic. He could be very emotional, he felt things very deeply. My mother I think tends to be more dispassionate, very analytical. Personality wise, I'm more like my dad, being very outgoing--he was very much an extrovert. My mother--but then I can be an introvert, too, because lots of times I'm happy just to sit and listen to what other people are saying, because I think very often when one listens, one learns a lot more. So, I really think I'm, I'm a hybrid of both of them. I think I look more like my dad, but I have characteristics also of my mom. Story_ID: 651481 Speaker 1: You have a sister, or? Speaker 2: I have one sister [Alicia Petross]. Speaker 1: One sister, okay. And is she younger or older, or? Speaker 2: Seven years younger. Speaker 1: Seven years younger, all right, okay. Tell us about her, and what is she doing now? Speaker 2: She was born in Detroit, Michigan. We both were born on the 31st of the month; I was born on December 31st, she was born on March 31st, 1961. She is now the director of human resources and global diversity and inclusion for Hershey corporation [The Hershey Company] in Hershey, Pennsylvania. She is brilliant, wonderful, very down to earth, very strategic in terms of the way she thinks, and, and her thought pattern. She's fun, and she's an absolutely great sister. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: She's married, no children. Story_ID: 651482 Speaker 1: Your family growing up, well it consists of your two--you and your mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] and father [Clarence Tinsley], and then later your sister [Alicia Petross], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head). Speaker 1: Anybody else in the family-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --who stayed with you? Speaker 2: Ginger [ph.], we had Ginger, our dachshund. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, now, did you grow up on the east side or the west side, or? Speaker 2: Northwest Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Northwest Detroit, okay. Speaker 2: Seven Mile [Road] and Meyers [Road]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's almost out of Detroit. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You got Eight Mile [Road] being the border. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: That's made famous by-- Speaker 2: Eminem. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Slim Shady. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, exactly. So, can you describe the neighborhood you lived in--did it have a name? Did your neighborhood have a name? Speaker 2: No. Well, I grew up first on Eagle Street, which was--oh, golly, would that be the west side of Detroit? Near Tireman [Avenue]--I think that would be considered the west side of Detroit. And I went to Sherrill Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then when I was in the fourth grade, 1965, we moved to the northwest side of Detroit, Monte Vista Street; and then I went to Beaubien Junior High--well, I went to Schulze Junior High School--no, no, sorry, Schulze Elementary School [Schulze Academy for Technology and Arts, Detroit, Michigan], fourth and fifth--fifth and sixth grade; then Beaubien Junior High School [Detroit, Michigan]; and then Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was hit by a car coming home from Schulze Elementary School. It was in March; and I don't, it was a residential neighborhood, and I was walking with some friends. And I remember walking up to the curb. I don't remember seeing this car come at all. I don't remember being hit, I remember nothing. I mean, I literally woke up in the hospital. And the witnesses said that the car--was driven by a teenager--hit me, like kind of hooked on my skirt, threw me up in the air, and then I came down at a 45 degree angle and slid on the pavement on the street. I remember nothing of that. I had a slight concussion. Didn't break any bones, but I had a cracked bone in my arm. I had some road rash. I was incredibly lucky, incredibly lucky. And I just had my arm in a sling for several weeks, and then the road rash healed. I have a little bit of a scar, I think it's probably gone now. And that was it. Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 651483 Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question--and this is, you've already given part, part of the answer. But, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Boblo Island [Boblo Island Amusement Park], going on the Boblo boat on the Detroit River. Hearing that whistle--I can still hear the whistle of that boat, and everybody being so excited, you know, even the adults, and the kids. And you know, you had, everybody was together. It wasn't a segregated boat ride. I mean, you're standing next to white people, black people, Indians [Native American], whatever. And that's really the way I grew up--I was not impacted by segregation in Detroit [Michigan]. So, Boblo, the ride to Boblo Island; playing on the playground; walking to school in the snow; putting on layers of leggings and, you know, just loving that, because that's part of just what you did; playing hopscotch outside on the pavement in front of my house. I had ballet lessons, I had private French lessons. Vernors soda was fantastic, a very strong kind of ginger ale. Faygo pop, orange Faygo pop. My dad's [Clarence Tinsley] ribs when he would barbecue in the summer--he was an excellent cook. Burning leaves, the smell of burning leaves; we used to be able to burn leaves. That was a great smell in the fall. Trick or treating with my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] on Halloween night. And she made it so vivid. I could literally look up in the sky and almost swear that I could see witches and goblins flying around. I mean she really made it special, really magical. Ooh, the smell of lilacs, I used to love that. I would walk to school when we lived on Eagle Street, and walking to Sherrill school [Sherrill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]. And there was a house that had all these lilacs. And it was really special, because they were only, they would only be there when they were blooming. And you could smell it like almost a block before you hit the house, and that was great. Sitting outside, again, on Eagle Street. There's a house probably 45 degrees on the other side of the street, and they were teenage boys. And I remember they'd sit outside in the summer and they'd sing 'Duke of Earl,' and they would harmonize that. And I was maybe five [years old]. And so, I didn't really know the song, but I liked the harmony. And I could hear them laughing, and that was really, that was fun. Going to Tiger Stadium [Detroit, Michigan], the old Tiger Stadium which no longer exists, with Uncle Charles [Charles Lampton] to see the Detroit Tigers play. And my father played this joke on me. I was like, I guess four. And we were in the car driving past Tiger Stadium, and they had the big tiger, you know, in a baseball uniform. And he said, "You see that? That's Tiger Stadium, that's Briggs Stadium. That's where they have real tigers play." And I'm like, "No." He said, "Yeah, they have real tigers, and they've trained them to play baseball, and they wear uniforms" (laughter). And I'm like, "Really?" And he said, "Yeah." And I said, "Well, don't they hurt, don't they hurt people?" He says, "No, they've trained them never to hurt anyone. But they play really great baseball." I believed it (laughter). My dad had so much fun teasing me with that; that was cool. Really great memories, really great memories. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right. Those are true Detroit memories, of Vernors, all of it, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But not the Coney Island hot dog. My sister [Alicia Petross] loves Coney Island hot dogs, which is like, that's iconic for Detroit. I can't stand them. (Laughter) I just, I don't get it; it's lost on me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651484 Speaker 1: How did you like school, now? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school. I wasn't good in math, though. My brain just didn't--it made s- it made no sense to me. It wasn't logical and I just rejected it. So, I got in trouble with math and needed to have a math tutor, which I hated. Because I had math, the dreaded subject, five days a week in school, and then I'd have a math tutor sitting at my dining room table like two or three days a week when I got home. And I thought my parents were really torturing me and it was so unfair. But obviously I had to learn how to do that and become proficient in it, because I had gone from Cs to Es--I mean I was failing, because I just totally turned my brain off. But, you know, that was when I learned about you don't always get to do what you want to do, and things are hard in life and you have to soldier on and, you know, fight your way through it. So, I did a lot of work. I just like let it go and thought okay, I got to do this. And after a lot of months, many months of hard work, I was able to pull my grades up. I was still just a C student, but basically I got A's and a few B's. But I was more proud of that C in math, because that represented really hard work that I really had to fight for. Speaker 1: Now, we have a note here that in the fifth grade, your mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] realized that you had a talent for writing. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that? Speaker 2: I always, she said I always asked questions. I mean she thought they were really very good questions. And she noticed that I started writing. I don't really remember what led up to that, but she felt I might have a talent for writing. So, she gave me a book. And she said, "Every day, I want you to fill one page with something you've written. And you can take it from your imagination, from something that happened in school, at home, in church [Peoples Community Church, Detroit, Michigan], something that you saw on TV--." But she felt, and my dad [Clarence Tinsley] felt, that a skill is like a muscle. The more often you use it, the stronger it becomes. She wasn't sure where writing would take me, but she thought I may have an aptitude for it. Well, I loved it, because you know, you've got people telling you what to do, which, rightfully so. But on the pages of that book, I got to be the boss, and I had my own thoughts. But then it wasn't enough to like write it down, I wanted to share it, I mean tell people. So, in the sixth grade at Beaubien [Beaubien Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], I got on the high school--the junior high school paper, loved it. Because I was like this little cub reporter going around and discovering things, writing about them, writing articles. And that was like really fantastic. And then I became the editor of the paper one year. And that's, that's how I started my, my journalism career. So, my mom recognized that I might have had a talent for writing. She certainly wasn't thinking television. She was, I think--and I said to her, "What did you think?" She said, "Maybe a novelist, or perhaps a newspaper reporter." But she said, "I wasn't thinking of broadcast." Speaker 1: Now, were there any black faces on broadcast television in those days when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Woody Willis is a face I remember on Channel 2 [WJBK-TV, Detroit, Michigan]. Beverly Payne, who's now deceased, was the first black anchor woman in Detroit [Michigan]. So, there were a few, but not very many. And again, when I looked at TV, I never really thought as a kid, or as a young teenager, that that's where I would end up. It really wasn't until college [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] that I zeroed in on broadcast journalism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I really thought I might end up more print, more newspaper. Story_ID: 651485 Speaker 1: So you were at Beaubien [Beaubien Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] in '64 [1964]? Is that about right? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, I was still at Sherrill Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan], and that was 1963. And I remember that, because we-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --were in the auditorium. And we were watching a film strip, which is like really dating me. Film strip, it wasn't even like a movie. And then the film strip stopped. Because I remember that sound, that clicking. It stopped, and then we were just like all plunged in darkness in the auditorium. And everybody's like, "Oh, what's going on?" And the lights came on, and the principal was standing on the stage and said, "We are dismissing class today because something horrible has happened. President Kennedy has been shot in Dallas [Texas]." And everybody was just in disbelief. So, we go home. And I remember very clearly, I was nine [years old]. But I remember that week, those four days, that very long weekend, of just watching black and white TV and the images with my parents. And at one point when Mrs. Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] arrived back in Washington [D.C.] that night, my dad [Clarence Tinsley], when they had showed a picture of her, he just did this (gesture) and just put his kiss on her, on her face. And I thought that was so poignant and very touching, and just really powerful. The other thing was seeing my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] and my father cry for someone who wasn't in our family. That really made an impression on me. And seeing what TV was able to do--because that was the first time television had gone live--was with the assassination, and then covering the events subsequent to that. Speaker 1: Yeah, covering that long for that period of, yeah. Speaker 2: And that was just, I mean it was just, it was riveting--you couldn't turn away from it. And I watched it, sitting cross legged on the floor with my parents. And I think, I think that experience--and then watching the documentation of the civil rights struggle in the South--were two very thin- two very formative things for me that were very powerful, that eventually led me to broadcast journalism as opposed to print. Because with television, you're there, you see it, you hear it; you're able to experience part of that. And that was the thing, later when I got older, that drew me more to this form of journalism as opposed to print. Speaker 1: Now, 1963 they say was a landmark year in terms of television news. Speaker 2: Absolutely. You had the March on Washington, then you had the Kennedy assassination just a few months later. It was just, it was un- and then you had the bombing [of the 16th Street Baptist Church] in between, in September in Birmingham [Alabama]. So, it was just absolutely pivotal, absolutely pivotal. Speaker 1: And that's, you're referring to the civil rights--the demonstrations of Birmingham, with the hoses and the dogs. That was the same-- Speaker 2: That was the thing. Because I never, I had never seen that. And I remember my mother saying to me that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement were very strategic by letting that be shown. Because I said, "Why are they doing this? Why, why don't they fight back?" And she said, "No, because they're using nonviolence, because that in time is going to prove to be more powerful than if they, you know, started fighting back." And my dad said, "They are showing the world the worst part of what is happening in America. And because television can show them this, in time that's going to change." And that was one of the things that my parents always impressed upon my sister [Alicia Petross] and me: that they wanted us to think about the world. Because they had things that they wanted to do that they weren't able to do because of the color of their skin, or because their family didn't have the money. So, they wanted the two of us to be able to put ourselves in a position to have those dreams, and to make those dreams come true. Because both of them felt that opportunities in America for black people would become better, and they wanted us to be able to be part of that. Speaker 1: Okay. A couple of other things about '63 [1963]. Now, it may be just me who notices this, and maybe I'm wrong. But it seems to me that Dan Rather rose to prominence during the Kennedy assassination, a Texas man, you know, and became a primary, you know-- Speaker 2: He did. I think he really made his bones, though, with Hurricane, oh, Cecelia [sic. Hurricane Carla] in 1961. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what kind of got him started on that upward spiral, upward trajectory as a broadcast journalist. But yes, in fact, he was in this building the day the president was killed, or maybe the day after. And Eddie Barker, who was a famous news director, legendary news director at this station [KRLD-TV; KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] in 1963, kicked Dan Rather out. Because Rather came in like, "Okay, this is the network. We're going to take over, you know, we've got this story." And Eddie Barker's like, "No, no, no, this is my town; this is my station; this is my news department." And the story I'm hearing is they just verbally just went at it, and Eddie said, "You're out of here." He wrote a very good book by the way, 'The Day the News Went Live' [sic. 'When the News Went Live: Dallas 1963']. Eddie Barker is one of the authors of that [sic.], which takes you really in depth in terms of what it was like in this building in this city the day that President Kennedy was assassinated. Speaker 1: I think also when Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] became president, a Texas president--Bill Moyers [Bill D. Moyers] sort of rose to-- Speaker 2: He was his press secretary, yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to pro- prominence, too. But so, '63 [1963] is also the year they say that the news went from fifteen minutes to half an hour. Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 651486 Speaker 1: Were you all getting--what, what periodicals were you all getting at home in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, Ebony magazine. The Michigan Chronicle was the black newspaper, which was weekly. Jet magazine, Life magazine, Newsweek magazine; and the two papers--there was a morning paper and an evening paper--Dallas--excuse me the Detroit Free Press, and the Detroit News. So, we were surrounded by newspapers, periodicals, magazines constantly--information constantly coming in. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you a big reader when you were? Speaker 2: Huge, voracious, voracious reader. (Pronunciation) Voracious reader, excuse me, and still to this day. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know there's a great library [Detroit Public Library] in downtown Detroit [Michigan]. I don't know if that was the one you went to, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, on Woodward Avenue. It's beautiful. It's right across the street from the Detroit Institute of Arts [Detroit, Michigan]. It's like they face each other, these grand structures, I mean just amazing. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're the one of the few cities that has an actual campus of cultural activities (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Wayne State University, that's my, that's my school. Story_ID: 651487 Speaker 1: Now, you went to Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mumford High School. Speaker 1: Now, is, there's some- is it Mumford the blue high school? Is it--? Speaker 2: The blue school on Wyoming [Avenue]. Speaker 1: That's right. I don't how I--you know, I've seen it, and it's got that glazed blue brick, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. But they've torn it down, and now there's a new Mumford that's on the same property, but it's been pushed back. I haven't seen it, because my mom [Janet Lampton Tinsley] doesn't live in the neighborhood anymore, she moved downtown. So, I haven't seen what the new campus looks like. Speaker 1: Okay. But I saw it, it had to be, not, well, within the last ten years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I saw the blue-- Speaker 2: Earl Klugh, the very famous jazz guitarist and Grammy [Grammy Award] nominated and Grammy winner, was in school with me. And so, he would play guitar for us, in like our current events class. I can't remember who the instructor was. But he would play on Fridays, and it was just so amazing. And we were so proud of him, because he would, he was like this grown up musician as a high school kid. And he would have gigs at Baker's Keyboard Lounge, which is legendary in Detroit [Michigan]. And he was, he was our resident star. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is, now you started high school, you entered high school in what, '66 [1966] or '67 [1967]? Speaker 2: Oh, would have been--I graduated, I was supposed to graduate in '72 [1972]. But I came out in the summer of '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: So, you entered in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: So, I think it was '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] or '68 [1968], I guess. Speaker 2: I think '67 [1967]--that was during the riot. And I think I was still at Beaubien [Beaubien Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] then. I think I started high school in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started high school in '68 [1968]. Sixty-seven [1967], I was still at Beaubien. Speaker 1: Now, do you have any memories of the riot? This is one of the great riots of, big riots of-- Speaker 2: Oh, man, do I ever. We were members of Peoples Community Church on Woodward Avenue. And so, my mom and my sister [Alicia Petross] and I were in church that Sunday. The riot had started like overnight, like, you know, after midnight Sunday. But we didn't know about that then. So, we were in church, the three of us. And then all of a sudden, my dad [Clarence Tinsley] walks into church, like up the middle aisle--and my mom was on the end--and bends down and is like whispering to her. And he says, I heard him say, "They're tearing up the place. You need to take the kids and get out of here now and go home." And so, we get in the car, the three of us. And my dad worked for the city, so he had been called in to help like with order and stuff, put barricades and things up. And so, the three of us drove home. And we didn't see my dad for a long time, because he was, you know, working so many hours. But I remember we had a colonial two story house. And I remember seeing and hearing and feeling the rumble of the tanks, because they called in tanks from the National Guard armory [Detroit Light Guard Armory, Detroit, Michigan], which was like Eight Mile [Road] and something. And so, they brought them down Seven Mile [Road] to go down to Woodward Avenue, to the site of the riot. And I was upstairs on the second floor, and I saw the tanks. And it just was like such a chilling experience for me. I felt like it, we were in a warzone, although it wasn't imminent. But it was still in my city, and it made me very sad and kind of scared. And I wrote down, and I remember I wrote down how I, how I felt about that experience. Story_ID: 651488 Speaker 1: So, '68 [1968] is also the spring that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. So, do you remember the, were there, was there trouble then in Detroit [Michigan] after King's assassination? Speaker 2: No, but just--everyone was just bereft. I mean, just plunged into deep, deep grief. And it was just a horrifying time, absolutely horrifying. But we did not, we did not have violence, no. Speaker 1: But blocks and blocks were burned down in '67 [1967]. Speaker 2: The year before. Speaker 1: The year before, yeah. Now, '68 [1968] was also the year when the Tigers [Detroit Tigers] won the World Series, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, was that exciting? Speaker 2: It was exciting. But again, because I think because my dad [Clarence Tinsley] wasn't a sports fan, like a team sports fan, I was happy for the Tigers but it wasn't, it wasn't something that was top of mind. I think in our family the feeling was more of, this will be great for the city in terms of a new image and maybe we can start over, as opposed to being baseball fans. Because no one in my family was really a baseball fan. Speaker 1: Okay now, '68 [1968] now, this is a time when everybody got a big Afro. Did you get one? Speaker 2: I tried, I couldn't (laughter). Speaker 1: You couldn't do it? Speaker 2: And that was, that made so mad because everybody had their Afro pick or their Afro comb, you know, and you'd stick it in. And I'd just wash my hair and it would just kind of get (gesture)--it didn't really do the Afro thing. I did buy an Afro wig, though. So, that, that gave me some cred (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651489 Speaker 1: This is, you know, Black Arts Movement days. And I know Detroit [Michigan] was a leader in black theater--Ron Milner and Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.], and other people. Did you have a sense of this arts movement as a writer, you know, in Detroit? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. But you know, that was something that we've always had, because Motown [Motown Records] was so pivotal for the city. And you know, I really wasn't in the Motown era, but it was something that I was listening to. And my babysitters--because you know, they were teenagers and they could go out and dance and stuff, or they would go to clubs. And so, but AM radio was so big. So, that's when I got my fix with Motown and The Supremes, and the way they looked and they sounded. And they were just so glamorous. And it was from my hometown. And it was like the world is loving Motown because of The Supremes; and The Temptations; Smokey Robinson and The Miracles; Martha and The Vandellas; Stevie Wonder--I mean, we just had so much talent. And it was like, yes, that's Detroit. And then we had the cars, you know, it was the automobile capitol of the world. And it was like, we had it going on. It was just, it was fantastic, lots of pride, lots of pride, and still a lot of pride from my hometown. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651490 Speaker 1: Now, in, in high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], now did you, did you work with the high school newspaper? Speaker 2: Nope. For some reason, I don't know why, I wasn't engaged with journalism in high school--I just wasn't at all. And I was, I was a nerd, I was a book nerd. I was not a cheerleader, I was not the socialite. I didn't really like boys. It was just, like, work. I loved learning and I loved my schoolwork, and that was my focus. Speaker 1: Okay. I thought you would have been more social, like in-- Speaker 2: I really wasn't, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: So, did you, so you weren't in any, were you in any clubs or anything in high school? Speaker 2: No clubs, although the kids I tended to hang out with were more of the bookish, academic--and a lot of us ended up becoming journalists or getting into journalism. So, it was more the serious kids. I wasn't into the jocks, or the cheerleading thing, or the social thing. Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you participate in any sports yourself? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. No swimming or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing, okay. Let's see. What about art? Did you have any of your father's [Clarence Tinsley] artistic ability? Speaker 2: I didn't develop artistic ability until later in my life, like really in Dallas [Texas]. So, I've always appreciated art. I know, I know good art when I see it. I understand what the artist is saying or wants me to feel. I never felt I could create it until later in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were kind of quiet in high school, you're saying. Speaker 2: Very quiet, very quiet. Speaker 1: Now, did you have any favorite--what was your favorite subject? Was it, you know? Speaker 2: Writing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: English, literature, history--I loved history--geology, geography, basically everything except math (laughter). And journalists don't do math. Speaker 1: All right. So, were there any, did you have any favorite teachers or mentors at school? Speaker 2: Let's see. I had Ms. Trutland [ph.], who was ironically one of my math teachers, who really cared about me. I mean, I could see that she was very concerned that I was struggling, so she really took a lot of time with me. Mr. Mason [ph.], who is now deceased. Mr. Richardson [ph.] in Beaubien Junior High School [Detroit, Michigan] in seventh grade is really the teacher who just like opened up my mind. He made learning fun. It was an adventure, and we couldn't wait to get to his class every single day. He was incredible. And I'm trying to think how old he would have been when we were seventh graders. But he was married, he had kids, he was African American. I mean he, and he had his own life, but he just made current events and literature just come alive. And I'm serious, it was like we were running over each other every day to get in his classroom and sit down. And he, we would call him Mr. Rich, Mr. Richardson--but we'd call him Mr. Rich. He was fantastic. Speaker 1: Okay, that's good, that's good. Now, by that time, by the time you were in high school, were they teaching black history in school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had, really my black history teacher was my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley]. She gave me so many books, and supplemented my education. We talked about it constantly. She really gave me very rich and deep and very broad exposure to black history. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember anything in specific, books that you liked? Speaker 2: Lerone Bennett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett]--I mean I had my own copy of the Negro in America, 1619 to the present ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America']. There's a really old book, I can't think of the name of it. But it's, it was old when I got it, it's leather bound. And it has different plates that shows black Africans. And they were slaves and then became--they were sold into slavery. And then you see them on the auction block; and then you see them in the South. My mother got that book for me as well. Poetry, "I, too, sing America," ['I, Too'], Langston Hughes. I mean, Harlem Renaissance, just everything. My mom and my dad made that possible for me and my sister [Alicia Petross]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651491 Speaker 1: When you were a senior then at, at Mumford [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you were getting ready to graduate--in a hurry because you went to summer school (laughter), did you have a plan of where you were going to go to college, or what you were going to do next? Speaker 2: I was accepted at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: --and I thought, you know what? I want to, I want to major in radio, TV, film. Speaker 1: Now, okay. Now, how was this decision made at this point? Now, here you have a shy person, shy high school girl, and--? Speaker 2: Not so much shy, it was, I was quiet. I was just--because I can be, I can be an extrovert. But I also have that kind of introverted--but it was kind of like, that really doesn't interest me. I think it was almost like I was saving myself for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have any special roles at church [Peoples Community Church, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Read the bulletin or anything, or? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I would--well, I had lots of exposure because my parents [Janet Lampton Tinsley and Clarence Tinsley] gave me private French lessons. So, I, you know, dabbled in that. I had ballet lessons. And I was never a prima ballerina, but I was like one of the leaders in the corps. And so, performance was very easy for me. To get up in front of the class and give a book report, (snaps fingers) piece of cake. Public speaking has never been a problem, I mean even when I was a little girl. So, I was always very comfortable in front of people. But I never felt I have to be the life of the party all the time. I think for me it was like, okay, I can do it, but I need to have a reason to do it. I'm not just going to, you know, throw myself out there. But when I was at the end of my high school career, I started looking more at TV. And I thought, you know what? They write--it's public speaking, those are two things I do well. I think that's what I want to look at. And so, that's when I started to make my shift from print journalism to broadcast journalism. Story_ID: 651492 Speaker 1: Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]. So, you knew they had a program. Did you go, go over to investigate it, since you were in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Nope, just signed up for it. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. That sounds like most teen- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I'm kind of like, it's kind of like--you know, if I know what I'm going to do--if I think that's it, (snaps fingers) that's just it. I don't need to like rethink it or double think it. Speaker 1: That's kind of teenager behavior (laughter). So, you picked it out, and you decided to go for it. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And graduated in the summer of 1968. Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], I'm sorry, '71 [1971]. So, summer of '71 [1971]. And-- Speaker 2: September of '71 [1971], started at Wayne. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were, you finished, what, in August of '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: I think it was August, it could have been late July or early August. And it's so funny, because people would say, "Oh, you missed prom." I'm like, "Yeah, so what?" It was, it was different. We were more--the kids I was hanging out with, we were more like, we want to be relevant, you know. And we weren't like these-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So, we were like these-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: --we were kind of like pseudo revolutionaries. (Laughter) And, and so, it was like, well, that's not really relevant, to go to prom. So, we're not, we're not going to do that. So-- Speaker 2: Did you all have an organization or anything, or just, just (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, we would just kind of hang out and talk. It was very informal--and talking about the world and what we were going to do when we got older, and, "This was so bourgeois, we're not doing that," and there's no cotillion or beautillion. You know, we're just not, we're just not into that. We want to be about important stuff. So, today or, you know, in my career when people say, "Well, what was your prom like?" I'm like, "I went to my junior high school prom [at Beaubien Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], but I didn't go to high school [at Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan] because it wasn't relevant." And they look at me like, what kind of planet did you come from? But back then, that's what we were about. Speaker 2: Now, Detroit [Michigan] is, had some interesting activists, I guess, that were doing things in those days. Did you know the Boggs--James Boggs, Grace Lee Boggs? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Or, know of them, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Back in those days? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. And Chokwe Lumumba just died last-- Speaker 1: I know. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: --another Detroit icon. He was with the Republic of New Afrika, and I mean there were a lot--I mean, did you have, were you influenced by any of those groups the, you know, revolutionary black groups in Detroit? Speaker 1: No, I was aware of them, and understood why they were doing what they were doing. But not, not in terms of like informing my world view. But very proud of black pride. You know, we had Shrine of the Black Madonna [Detroit, Michigan]; and self fulfillment, self improvement, and not necessarily having to deal with the white power structure. I mean, I understood where that was coming from during the black power movement. And that, you know, that made sense. But I don't know, I think I've always been more of a--I'm not really a joiner. And so to pledge a sorority, no, thank you. I'm just not an organization person. I think I'm--it's not like a lone wolf, but it's just kind of like I just do my own thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I guess it is a lone wolf. Speaker 2: Well, maybe. Speaker 1: But hopefully, a lone wolf that does good (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 651493 Speaker 1: Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]. Now, who were--now you had a mentor at Wayne State? Speaker 2: Oh, Dr. Jack Warfield-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was my advisor in radio, TV, film. He had had a career in radio, in the theater; and he was an instructor and then the advisor for the radio, TV, film department. And he made TV production come alive for me. It was just, it was a great experience. So, when I signed up for radio, TV, film, I'm like wow, what's this going to be like? And then it's like the first day in his class, it's like yep, this is what I want to do. And then we had a field trip to WXYZ-TV, which is the ABC affiliate in Detroit [Michigan]--Channel 7. Wow, I mean I can still remember. I was just, I was in awe. We went in the newsroom, it was in the afternoon. And it was like a little--it wasn't dark, the lighting was just a little dim. People were coming in and going out, the phones were ringing. Back then it was typewriters, back then it was the teletype machines. And you could hear all that--that cacophony of noise. And people were talking on the phone, the phones were ringing. You'd hear some cuss words every once in a while. And it was like, I got to do this, I have to be here. I mean, newsrooms for me are really special, magical places. And that's when I said it's got to be television news. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, this--so what was your, I guess, I guess track at Wayne State? What did--what did you have to take in order to reach your goal? Speaker 2: Major in radio, TV--radio, TV, film; I had a double minor in journalism and humanities. And back then my experience was more print journalism, so I had to learn to write for television, which is completely different. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So, my training in school had been more print journalism, and writing for print. We write completely differently for television, because my writing has to support the video, my writing has to por- excuse me--my experience was print journalism. And so, when I decided that broadcast journalism was what I wanted to do, I had to learn a completely different way of writing. Because for broadcast journalism, my words have to support the video that you see; my words have got to support the sound that you hear. So, that was a bit of a struggle for me, in terms of being really descriptive over here with the words. It's like, I don't need to do that, because I've got the pictures and the sound. I have to be able to support that, give it context, and make sure it makes sense to you. So, that was a bit of a challenge. But once I got over that, it was like this is what I love doing. Story_ID: 651494 Speaker 1: I was asking you before if you had a, you know, in house broadcast at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], news broadcast that you all were a part of? Speaker 2: No. The work that we did in TV production was just in the studio, it didn't go anywhere. But for us, it was like on line, live on the air every single day. We would have different positions, different responsibilities. We'd rotate. So, one, one week I would be the director who physically had to put the newscast or production on the air. Another week I'd be the writer; be the set producer who had to put everything together. But when I was the anchor, that's when it clicked. And it's like, you know what, I can do this, I want to do this. I want to work really hard and be good, and be able to do this. And Dr. Warfield [Jack Warfield] inspired me and challenged me to make that happen. And we became, we became personal friends. And moving ahead--but when I went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], his mother lived in Milwaukee. And she was like (air quotes) one of the grand dames of the city, and he had me meet her when I moved there. And she would have these great salons in her apartment, and like theater people and politicos and business people would show up. And I was just this kid, and I would just sit there and just kind of listen to them talk about literature and politics and music, and just everything. And it was, was very fascinating. So, I was very happy that Dr. Warfield would share that part of his personal life with me, by letting me be able to be around his mother. That was really very special. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, did you have any, you know, exciting speakers at Wayne State when you were there? Speaker 2: Not really. No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: And did you get a chance to cover any real news in Detroit [Michigan] as a student? Do they--? Speaker 2: No, the curriculum wasn't set up then. It was more television production. And then we would write whatever we were expected to write. And I would write things about what was happening on campus, but they never had us go beyond school to write anything. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, you said you didn't join any sororities or anything? Speaker 2: No. My mom [Janet Lampton Tinsley] was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but it just, it never appealed to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there a black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Were you, were you a part of it? Speaker 2: I didn't join it, but there were times when I go and hang out and see what they were doing. And I wrote about some of the activities. But, and I think, too, it's kind of like being a reporter, because we really don't join that many organizations. You know, because you have to still observe it, and be distant, to be able to report on it. So, no, I never felt the need to like get involved. Story_ID: 651495 Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking you (laughter) off camera about 'The Mary Tyler Moore Show.' Now, this was a national--'The Mary Tyler Moore' is a show about being a producer, a woman television producer, in Minneapolis [Minnesota] I think, right. Did you watch that, and did it inspire you in any way? Speaker 2: I loved 'The Mary Tyler Moore Show.' It was--because you got to see the different characters and personalities in that newsroom. You got to see a little bit about what a newsroom was like. So, while I was more interested in being a reporter and going out in the field, Mary [Mary Tyler Moore] stayed inside as a producer. It was still great to see that aspect of what I thought part of my career could be. And so, yeah, I was an avid 'Mary Tyler Moore' watcher, absolutely. And it was, it was kind of cool when I ended up getting my first job in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], which is kind of similar to Minneapolis. And so, it was kind of like, oh, yeah, a little, little 'Mary Tyler Moore' action. Speaker 1: It's just as cold, almost. Speaker 2: Really cold, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So (laughter). Story_ID: 651496 Speaker 1: Were there many African American students in the department [at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] with you? Speaker 2: There were some, but there--no, there weren't that many. Pam Miller [ph.] and I were in the same class. And she ended up getting a job in TV in San Francisco [California]. I don't know if she's still in the industry now. But the two of us were very focused on being on camera as reporters. I think the other people were more interested in technical positions, or being producers or being writers. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I know your early skill, identified by your mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley], was being a writer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Why did you, you know, why were you excited about becoming an anchor? Speaker 2: Oh, to be able to show people what was happening. But it, but I wasn't thinking about an anchor, I always looked at being a reporter first. But it was like getting out there, you know, covering what was happening; and then telling people to help make them better informed citizens. Story_ID: 651497 Speaker 1: As you're approaching graduation, did you have any job prospects? Speaker 2: No. I graduated in December of 1974, and again I'm on that hyper thing, right? So, I put four years of college into three. Because at that time that's when TV stations were starting to open the doors of the newsrooms to women and minorities. And back then, we weren't sure how long that was going to exist. So, I wanted to make sure I could take advantage of that while that opportunity was still present. So, I had identified I don't know, maybe a year and a half, maybe two years prior that I wanted to try to put four years of college into three, and get out one year ahead of schedule. Worked really hard, had great support from my parents [Janet Lampton Tinsley and Clarence Tinsley]. They had saved money for my college education, but being in that generation, I wanted to be very independent. But you can't be independent if you're living at home, not paying rent, and eating your parents' food. So, I figured okay, I want to get a job. And they were like, "Why? We've got this money for you." And I said, "I want to do as much of this as I can." They were like, "Okay." They know their daughter. I am very independent. So, I got a job at a shoe store, L.G. Haig. I didn't sell shoes; the guys sold the shoes. But I was the cashier. I would ring up the shoe sales, and I sold the purses and the stockings. And I got a commission on what I sold. I think I had that job for two years, maybe two and a half years. It was perfect, because I would go to school in the morning; and then during the week, I would have that job in the afternoon. And then on Saturdays, I worked a full shift. I think college back then for me was like seventy-four dollars a quarter. I mean insane, right. But I got to pay for that through my job. That made me feel so proud, because I was doing something on my own for myself. So, working at Wayne State as a student, working at L.G. Haig, really that was my life. When I graduated in December I was really proud, because I had set a goal, I reached it; and then I had interviews with the three news directors in Detroit [Michigan]. And I'm like hometown girl, I know the issues, Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]--"I'm ready to work and do a good job for you." And they're like, "Great, Ms. Tinsley [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley], come back in five years when you have the experience." I'm like, "What? Five years?" They're like, "Yeah. Learn, make your mistakes, grow; and then come back." I was like, ooh, I didn't even think of that. And I said, okay. I sent out seventy resumes, really small stations--Michigan, Ohio, Indiana. Three of them, only three, bothered to acknowledge that I existed. One was a rejection letter, which I still treasure to this day, because at least they acknowledged that I sent them something. All those others were like (gesture), they never even responded. But you can't be dejected; you can't give up and get a no and just say, "Okay, that's it." I sent out more resumes, working at the shoe store full time. And then my mother called me in June of 1975 at the shoe store and said, "Carl Zimmermann is going to call you at the shoe store. He's the director of communications at WITI [WITI-TV] TV-6 in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]." I get the call from Mr. Zimmermann, they have an opening for a reporter. They got my interv- they got my audition tape, audio tape--not video--audio tape. And he said, "You know, we want to fly you over for an interview." They did, and I was just amazed. I'd never been to Milwaukee. And then they sent me back home. And then I guess maybe a week later, they said, "You've got the job." So, I started July 13, 1975. Story_ID: 651498 Speaker 1: What was it like? Were you the only African American in the newsroom (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was not the first African American, I was not the only African American in that newsroom. I wasn't the only woman, and I wasn't the first woman. So, those were not doors I had to open. What I had to deal with was being twenty-one years old, right out of college [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], working in a newsroom where people spent their whole careers to get there. And so, I didn't want to come off as the hot shot who's just here from college, who's going to show all of you how to do your jobs. I was totally green, because I had no professional experience. And I let them, in a very nice way, know that I was serious and I wanted to learn from them. And so, I'd say, "Jill Geisler, can I talk to you about asking a question without bias?" "John Drilling, can I sit with you and watch you edit your film?" Because back then it was an A and B roll on film. And then they could see that I was serious; and they were very open, very generous with what they've learned in techniques and skills. I was on a ninety day probationary period, because I was hired as a reporter trainee. So, within that ninety day period if it appeared I wasn't working out, or it wasn't going to happen, they could let me go, and no problem. Any time I made a mistake I thought, okay, this is it--literally, this is like the end of my career before it even begins. But the ninety day period ended. They were really happy with my work, happy with my potential, and they hired me full time. I was at that station for three and a half years. And during that time, I reported everyday general assignments. Later I became the co-anchor of the noon news. And then I'd still go out and report for the evening newscast. I was made the solo anchor of the Saturday night ten o'clock news; and I produced and co-hosted two public affairs shows. So, I'm working six days a week, more than forty hours a week, and I absolutely loved it. Speaker 1: So, this is an ABC affiliate, right? Speaker 2: We were ABC the first year I got there; and then the next year, we became CBS. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in 1995 when all the changes happened, that station went from CBS to becoming Fox [Fox Broadcasting Company]. We're an O and O--we're owned and operated by the Fox network. TV-6 [WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] is affiliated with the Fox network--they're owned by someone else. Story_ID: 651499 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the memorable news stories and events in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] in those days? Speaker 2: The first story I covered was confiscated weapons at Billy Mitchell Field [General Mitchell International Airport, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which is the airport there. And it was really a box that had brass knuckles, machetes, long knives, screwdrivers--really sharp instruments, random things that people had tried to take on planes--a fake grenade. And that was, that was my first story. So, it was kind of like a cautionary tale of what not to do; and certainly, you know, before anyone thought of terrorism on a plane. But it was like, you know, "The FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] doesn't want this on, and this is what they've gotten at Billy Mitchell Field--guns, you know, things like that. Let's go to TV-6's [WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] [HistoryMaker] Clarice Tinsley." And it was like my minute three, and that was my debut. And then--from then, it was covering city council [Common Council of Milwaukee] meetings. We had a lot of dead bodies at that time that would turn up, organized crime kind of thing. So, covering dead bodies in trunks of cars that would pop up from the bottom of Lake Michigan; fatal fires; fires. I remember being--you know, they'd wake me up in the middle of the night because I was the closest person to a fire--getting there, meeting my photographer. Walter Cronkite came--I still have a picture in my office of Walter Cronkite, and I'm there at his news conference. And I had to take the microphone away from him. Because we were one of the first stations to get a pager system. And my photographer, Clint Fillinger and I, got paged to go cover this major fire. Well, nobody else knew about it. Cronkite is down at the Milwaukee arts center [Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] on stage, giving this talk. All the TV stations are there. I get the page about the fire. We've got to go. I've got to go take the microphone away from him, but I don't want my competition to know what's going on. So, I wait for a second when he's paused, and I walk up to him. And I cover it, the mic he's wearing. And I say, "Mr. Cronkite, I am so sorry to do this to you, but I just got paged. We have to cover a major story. There's a fire, but I don't want the competition to know." And he leaned over and said, "Young woman, I understand. You go do your job, I won't say anything." That was so cool. And so, took the microphone, and we left and kind of just made it seem like, you know, we had to go do something else. And we got it, we had the scoop. But I have that picture in, on my wall in my office [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] of me getting ready to take the microphone from Walter Cronkite. Speaker 1: Okay. We're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Incredible. Story_ID: 651500 Speaker 1: We're talking about TV stories in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. And you just told us about Walter Cronkite coming to town. All right, so, now, you all were CBS affiliated then when-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Cronkite came, I guess, right? Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Oh, one, there's one funny story. It was a feature, but it was hilarious. Taste of Honey [A Taste of Honey], remember 'Boogie Oogie Oogie'? They had a huge hit, right? Okay, I believe it was Northside High School [ph.] had contracted with Taste of Honey to perform at their school before they got big with that hit. So, I was assigned to go cover them, but nobody believed they were going to be there. Everybody thought it was like this urban myth. So, the radio station in Milwaukee was promoting it. They said, you know, "Taste of Honey is going to be here, 'Boogie, Oogie, Oogie.' Come to the gymnasium, that's where they're going to perform." But no one believed it because they were so big. Everybody thought, oh yeah, this is like a radio prank. And my photographer and I were there covering it. It was like a handful of kids with this great group there. And it was like nobody showed up. It was hilarious. It was too good to be true, and they didn't believe it. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's interesting how that could work. Because if a group has already contracted to appear someplace-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and all of a sudden their record takes off, then they still have to show up at the place that they-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: --scheduled. Speaker 2: And they still gave a great performance, even though they didn't have, you know, the turnout that they thought, because they were pros. They didn't have the turnout they thought they'd have, but it was just, it was very, it was just really--you know, it would be so different today, because we'd be going live, we'd show it, it would be social media. You'd had, you know, tons of people there. But back then it was like they can't be here, they're too big, they're like national now; this is a prank, it's not going to happen, they're fooling us. We're not going to let them do that to us. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you there--I remember there was a national news story. In fact, it was on 'The Phil Donahue Show.' A gentleman from Milwaukee formed a black militia. Do you remember that, that story? Speaker 2: I don't know if I was there then. I was, I was seventy-- Speaker 1: Could be, maybe not. Speaker 2: --five [1975] to '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, maybe it was the '80s [1980s]. It might have been the '80s [1980s]. I was trying to think of other Milwaukee stories, but-- Speaker 2: We had, oh, Ed Gein. He was there before I got there. But he was, it was kind of like 'Psycho.' He had allegedly killed his mother and had taken her skin and put it on lampshades and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was-- Speaker 2: He was in a mental institution. Speaker 1: --a model for 'Silence of the Lambs' ['The Silence of the Lambs'], or something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was somebody that I heard a lot of reporters talking about, because they had been there to cover him. The Edmund Fitzgerald [SS Edmund Fitzgerald] was a very big story-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --the first year that I was there, just months in to my employment at TV-6 [WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: That's a ship, right, that-- Speaker 2: A ship that-- Speaker 1: --sunk in the- Speaker 2: --sunk in Lake Michigan. But it was insured by Northwestern insurance company [Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company], which is based in Milwaukee. So, that was our local tie to that story. And then of course, me being from Detroit [Michigan], I hadn't seen the Edmund Fitzgerald, but it had gone up and down the Detroit River. And I felt, I felt a real bond with the men on that ship and with that ship, because I'd grown up seeing Great Lakes freighters up and down the river in my city. So, that was a major national and international story, just, like three months into my tenure there. Speaker 1: A song was composed about it, that made (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Gordon Lightfoot. Speaker 1: --yeah, Gordon Lightfoot, right. Speaker 2: The, oh, what is it? The, (pause) it's something '--of the Edmund Fitzgerald,' 'The Wreck'--thank you, 'The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald.' Another story that was, that was so major, I was at the Wisconsin State Fair co-anchoring the noon news when we got word that Elvis had died. And I was scheduled to interview Kenny Rogers, who is really big with his big song "You got to know when to hold them, when to fold them" ['The Gambler']. So, Kenny came on with us live. And instead of talking about his song, that's when I got to talk to him about his memories of meeting Elvis Presley. And of course, he had met him, and said he'd been very supportive and very kind. He was just in awe, you know, being this young guy trying to get his career going, to be able to see this legend and perform for him. So, that was, that was an amazing interview, that was really powerful. And that was an example of, you know, breaking news, when we didn't really have the level of breaking news then that we have now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651501 Speaker 1: So, you were there until 1978, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And then what happened in '78 [1978]? I mean why did you leave Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: I felt that Milwaukee had offered me everything professionally that I was going to learn there, not that I would ever learn everything I needed to know. But I was ready to move on to a bigger market. Milwaukee at that time was the thirty-fourth TV market in the country. So, thirty-four out of two hundred was really a great place to start. But I wanted to take my skills to top ten, and I was hoping that I would be able to do that. So, I had sent my resume to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And one of the stations was interested, but it never really went anywhere. And then I got a call from Allen Levy, who is now deceased. But Allen was the six o'clock producer at this station [KDFW-TV] in Dallas [Texas]. Allen called his friend, Ross Crystal, who was at my competition in Milwaukee; a- Ross was at TV-12 [WISN-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And Allen said to Ross, "Who's in the market that you want to get rid of?" And yay, Ross said, "Look at [HistoryMaker] Clarice Tinsley at TV-6 [WITI-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]." Speaker 1: So, he was, wait a minute. Now, he's looking at the rival station. He wants to get rid of you to, so the competition would be weaker. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's what he, that's the--? Speaker 2: I was so thankful, I had no idea. So, Allen calls me directly at TV-6 and says, you know, "I'm Allen Levy, six o'clock producer, we're looking for a new ten o'clock anchor. You were referred to me by competition across the street. Are you interested and, if so, would you send me your material?" I'm like, "Wow, yeah." So, I sent it. They flew me down for an interview and an audition. And I was just honored, you know, to be able to be considered. Went back to Milwaukee, and I think three days later they called me and said, "You've got the job." It was like incredible. So, I left in October of 1978, moved here in November of '78 [1978], November 13th was when I started employment. But I didn't go on the air until December 4th. And my co-anchor was Barry Judge, who ironically worked at Channel 12 in Milwaukee. So, both of us ended up from Milwaukee working here. Gary Basner is now deceased, but Gary was our weatherman. And Allen Stone was our sports guy. And so, that was the, the anchor team at ten o'clock. Speaker 1: So, that, that is a big--so, ten o'clock news in Dallas and (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was twenty-four years old. Story_ID: 651502 Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the stories from, you know, the early days here [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]? Speaker 2: Oh, the first assignment I had was covering the Cowboys [Dallas Cowboys] in the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XIII] against the Steelers [Pittsburgh Steelers] in the old Orange Bowl [Miami Orange Bowl, Miami, Florida], which doesn't exist anymore. And unfortunately, the Cowboys lost. But they had won the previous year, they'd won the Super Bowl the previous year [Super Bowl XII]. So, to be able to cover a big story like that--and I went to cover the fans, the Dallas fans who went to go to the Super Bowl. To be able to cover that and see what a television station had in terms of market 10 resources was just incredible. And I was also a special assignments reporter, so it wasn't just anchoring. It was also still continuing to report. I ended up--in time I went to Berlin [Germany] to cover the fall of the Berlin Wall; and the impact that it would have on the defense contractors here at home. But, you know, learning about the Berlin Wall--and then standing in front of it and then having people with shovels and pick axes, and little knives, and the legs of chairs chipping away at the wall--literally destroying it--and then giving pieces to us and to their families; and seeing east Germans and west Germans who hadn't seen each other, you know, in years embracing, crying. It was just, it was an incredible experience. Story_ID: 651503 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I went to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia for Operation Desert Storm. And to be in the kingdom as a Western journalist was a very unique experience. Because we were able to do that because Saudi Arabia was an ally of the United States. But it was, it was amazing. It was the most dangerous assignment I'd ever had, because we got to Kuwait City [Kuwait] three days after the Iraqis pulled out. They had booby trapped a lot of the city, and so we were warned: don't walk where you don't see people walking; don't pick anything up; don't drive where you don't see other tire tracks because there could be cluster bombs there. Speaker 2: This is '91 [1991]? Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991], all right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, March. And we were driving in from Saudi Arabia into Kuwait City, just miles and miles of just flat, flat highway, desert on either side. There was a very thin black line on the horizon--very, very thin. We kept driving, kept driving, kept driving. And that line became liquid, it was drops of oil. Because that was the oil towers that the allies had bombed, falling over like giants. And all of these droplets of oil were in the air, starting to collect in our throat--difficult to breathe, hard to speak. You could feel it in your skin, you could--I mean it was like so thick on the windshield--oil in the air. Incredible. Get into Kuwait City. The station had made reservations at the Holiday Inn downtown, an atrium style hotel. But we weren't sure what kind of condition it would be in after the Iraqis had pulled out. We had bedrolls, and we were prepared to sleep in the desert if we had to. But we get to the Holiday Inn, it is standing. And they have these guards all around with submachine guns. Get in, there's no electricity because the power grid has been compromised, but they're leasing rooms. Now, what had happened, before the Iraqis left, they took their fire tracers and they just totally, they tried to like burn it and damage as much as they could. So, you're walking into this building that has been on fire, but they're giving you rooms from like the fifth floor up, (laughter) which is like so counterintuitive, right? So, we get to our rooms, and it's like it's covered in soot. There's soot everywhere--on the bedroll, on the--just everything, on all the furniture. But it had a bed; there was electricity. At some times during the day, it had cold, running water. I thought I was in a mansion, because that was so much better than having to sleep in the desert. We just stowed our gear and immediately went out and started interviewing, talking to Kuwaitis about what it was like living under the occupation of the Iraqis. That night--the city was under a curfew. So, we had to go to a hotel to feed our stories to the satellite. But the curfew was at midnight, right? Well, we didn't finish until after midnight. We had to get back to the Holiday Inn. So, it was Tim Ryan; I was in the back of the jeep; and then Max Stacy was our photographer, who was also driving. We had credentials with our pictures, CBS journalists, written in Arabic. And they had these checkpoints all throughout Kuwait City, because you still had some Iraqi insurgents who were still in the area. So, these guys at the checkpoints were really nervous, and they didn't want to deal with anybody, because it's just like go, go, go. So, we approach each checkpoint. There's no electricity, so there are no lights, right. So, we had to turn on the dome light so that they could see it was the three of us, holding up our credentials. They're sitting at campfires with their submachine guns. And we're like, "Holiday Inn, Holiday Inn?" And they're like, "(Gesture) Just go, just go." They don't want to be bothered. The last guy we went to, had his gun, and didn't really point it at Max, but like gestured, get out of the jeep. And Tim and I are like, oh, my god, please don't let anything happen to him. And then he gestures, like, kneel down. And we're like, "Max, don't, don't, don't--." And he says, "No, I think this guy's okay, I think it's cool." But what he wanted, he wanted Max to kneel down, because he was drawing in the sand a map to show us where we were, and show us where we needed to go to, to get to the Holiday Inn. So, we got there, and that was a nerve wracking experience. But the whole time we were there, there were maybe like five people a day who got maimed because they got crossways with those booby traps that that the Iraqis had left behind. Speaker 2: Now, now KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] then was affiliated with ABC? Speaker 1: CBS. Speaker 2: CBS, okay, at that point, okay, all right. Story_ID: 651504 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about some things that preceded that. Now, you covered the, the Air Canada Flight 797 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so right. Speaker 2: I was in the newsroom that night getting ready for my ten o'clock newscast [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]. And the Air Canada jet--the Air Canada jet had taken off from DFW Airport [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas], and it was supposed to land in Toronto [Canada]. But we got the emergency call that a fire had developed on board--it was making an emergency landing in Lexington, Kentucky. And the station chartered a Learjet, and sent me and a photographer to go cover that story. So, at ten o'clock, instead of being on the anchor desk, I'm in the air with my photographer on the way to cover this. We land, and it was a very different situation, in there wasn't as much control in terms of keeping the media back. So, we landed. I mean, the plane is right there. And it was gutted at the top, and you could smell, I mean you could smell death. And I walked over to an Air Canada representative. And back then, you could do it. I said, "May I see the manifest? I am so sorry that this happened." And they just give me the manifest. And so, I'm just looking at the names, and all of a sudden I see Curtis Mathes [George Curtis Mathes, Jr.]. And I'm like, Curtis Mathes. Is this the Curtis Mathes, tele- used to be a television company [Curtis Mathes, Inc.]. And to have a Curtis Mathes TV was a really big deal, because they were very expensive televisions. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: They were in these beautiful wooden cabinets. I mean back then it was really state of the art. And I'm like, "Is it the Curtis Mathes?" And they're like, "Yes, I'm afraid so." He was, he's, he was a Canadian. He was going back home after having done business in Dallas/Fort Worth [Texas]. Well, that was before live technology. So, even though I knew that--it was the middle of the night, I couldn't report that this notable person was one of the fatalities on this plane, because we had to wait until the morning to cover it. So, all night and overnight, my photographer and I are doing interviews and getting information. And then we were able to uplink to the satellite in the morning. But that was, that was a very difficult assignment because those were our people. And there were I believe twenty-three people who had died on that plane. And a lot of the people were alive when the plane landed, even though it was on fire. But when the doors opened, that's that--a lot of the people on the plane were alive once it landed. But when the door opened, that's when that new rush of oxygen fed the fire. And so, so many more people were killed because of that. Speaker 1: Gee, that's just terrible. Story_ID: 651505 Speaker 1: Hurricane Alicia was another disaster that you covered, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. The station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] sent me and my photographer, Jack Weber, to Houston [Texas] to cover the approach, the landfall, and the afterma- aftermath of Hurricane Alicia. And I'd never been in a hurricane before. My father [Clarence Tinsley] was so proud of me. And every time I had an opportunity to go cover something, regardless of how dangerous it could have been, my dad and my mom [Janet Lampton Tinsley] were like "Yes, go, go, go, go." So, we knew that Alicia was approaching. I get this package in the mail from my dad, and it was a wetsuit. It was an orange wetsuit, because he wanted to make sure that his daughter was going to be prepared to deal with the weather situation. And that was like such a loving gift, because I hadn't even thought about, you know, being outfitted like that. And so, I still have the picture of me with the hood on and the orange stuff. And I always had such great support, particularly from my dad, because he loved seeing me being out there in (air quotes) nontraditional female roles. Speaker 1: Now, is-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: So, Jack and I got our hotel room. And we had done interviews preceding that, and showing how people are preparing for all that. So, then we had to get some sleep, because it was going to be a long day. So, we set our alarms for three o'clock in the morning, because I think landfall was supposed to be like four or 4:30. And I had never covered a hurricane before, Jack had. And so, he had given me some tips on how to handle it. Like, you have to stand with your legs spread apart, your knees bent. Because the wind is so strong, if you just stand erect, it's just going to blow you over. And I knew that I had to watch out--not just for me, but I had to watch out for him too, because he's looking through everything. Through the viewfinder, this eye is closed. So, you got winds of up to seventy miles an hour; he doesn't know what's around him, he can just see what's in front of him. So, I had to make sure that I not only had my back, but I definitely had to watch his back. We had stuff flying through the air, just all kinds of debris, tree limbs, just everything, you know. In a hurricane, the rain is so strong, it literally stings you like needles in the face and on the hands, any part of your exposed skin. But it was really, really exciting being able to cover that. Story_ID: 651506 Speaker 1: In '84 [1984], you won a George Foster Peabody Award for an investigative story called 'A Call for Help.' Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: In January of 1984, I got a call from a man named Larry Boff. It was a Friday night. I was in the newsroom [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas], and he said, "Clarice [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley], you are my last hope. No one believes that when I called 911 for an ambulance for my stepmother, instead of an ambulance they argued with me, they hung up on me. I called back again, they argued with me again; called again. My stepmother died before I got the ambulance." And I'm like, "Mr. Boff, I am sorry that your stepmother is dead. I don't know that this will become a story, but I'll look into it." He started crying on the phone. I took out my notebook. He said what had happened, his stepmother, they were in the living room, she turned blue. He calls 911, "This is Larry Boff at--," blah, blah, blah--address. "Please send an ambulance now. My stepmother can't breathe." The nurse dispatcher said, "Why can't she breathe?" "I don't know, send the ambulance." "Put her on the phone." "She can't talk, she's incoherent." "Why is she incoherent?" "I don't know, please send the GD ambulance." "Don't curse at me." "Send the ambulance, my stepmother's dying." She hangs up on him. He calls back, gets the same nurse dispatcher. "Oh, it's you again?" "Please, for the love of God, will you please send the ambulance to--," blank, blank, blank address. "Put her on the phone." "I can't; she can't talk, she can't breathe." "Why not?" It goes on like that. The nurse dispatcher gets her boss. "Don't you cuss at that nurse, what's your problem?" "Sir, for the love of God, please. Why are you people doing this? Send the ambulance to--," blank, blank, blank. "You tell that nurse what she needs to know. You answer her questions." Gets back to the nurse dispatcher. "Please send the ambulance." "Sir, I need to talk to her." "You can't talk to her." She hangs up. He calls the third time. A different nurse dispatcher answers, sends the ambulance, but Lillian Boff died before the ambulance got there. Okay, he said, "I called Channel 8 [WFAA-TV, Dallas, Texas], Channel 5 [KXAS-TV, Fort Worth, Texas], Channel 11 [KTVT-TV, Fort Worth, Texas]." We used to have an afternoon newspaper, the Dallas Times Herald. "I called the morning news, Fort Worth Star-Telegram. Nobody believes me." He said, "Everybody said, 'This is 1984. You're going to call for an ambulance, you're going to get one. You must have done something wrong.'" He literally said, "Clarice, you are my last hope." Okay. You get a lot of calls in the newsroom from people who see everything and anything. And you know very clearly that some are delusional; some are very, you know, they're damaged, they need help. But there was something about this man that just made me say, you know, maybe there's something there. Story_ID: 651507 Speaker 1: I was single, it was a Friday night; I was going out with some girlfriends to a nightclub. But before I left the newsroom, I called one of my contacts in the fire department. He wasn't home, he was at a lodge meeting. And his wife said, "Oh, you can call back later." And I'm like, "Well, what time?" And she said, "Well, he'll be back around midnight." And I'm like, "You're sure that's not too late?" She said, "Oh, Clarice [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley], we love you. You can call at any time." And I thought, yeah, if you knew why I was calling, you wouldn't be saying that. So, there's no smartphone, right. So, I go to the nightclub; my girlfriends and I are having fun. Midnight, I excuse myself and go to the payphone. I call the fire department guy, and he's chatting, and he's like, "Nope, don't know anything about that, haven't heard anything about it. I don't know, can't help you." I'm like, "Okay." Saturday--I don't work on the weekends, but I made thirteen calls from home. On the thirteenth call, I had that pregnant pause, and the guy says, "Yeah, I heard about it. It didn't go down the way we would have liked. And that's all I'm going to say." And he hung up on me. And I'm like, okay, something happened. So, I had my notebook. Monday, I go to work, I lay everything out to my news director. I had called the city, and they refused to give us the audiotape. So, we filed under the Texas open records act [Texas Public Information Act], which is an amazing document. On the thirteenth day, the city called and said, "You can come down and record the audiotape." I had my notebook. And the amazing thing is that everything that Mr. Boff [Larry Boff] said to me--that I had written down--was on that audiotape, and in order. It was verbatim, which is very rare. Because cops will tell you, eyewitness testimony is suspect--you're in shock, you may think I can't believe this is happening; you don't necessarily remember what you think you remember. Everything was on that tape, in order, in my notebook the way he told me. Even though I had the tape, I didn't have a story. I didn't know what the procedure was for 911. I didn't know what the training was. So, I put together an investigation for one month, talked to all the principals involved, did all the phone work, put the story on the air in March on a Monday, six o'clock. We got eight hundred phone calls, (snaps fingers) like that. "You're making the City of Dallas look bad, Clarice. You're going to need an ambulance tonight, and it's not going to be there." I got death threats. "How can this happen in Dallas? This is horrible." "You think that's bad? Let me tell you what they did when I called for an ambulance." We aired the same story at ten o'clock. We got 975 new phone calls. Again, outrage, disbelief, a few death threats. We aired--we didn't air it again. The next day, the networks picked it up. CBS picked it up; 'Nightline' did the story; CNN picked it up. I heard from Texans who live in Europe who saw it who were outraged. And then the next day, everybody who didn't want the story, who didn't think it was a story in this market, got involved. Every single person in the Channel 4 [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] newsroom was involved in some aspect of carrying that story forward, to make sure we stayed competitive on it, and that we stayed in the lead. Also, TV stations and newspapers all across America said, "This happened in Dallas, Texas. Could it happen in Detroit [Michigan]; Los Angeles [California]; Atlanta [Georgia]; Washington, D.C.?" I mean, the whole country was looking at their 911s. Based on the story and the reaction that it produced, the City of Dallas did its own investigation. People were demoted, people took early retirement to avoid punishment; people were fired. But the most significant thing is that the system changed. It's regrettable that a woman [Lillian Boff] had to die in order for that to happen. And based on that story, I received the George Foster Peabody Award, which in broadcast journalism is considered the highest award that one can get because the Peabody represents a story that brings about change. The 911 system changed in Dallas. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. This is 1984, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: And you're thirty-one years old-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you're still young, and (laughter). Story_ID: 651508 Speaker 1: And also in '84 [1984], now you met your husband, Stephen Giles, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: And got married, right? Speaker 2: Not married in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't marry--okay, all right. Speaker 2: No, we met. My--some friends gave me a party in honor of the Peabody [George Foster Peabody Award], and Stephen was one of the guys that they invited. But he wasn't the guy they were thinking of fixing me up with. But he is so handsome, and he was so wonderful. And he had this mystery about him. Because he would come over and talk to me and then he would leave. And then he would come back and chat, and then he would leave. But I could tell he wanted to get to know me as a person, not (air quotes) somebody who's on TV, and that was really great. But at the end of the night, he left. I'm standing with Carol [ph.], our hostess. And she said, "I'm so sorry Diane [ph.] couldn't make it." And he said, "I know she wanted to come, but she was sick." And Carol said, "Oh, well, tell her I said I love her." And I'm like, well, he didn't wear a wedding ring. And he wasn't flirting with me. So, I guess Diane is his wife, so, he's married. So, forget it, it's okay. Well, then Mon- that was a Friday night. So, Monday, I get this card from Stephen Giles, who says, "It is true what they say about you. You are a really nice person, and I'm glad I got to meet you." Well, I called Carol, and I'm like, "Why is a married man sending me this card?" And she said, "Who's married?" And I said, "Stephen Giles." And she said, "He's not married." And I said, "Well, who's Diane?" And she said, "That's my girlfriend, he works with her." And I'm like, "Oh." So, we became friends. We talked on the phone for like an hour at a time. Our first date was a Patti LaBelle concert. He had been married before, and had a son [Stephen Giles, Jr.]. And I was totally career focused; and I was never, I never really thought about having children. So, I wasn't sure I wanted to get involved with a guy who had a child. He didn't want to bring a lot of random women into his son's life. And so, he wanted to be very careful about the women he got involved with. So, I think that was really very good for both of us. But a month after I met him, I said to my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley], I said, "I think I met the man I'm going to marry." And two and a half la- years later, he asked me to marry him. And he gave me one of the best compliments I'd ever gotten. After he got to know my mother, he said, "Clarice [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley], if you get to be half the woman your mother is, I will be a happy man." And I'm like, "Oh, my gosh, thank you for saying that about my mom, because it's true." Story_ID: 651509 Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] was also the year that you reported [for KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] on international drug smuggling. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, from Texas--in Texas from El Paso, Texas. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We, my photographer and I were on Lake Falcon [Falcon International Reservoir], which is a lake that borders Texas and Mexico, and at the time was a hot bed for drug smugglers. That was one of the ways they were bringing drugs from Tex- from Mexico into Texas and the United States. Really, really, dangerous, because shots had been fired, people had been killed. But we wanted to be able to cover as much of that drug highway as we could. So, we had a night vision camera, and we were with a border patrol agent. Again, very dangerous, really exciting. We didn't see any activity that night, but I'm glad that we were there to document and show people one of the ways that drugs was coming into our country. We also went to El Paso and talked to the head of the law enforcement agency there--very specific look at trying to interdict drugs and drug smugglers. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you cover a story like that, do you have support from law enforcement at the scene when you're out there? Speaker 2: We were, we had support. But a lot of it, we were on our own. We had to be very careful and, you know, follow the instructions we were given--not do anything, you know, foolish. Because we're not going to risk our lives to be able to cover a story. But it was dangerous. I mean, it was really dangerous because that was a known drug highway. Speaker 1: So El Paso is right on the Rio Grande, right? Speaker 2: Yep, it's right there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right on it. Speaker 2: It's right on the border. Speaker 1: Right across from Mexico. Story_ID: 651510 Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] is also the Challenger disaster. And Houston [Texas], you know, figured prominently in that. And that's right down the road from Dallas [Texas], so, were you there? Speaker 2: I was there. I was--it was Tuesday, I was getting a manicure. And my manicurist had the television on, and it was in the background. Because back then we were accustomed to space shuttles going up. But after liftoff, we saw that plume of smoke, and it just went up and then kind of like a horrible Y. And there's just this silence. And they showed the families, and it's like what's going on, this isn't normal. What just happened? I call the station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] and they said come in. And back then we used to have go bags. So, you had a go bag always in the trunk of my car with clothes and toiletries. And if there's a story, you just grab the bag and go. And when we realized, tragically, that the shuttle had exploded, the station said, "We're going to send you and a photographer and a crew to Houston to the Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center] to cover this national tragedy." So, we went down and we were there for four days, which culminated with President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] arriving to lead the national memorial service from the Johnson Space Center. And it was, it was just gut wrenching. Covering that story, we talked to people at the Johnson Space Center who had worked with the seven Challenger astronauts--who knew them, who spent time with them, who trained with them, who trained them. They spent their off hours with them. We went to bars, local stores, where they would hang out. Everywhere you saw yellow ribbons. You saw signs, "We love you," "We miss you." It was just very palpable, that grief and that sense of mourning. And we were set up in the Johnson Space Center. I still have photographs where I'm standing next to the modules of a space shuttle. And it was just deep grief, just really deep grief; and very much felt there, because that's where they lived. I mean those people knew those seven astronauts. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you have a chance to talk to the family of Ron McNair [Ronald McNair]? Speaker 2: We never got to talk to the families. No, we only had access to the people they had worked with; the people they had, that they had trained with. We were not able to talk to the families. Story_ID: 651511 Speaker 1: You talked about covering the fall of the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany], and about being in Kuwait. Chronologically, they're next. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So that's why I'm raising them. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And, but in 1993--now, I don't want to skip over anything. If I'm skipping over something, stop me--that's significant. But of course the '92 [1992] election where, you know, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] wins. That would, did, are there any stories about the election? Speaker 2: We had a town hall meeting in this station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] with Bill Clinton when he was governor, running for president. And I moderated that. And it was in the lobby. We'd set up a different configuration in the lobby. And that was really amazing, because even then--it's true, he is a rock star. He just has this, like this force field, this sense of charisma that just really permeates, whether you know, people voted for him or didn't; Republican, Democrat. I mean, just this big guy who just like really just takes on the whole world. That was, that was really an interesting assignment. Speaker 1: Now in terms of politics--now, Dallas [Texas] at the time, wasn't Ann Richards the mayor? Speaker 2: The governor. Speaker 1: The governor of the State of Texas. Speaker 2: Governor Ann Richards, yes. Speaker 1: That's right, okay. The mayor of Dallas was, I don't know. Was there-- Speaker 2: Oh, wow. It could have been Bob Folsom [Robert Folsom], it could have been Steve Bartlett. [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk was our first African American-- Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --mayor. I don't remember who the mayor would have been at that time. Speaker 1: Ron Kirk wasn't elected until, what, 2000 [sic. 1995]? Speaker 2: It would have, could have been Steve Bartlett; could have been Mayor Folsom. Speaker 1: Okay. I was just trying to get a sense of the--so what was the condition of, you know, what was the state of black politics in those days? Speaker 2: We have, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson is the congressional representative. We had, have had black Dallas City Council members. Dallas used to vote at large. And so, there was a legal fight to install single member districts, because the feeling was that the African American community was not necessarily having its interests represented with at large candidates. And so, a federal lawsuit was filed to have single member voting districts. Al Lipscomb, who's now deceased and was a council member, was very active, one of the people active in that. So, having a level of activism in Dallas. And black people have always had to fight for that, which was very different for me coming from Detroit [Michigan], which was majority black. It was a very different experience coming to Dallas where we didn't have as many black people in positions of power, or just as many black people in terms of population. Speaker 1: Yeah, in that period of time I guess is when the State of Texas kind of flips from being a state where--you know, that gave rise to Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Ann Richards as a governor, to a state that in '94 [1994] had people like Tom DeLay and Dick Armey, and you know, extreme right wing sort of stance. I guess that would be correct in saying that they're extreme right? Speaker 2: And becoming a red state. Because-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --traditionally, it had been Democrat, it had been blue. Speaker 1: Yeah, it flipped. Speaker 2: But then shortly after President Johnson worked for the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]; and then President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came in, and really made a play to cover--to court southern whites--that's when things started to shift. And then you have Texas go from becoming Democrat to becoming a Republican state (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Ninety-four [1994] is Newt Gingrich's Contract with America. And you know, it was a consolidation of conservative congressmen at that point. Speaker 2: And having the national Republican convention [1984 Republican National Convention] here in the City of Dallas was huge. And Dallas, you know, we're bidding for it again, to have the 2016 Republican National Convention here. Dallas was a very different place in 1984 compared to hopefully what the delegates will see when they, when they come here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If they get, if we get the bid. Story_ID: 651512 Speaker 1: Also in '93 [1993], just as that, I mean as this political turn is happening, KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] affiliates with Fox, basically, which is more of a conservative-- Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995]. Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995]? Okay, all right. Well, this is the year after Newt Gingrich then--affiliates with Fox. Did you notice, well what did you notice in terms of change in terms of the station then (unclear)? Speaker 2: We were shocked when we were told that we would go from becoming a CBS affiliate, to owned and operated by Fox. And the thing was it wasn't because it was considered conservative back then; that they didn't have news. I mean, they weren't known for local news. They were known for Homer Simpson. It was 'The Simpsons' when you thought about Fox. And it's like, oh, my gosh. All of us are just in shock. What's going to happen? I mean we had this tradition of news and hard news coverage. And you know, CBS network supports us, and we've got the resources. And then we're going to go to a network--yeah, we're going to be owned and operated, but it's a network that doesn't have a tradition of news. And what is that going to be like? And a lot of people were just really, you know, freaking out and just upset. And I'm thinking, well, if we don't have a history of news, then we're going to get to be the ones who write that history--we're going to be able to start that. And you know, maybe this could be a good thing. It doesn't necessarily have to be bad, doesn't have to be negative. It's going to be different, but maybe this could be really good. Well, the positive thing is that when Rupert Murdoch bought these stations, one of the hallmarks that he used was football. And of course, duh, Dallas Cowboys, you know, a major NFL [National Football League] franchise. And so, building sports around the Fox brand in the beginning helped give it credibility. And then we are, I believe we are still the largest group of local stations that are together, owned by a network. So, we are a network unto ourselves. When you think of Fox cable [Fox News]--that is not Fox local news [Fox Broadcasting Company], because cable is a completely different animal. It's opinion and it's--you know, it's not what we do in terms of--we're just dealing with the facts; we don't get involved in opinions--you know, what I think, what I feel. No, that's not my job as a journalist. So, they're two very different branches. It's like we're cousins; we're in the same family, but we're doing two very different jobs. We do a great job covering local news. I mean, we do nine hours a day. That's more news than anyone covers in Dallas/Fort Worth [Texas]. And we do it with a very high level of integrity, very high standards. Because it would be really easy for us to take the same story that you saw at five o'clock--same story on at six, same story on at nine or ten. But it would kill us, and it's not serving the viewers. So, at this stage--and we work really hard to make sure every newscast has a different lead, has different stories. And if it's the same story, we're bringing in different elements that you haven't seen before, keeping it fresh, moving the story forward--and breaking news. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're 100 percent right, though--back in '94 [1994], Fox was not known for news. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, I'm really operating on a present time notion of network Fox, you know. But, you know, so I'm sorry, I--that's true. You're right, you're absolutely right. There was no imprint then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. It was a brave new world. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 651513 Speaker 1: Oh, in '95 [1995], you started a weekly spotlight called 'Clarice's Hometown Heroes.' Speaker 2: I started 'Clarice's Hometown Heroes' in 1995 because I had hit a brick wall. I loved news, I loved giving people information. What we do is a service profession, and it makes a difference. But also, there's a lot of negative news that goes on because there's evil in the world--it is a presence. And that makes news. But in 1995, I had just, I had just hit a wall. It's like, you know what? Yep, negative happens, evil happens, but good things happen, too. I don't believe in public relations, because that's not what news is. I'm a straight shooter. But it doesn't always have to be negative. So, I went to my news director [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] and I said, "I would like to do a feature that's going to honor people who are volunteers, because I have a great deal of respect for volunteers. They don't get paid to do what they do; they're there because they're passionate and they want to make a difference. And they don't want the spotlight, but they deserve it. And so, I would like us to do that." So, my news director is, "Great, who you got?" (Laughter) And I'm like, "Oh, okay, I'll do some research, and I'll get back to you." So, I'm like, good, you know, they're open to it. But then the pressure's on me, because I've got to hit a grand slam home run here. I've got to get somebody who's going to, like, let them see where my vision for this franchise can go, because I want to be able to do it every week. So, I'm doing my phone calls. And it's like yeah, that's a good person, but I need somebody really great. That's not it, we're just not there yet. And I called Parkland Hospital [Parkland Memorial Hospital, Dallas, Texas], and they said, "Oh, we've got this great lady here, Princella Hartman, African American, eighty-nine years old. She takes the bus three days a week from her home in the State Thomas area [Dallas, Texas] to come to Parkland. And she works with new mothers to help them learn how to be moms and how to bond with their babies. I'm like, great. So, I go there and I meet her. She's like, I don't know, maybe 5'6", beautiful copper African American skin, white hair with a bun on top of her head, a little white blouse with the bow, little glasses on the pearl necklace. And the whole time she talks to you, she'll pat you and say, "Well, baby, how are you doing?" Or, "Honey, what's going on?" She's this wonderful earth mother--elegant, beautiful presence. Princella Hartman was my first Hometown Hero. Because she was so amazing, management got it. People loved it. And in 2014, 'Clarice's Hometown Heroes' is still on the air because of Princella Hartman giving us such a great inaugural run. Princella lived to be 107 years old, and she died last year. Princella Hartman was a feminist, she was a leader; she was a very strong woman. She has five generations of family behind her. A street is named after her--Hartman Street is named after her. She was very big into neighborhood preservation. That woman had not only quality to her years, she had quantity as well. And I went to her memorial service, and it was sad because she's no longer here. But I feel so grateful that I got to introduce North Texas to Princella Hartman. And people--when I did her obit [obituary], people genuinely felt her death, they felt her loss. But more than that, they were glad that she lived and glad that she made an impact. Story_ID: 651514 Speaker 1: Another thing you did, now, I skipped past it, I'm sorry. But in '93 [1993], you won an Emmy Award for hosting a Cowboys pep rally in 1992. Now, this is--what did you do? Speaker 2: I hosted the Cowboys [Dallas Cowboys] getting the NFC [National Football Conference] championship, and it was on the field at the former Texas Stadium [Irving, Texas]. And it was really exciting, because I did interviews with the players, talked with the fans, and we had pieces that I had done and other reporters had done. And it was just, it was a great deal, it was a great assignment. And then getting to cover the Cowboys. And they subsequently went on to win that Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXVII]. And then they won back to back, that was terrific. I think I've covered one, two, three, four--five Cowboy Super Bowls. And four of them, I was there when they won. One, though, the last one in Phoenix [Arizona]--I was at the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXX], but my dad [Clarence Tinsley] was diagnosed as being terminal. And it was on a Friday, it was the Friday before the Super Bowl. So, we'd gotten in that Tuesday. I had to cover all the stories with the fans and stuff. My dad had been ill, but we didn't realize he was that ill. And the doctors told my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] that Friday that he had maybe six months to a year to live. I'm in a total state of shock, and it's just, I didn't know what to do. And I went to my producer [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] and told her. And Lena Sadiwsky said, "You don't need to be here. You need to be home with your dad." And so, even though we didn't think his death was imminent, my news director said, "Absolutely, come home." So, I came home and had to completely repack, because the weather in Detroit [Michigan] was the coldest, one of the coldest Januarys that had ever been on record. So, I go from like sunny Phoenix to packing for that trip home. And the Cowboys won the Super Bowl that Sunday. I landed that night, saw my dad the next day in the hospital. He was so happy that I'd been there, because he always loved me going on assignment. He li- he watched the game on TV, so he was really proud of the Cowboys winning. We had a great day. My sister [Alicia Petross] flew in, and it was me, my mom and my dad in the hospital. And then one of my dad's friends, Walter [ph.], came by. And it was just like old times, it was fabulous. And then we left my dad, and he said, "What time are you coming tomorrow?" And I said, "We'll be here at eight [o'clock]." And he said, "Good." My dad died the next morning. And--oh thank you, Scott [Scott Stearns]. And the phone rang at home, like early. Like, I don't get up early. I'm a night owl, so I sleep, I sleep late. But the phone rang, I have no idea what time it was. Maybe it was like 6:00 or 6:30. And my mother and sister say they knew as soon as the phone rang, that they knew that that meant my dad was gone. But I'm like the eternal optimist, and I'm like, "Nope, he's going to be alive. We're going to get there, we're going to see him." So, that drive was just, no one talked in the car. And we get to Henry Ford Hospital [Detroit, Michigan]--and my dad was already gone, of course. But he looked so peaceful. He just looked beautiful, and just looked like he was sleeping. So, I'm very glad, I'm just eternally grateful that I, that I left work and went home to be with him. Because the doctors were shocked, because they had projected six months to a year. They had no idea that his death was imminent. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had the support of, you know, the workplace, too, it seems on this. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my gosh, I think I was gone for like two weeks, two and a half weeks, yeah. People were so kind. They sent letters and called and, yeah, very supportive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very grateful. Story_ID: 651515 Speaker 1: What has it been like here, in terms of the presence of African Americans in the, in, in the news in Dallas [Texas]? What has your station done, and what have (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not--I was not the first African American anchor on the air. The first woman to anchor was [HistoryMaker] Iola Johnson who was on Channel 8 [WFAA-TV, Dallas, Texas]. She started I believe in 1976, and I came in '78 [1978]. I wasn't the first black person in this newsroom, Channel 4 [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas], back when we were CBS. Gayle Joya was anchoring the noon news. Jay Ratliff [ph.] was a reporter, and I think he sometimes anchored the Saturday night news. So, we did have some African Americans, but not that many, and not really that many in the market. So, we have made improvements as the years go by. Shaun Rabb is an outstanding reporter; he's a super star, African American here at our station--just an amazing guy, does such great work. Dionne Anglin is African American, really sharp reporter. At a time I co-anchored--I used to have a co-anchor. I co-anchored with Baron James, who is an African American male. Baron is now in Florida. And we were the first anchor team at night--main anchors five and ten, to anchor together. And I was really proud of that, because we're two anchors and we're African American. But it's not like anything that's going to prevent us--and I'm so glad that the station did that. And my ten o'clock producer is an African American woman. And so, at one point, we had an African American woman producing the ten o'clock, and then two African American anchors. And I was very proud of that. Story_ID: 651516 Speaker 1: What's the competition like in Dallas [Texas]--how many stations try to cover local news here? Speaker 2: We have Channel 4, Channel 5 [KXAS-TV, Fort Worth, Texas], Channel 8 [WFAA-TV, Dallas, Texas], Channel 11 [KTVT-TV, Fort Worth, Texas]; and Channel 33 [KDAF-TV, Dallas, Texas] does a nine o'clock news, which is not a traditional newscast for them. It's kind of like more infotainment. We have Hispanic stations as well, Telemundo. So, there's a lot of news in this market, and we are the fifth market for television news in America. So, we are a big deal, it's powerful. We work very hard to inform our citizens every single day, every newscast. Very competitive news market, and that's good because it makes us better, it makes us sharper. But the person who really benefits (air quotes) is the viewer. Speaker 1: So, this, this, so, the station not only covers Dallas and Fort Worth [Texas], but a metro area that's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --yeah, much larger? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Did you want--let's see, if you were asking about personnel, I solo anchor the five and ten o'clock. We have Stevie here and Heather Hays who work together. They--Steve [Steve Eagar] does the 5:30 solo; and then he does the six and nine o'clock with Heather. I'm solo at five and ten. Channel 8 has an African American male, John McKay, long time veteran anchor. Gloria Campos is just retiring, but I believe they're putting a new Hispanic woman with John. And then at Channel 5, you have Brian Curtis, white male, and--oh, my gosh, I'm doing (unclear), I can't think of her name--I can't think of her name--Channel 5--I may come back to that. Speaker 1: Yeah, just come back. Speaker 2: Sorry about that. And 11 has Karen Borta and Doug Dunbar--those are the main anchors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I need to come back to that. Speaker 1: What does--KDFW [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas], where do they stand in terms of the market, you know, in? Speaker 2: My five o'clock is number one, for which I am very grateful. Our six o'clock is number one. So, in early news, we're number one--5, 5:30, and 6--three separate newscasts. We have a nine o'clock, which is very dominant--an hour nine o'clock, and then my ten o'clock comes after. So, very often the nine o'clock will be number one in late news, and my ten o'clock will be number two. Or, there are nights when my ten o'clock will be number one. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651517 Speaker 1: And there's a local chapter of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, Dallas-Fort Worth Association of Black Journalists. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And are you very active in the NABJ? Speaker 2: I'm a member, and they honored me in 2010 with the Asante Award. Speaker 1: That's right (laughter). Okay, now, this is a--in 1998, you know, the country was rocked by the James Byrd [James Byrd, Jr.] story, you know. Is Jasper, Texas close, close by? Speaker 2: It's in East Texas, yes. Speaker 1: East--yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Very close. It was, it was horrifying. And horrifying that it happened, and the fact that it was in our state was, it was just revolting. I mean that man suffered, and truly that was a hate crime. And national media just came down and we [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] just assigned--you know, Shaun [Shaun Rabb] covered it. We had several people who were covering it, and it was just I mean beyond belief that that could happen to a human being. And that's the thing with news--that for us, we don't have that filter that the public has. So, there are facts about that case that we know, there are details we know that we don't report. Because it's enough to know that he was dragged behind that truck. You don't need to know what happened to him. But that's something that we get, and it's very difficult, it's very painful to cover stories like that. But at the end of the day you're a professional, and you have to do what the job requires. Speaker 1: So, you see the good and the worst. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean the best and the worst of people, I guess, from--? Speaker 2: We do see the best and worst. And I'm a big proponent of trying to surround myself with as much positive energy and thoughts as possible, because I'm somebody who is aware of pain and suffering. And I do, there are times I do live with that, I do live with other people's pain. I respect that, I honor that; and particularly when I'm telling that story, they're sharing part of that with me. And so, I don't want to be glib about it, and just go like, ugh. So, I, I embrace a little bit of that. And that can take a toll, so that's why I need to work--to make sure I work out. Physical fitness is a big part of my life. I eat well, I get a lot of rest. I drink a lot of water. My mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley], for her, water is the drink of life. And so, I really work very hard to be able to take care of myself, because there are times you have to go into the abyss, and you need to be able to come out of it. Story_ID: 651518 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the--what happened on September the 11th, 2001. Speaker 2: I was asleep, and my husband [Stephen Giles] woke me up. He was getting ready to leave for work. He said, "A plane crashed into the World Trade Center [New York, New York]." And I'm like oh, my gosh. You know, and immediately I'm thinking, small plane, like a Piper Cub [Piper J-3 Cub]. And I said, "I hope, I hope nobody died, I hope it's not fatal." I stayed in bed, I turned over. He comes back, like you know, eighteen minutes later. Said, "It happened again." I shoot out of the bedroom. We have a TV in our bathroom. I turned it on, I'm looking at that image, and I'm like, "Baby, we are under attack." And he said, "You think so?" And I said, "Yeah." I said, "Twice?" I said, "That is not a coincidence." And I said, "Look at the size." I said, "That is a big plane." Or, was a big plane. So, I jump in the shower. And I don't go to work until two o'clock in the afternoon. And at that time, normally, I'm asleep that time of the morning. I jump in the shower. I'm doing like minimal makeup, I'm just getting dressed, because I'm going to go to work. And then the station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] calls me and said, "We need you in." And I'm like, "Nope, you don't have to tell me. I already know." I'm in the car on the toll way listening to the radio when the South Tower [2 World Trade Center] collapses. And I'm like, what in the hell is happening to our world? I'm in the newsroom--Fox network [Fox Broadcasting Company] has our coverage. I'm in the newsroom, and we're all standing up just looking at the monitors when the North Tower [One World Trade Center] collapses. I look across the newsroom, and my general manager was in the newsroom, Kathy Saunders. And just across the newsroom, we just look at each other, and we don't even say anything. And it's like, what is happening? So the North Tower collapses, Fox gives local stations the option to jump in. So, we take coverage. I'm on the air with Baron James for just hours, and then we're just rotating our anchors in and out--just hours of coverage. And then we're thinking, okay, we have got to stay in control, because we don't know if that's going to happen here. And if I start freaking out, if I get emotional, I'm going to freak out North Texas. Nobody can prepare for that, no one can train for that, because we never knew something like that magnitude would happen. And so, I remember just being very careful about everything I was saying, being careful about the observations I was making, because we didn't want to do anything that would add to any fear going on here. Then the ground stop happens--unprecedented--no planes in the air anywhere. So then we're doing local coverage in terms of what's happening here with police and firefighters; and then what the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] is doing with respect to what we think is a terrorist attack. We don't know about Al-Qaeda yet because it's still too early. Story_ID: 651519 Speaker 1: Okay, go back to the summer. I had learned about the FBI Citizens Academy class because I'm very big into community speaking. I do a lot of speeches in the community, I do a lot of community service as the emcee. So, I was in Richardson [Texas], and I was at this event, and this guy said, "Oh, Clarice [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley], I just did this thing. You would love it: Dallas Citizens Academy class. I was in the first class." And I'm like, "What is that?" And he said, "We learned about the inner workings of Dallas FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. And then at the last class you go to the gun range, and you get to fire all these weapons that nobody ever sees. But the amazing thing is you learn about what the FBI does." And I'm like, "Whoa." So, I had applied to be in the second FBI Citizens Academy class. They had to go all the way to the director, because I didn't wanted to be a citizen; I wanted to cover it as a journalist and say this is what Dallas FBI is doing. So, they had to get approval from the FBI director. And they said, "Well, there are going to be certain things that she's not going to be able to report about. Are you going to be okay with that?" So, I had to have a meeting with my news director. We talked about boundaries and certain things that would be in national interest that would, you know, be a violation. And I said, "Yeah, we're good with not covering certain things. But know that if I find out something about FBI in Dallas [Texas] that isn't kosher, I'm going to report that." And they're like, "Yeah, no. If you find out about wrongdoing that we're doing, of course, you know." I said, "I'm doing that." "But if it's something else that deals with, you know, national security, okay, we can honor that." All right, so what day is my class going to start? September 11, 2001. All summer long, I'm like "Yay, September 11, 2001. I can't wait for that to start, it's going to be so great." Well, of course, when that day finally happens, we don't meet as a class. Because the mission of the FBI changed that day to preventing terrorist attacks, which had never been pre- preeminent in their mission statement before. We didn't meet until March of 2003 because the FBI was involved in tracking down what happened, how everything colossally went so wrong. Then the war started in Iraq [Iraq War], and FBI agents from Dallas were used with that. Then Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] exploded over North Texas. FBI agents and the Evidence Response Team were sent down to try to retrieve the debris. Everything had just kept happening, so we didn't start until March of 2003. Story_ID: 651520 Speaker 1: I love New York City, my husband and I have been there. We stood at the base of the World Trade Center [New York, New York]; ate Nathan [Nathan's Famous] hot dogs--looked up. I've had dinner at Windows on the World [New York, New York]. That was very personal for me. We would go to New York [New York] once a year. The last time we went was for our wedding anniversary. We got married April 18th. And that April, 2011--excuse me, 2001, we went to New York. And I remember for some reason--I don't know--I still don't know why we did. We were supposed to fly into LaGuardia [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York]; they diverted us to JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York]. But before we could land at JFK, we had to circle. And we kept looking at the World Trade Center. And I'm looking at it, and it's like wow, that's really cool. Because you never really get to see it. We wouldn't have seen it, because we would have gone to LaGuardia. But it was like--I don't know. Looking back on it, it's like that's what I'm looking at, that's what I'm focused on. And then we went to the Empire State Building [New York, New York]. And my husband did the thing--(gesture) like he held up his arm, like the crook of his arm--and I took the picture with the World Trade Center like right here, you know, like he's holding it up. We never do the tourist thing. Why we went to the Empire State Building, I don't know. But I still have that picture of him with the World Trade Center. That's April. That September--not existing, right. So, I never got to grieve that. I never--it was like I had a friend who died, and for a whole year, I never got to go to the funeral. But for a whole year, I talked about that friend every day in news coverage [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]. We had local angles here, we had local people here, or just covering just the enormity of it. But I never really got to deal with it on a personal level. So, that September I went to New York, a week after the attacks, and my husband couldn't go. We have a friend, Curtis Green [ph.], who lives in New York who is the penultimate New Yorker--very sophisticated, great guy. Stephen [Stephen Giles] called him and said, "Clarice [HistoryMaker Clarice Tinsley] is going to go, but I don't want her to go by herself. Not because it's dangerous, just because it's a big emotional thing, and I don't want her to do it alone. Would you go with her?" He's like, "No, Stephen, I'm not going. This is my city. They did it to my city, I was here that day; I experienced everything. I've never went down there, I'm not going." And he said, "Look, brother, I'm asking you as a favor. Do this for me, for my wife." And he's like, "Okay." So, I was staying at The Ritz-Carlton [The Ritz-Carlton New York] in Battery Park [New York, New York]. So, Curtis comes, picks me up, we walk over, and we were just absolutely silent. The boots of the firefighters were still on the wrought iron fence of the church [St. Paul's Chapel, New York, New York] that was right behind the World Trade Center. All the memorials were still there--the pictures of the missing, the pictures of the dead. There had been fresh flowers put down; there were signs just everywhere. And there was just this pall over everything. And we just walked around in silence. You could hear people crying, you could hear people sobbing. But there was just no conversation. We went back to The Ritz-Carlton. We had a drink, we really didn't talk. Curtis left, I went back to my room, and I just broke down. And that's when all the stories I'd covered, all the pain I had reported--you know, my memories of being in world--Windows on the World--that just all came out. And that's when I got to personally deal with it. And I'm glad I went. I'm glad I went, because that was me--that was my way of paying my respect to the people who died that day and the people who suffered, and the families that will never be the same. Story_ID: 651521 Speaker 1: Now, you got a chance to go to Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Virginia] to witness a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] training I think that same, in 2003 as well. Speaker 2: Because of my--because, because I'm a member of the Dallas [Texas] Citizens Academy [FBI Citizens Academy] class, I made very good contacts with Dallas FBI agents, the special agents in charge. They got to know my work, they respected my work. And an opportunity came, a very rare opportunity came. And they said, "Would you and a photographer like to come to Quantico to cover the training, part of the training, of men and women who want to become special agents?" I was like, "Yes." So, Jeremy Pollard, JP, my photographer and I, got to go. We were there I think three days, and it was power packed. We ended up coming back and putting a documentary ['Inside the FBI'] together. It was amazing, covering what they go through. And, a little bit of fun because 'Silence of the Lambs' ['The Silence of the Lambs']--the main character with Dr. Lecter [Hannibal Lecter]--Clarice Starling. So, the whole thing was being where part of that movie was shot. And then seeing the yellow brick road where the movie starts, where Clarice is running on her, on the, the path, like for part of her physical fitness and part of her training. So, to get to see that was very cool, too. And then to have the same name was really special. Story_ID: 651522 Speaker 1: You were in actually a couple of movies yourself, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, TV shows. Speaker 1: Yeah, TV shows, the 'Prison Break' and--? Speaker 2: I've done some episodes of 'Prison Break.' I did episodes of 'Good Guys' ['The Good Guys']; and 'Walker, Texas Ranger.' For 'Walker, Texas Ranger' I was a reporter on the scene. For 'Good Guys' and 'Prison Break,' I was an anchor talking about action that was happen- happening in the story. And then for 'Wishbone' which was a, I think it was PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], or on PBS--a story about a dog that had an inner life as a historical hero. And so, I got to do a 'Wishbone' episode ["Barking at Buddha"]. And I was a reporter [Kate Connelly] for 'Wishbone' as well. And that was, that was fun. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is some of the fun parts of being an anchor (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 651523 Speaker 1: Twenty ten [2010], you covered a shooting at city hall [Dallas City Hall, Dallas, Texas]. I think you won an award for this coverage. What happened, what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, that was--that was a social satire on social media. And--because that's when social media was kind of just, you know, getting started. But we took it to the extreme of, you know, what would happen if social media covered the news. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And so that was, actually, that was a story that went viral, and it was really fun to do that. And that was 'Fox 4 Goes Social.' That was what we entitled it, and it was really very much a tongue in cheek about breaking news and social media. And we won an Emmy [Emmy Award] for it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was a pretend story about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a shooting incident? Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right. And like, the news then is covered by, what, Facebook or something? Or (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, we had--I need to--hopefully, I can pull it up for you. It was, we had different reporters on the scene covering a (air quotes) so called shooting. "But first, let me check the number of people I have on social media. Oh, yeah, well, I could tell you about it here. But why don't you come to my website first, and then we'll tell you about it there." So, it's how social media just gets to be too big--becoming the story, as opposed to covering the real story. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It was satire. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651524 Speaker 1: Now, you've interviewed Laura Bush, Ron Paul--different people. I mean, do you have a favorite celebrity or politician you, you've interviewed? Speaker 2: No, I don't have a favorite. I'm just grateful to have had the opportunity to interview as many different newsmakers as I have. But it's like, yeah, it's nice, it's exciting. But then you've got to do your research, and it's about the work. And it's all about the work, and then being in the moment, you know, and being present. And then, hopefully doing a really good job and being proud of representing yourself and the station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] when it's done. But it's, yeah, it's neat to be able to see these newsmakers or entertainers, rock stars, you know, politicians, and see them up close; and hopefully ask the questions and get the answers that people want to know. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the biggest news stories in the African American community, maybe the biggest of the 21st century, was the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about coverage of that election? Speaker 2: I have not been able to meet the president. The thing that is so incredible--during his first election--excuse me, during his first inauguration--because I came in to cover that, cover the local angle while we had our network coverage on. And then once the network took the swearing in and everything, I'm in the newsroom. The phones didn't ring for two hours. Do you know how rare that is in a newsroom? The phones didn't ring. It was like everybody was just captivated. Excuse me, it wasn't two hours, it was one hour. They were captivated watching this. I mean, the phones didn't ring. That's unheard of, because you get phones ringing constantly (snaps fingers), you get phones ringing intermittently, you get phones ringing in a newsroom. We got zero phone calls for that hour. That amazed me. That just never happens, ever. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It happened that day. Story_ID: 651525 Speaker 1: It just occurred to me that Dallas [Texas] is like is the cen- generates a source for much of the national news that black America gets through 'The Tom Joyner Morning Show.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, which is broadcast in every city around the--or most of it. Speaker 2: The Fly Jock, Tom Joyner. Speaker 1: Do you have a relationship with? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He calls me Reesie [ph.] (laughter). Tom, I first met Tom when he was at K-104 [KKDA Radio, Dallas, Texas], and just at K-104. And I had a couple birth- because my birthday's New Year's Eve. And so, I think there may be two birthdays where he and his wife, Dora [Dora Chatmon Joyner]--his first wife, Dora, would come over and I'd like have a birthday party. And it was just really cool. And Tom was, of course, very close to The Commodores and Lionel Richie. And so, when they would come into town, he'd kind of hook us up, and we'd get to go to the concerts and stuff. And so, Tom has always called me Reesie, and I love that. So, then when he became--he was talking about doing this Fly Jock thing. I was like, wow. I mean nobody could, we couldn't wrap our heads around it, because nobody had ever done it before, right? I was like, "Tom, you're really going to do that? I mean, you're going to--okay, wait a minute, you're going to do the radio here in the morning, and then you're going to get on American Airlines fl- plane, the same plane every day, and fly up to Chicago [Illinois] and then do the afternoon show?" It was like, "Wow, more power to you." And so, yeah, same seat, same plane. And Dora would fix like the same thing, because he didn't want to eat like junk food and get all the weight and stuff--and then have a different producer to tell him all the stuff that's going in Chicago, so he can be relevant and talk about that. And the guy's like brilliant, he made it work. And then to synd- you know, nationally syndicate it, it's just amazing. I saw Tom--let's see. It would have been two years ago at the Cirque du Soleil Michael Jackson concert [Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour], and that was really great. We got to take a picture and hang out. I'm really proud of him. Story_ID: 651526 Speaker 1: Do you have a chance to mentor any young people in the media (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. I, I'm on the board of the Southern Methodist University school of journalism [Meadows School of the Arts, Division of Journalism, Dallas, Texas]. And so, I'm invited there to speak to the students. And I always make myself available to all young people who are interested in broadcast journalism; or just, you know, interested in college. So, I'll have them come into the newsroom [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]. They'll shadow me, watch the five o'clock; and then, you know, we'll talk about the profession or talk about what they want to do. I had people who did that for me when I was at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], and it's really important for me to be able to pay that forward. So, I'm always, always having younger people coming in, and talking to them about the business. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what advice would you give someone in college today? Speaker 2: Tell them you've got to be passionate about it, because it doesn't want you, you have to want it. And then you have to be willing to do the work. And it's not about you, it's not about being (air quotes) on TV. It's about working for the people, working in a service profession, and really working your butt off. Because you know, it may (air quotes) look glamorous and look easy, but we work hard in this newsroom, and we work hard every single day. And there's a lot more pressure today; there are a lot more things that are expected of me, of all of us, in terms of doing our job. And there are lots--there are so many more platforms now that we have to work on. It's not just being on television. Its social media, it's being--you know, in the community, its coming up with story ideas. We have editorial meetings twice a day: one at nine o'clock and one at two in the afternoon. I'm in the afternoon meeting. We are expected to come in with story ideas that are able to go on the air. So, it's not like, "Oh, I think this can happen, I think I heard about this. Let me go make some calls." No, you've made your calls before you get in the meeting; and then you do your pitch--because we're not wasting time. You know, we work really well together, but it can be a grind. And so, I tell, I tell young people you've got to love it. You have to be dedicated, you've got to want to get out there and tell those stories 'cause it's really important and it's great work; it's very rewarding. But you've got to want to do it, and you have to be prepared to handle it. Story_ID: 651527 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major that you wish you could do over again, or? Speaker 2: Wow, that's a good question. Would I do something over again? No, I don't, I don't think so. I had two pregnancies that ended in miscarriage in the early 1990s. And I had to think about whether I wanted bed rest in order to continue a third pregnancy--the chance of continuing a third pregnancy. And I really, I had to pray about it. I was depressed, because I got pregnant twice within six months. So, I could get pregnant, but I had trouble staying pregnant. The first time I was six weeks pregnant, the last time I was three months, and we were just getting ready to announce it. And Stephen [Stephen Giles] was wonderful, he was so supportive. And he said, "You know, I will do whatever you want to do, because you're the one who has to go through this, in terms of your body. I will support you." And then I was really depressed, and then I had to think about it. Prayed about it, and I said, you know, I'm going to be really honest. I don't want to put my life on hold for the chance of maybe this works out but maybe it doesn't. I think Steve [Stephen Giles, Jr.] is a child God intended me to raise in this house; and I'm okay with that, I'm good with that. So, I made a decision; I guess I was in my thirties--yeah, mid-thirties--not to try again. And I always wanted to make sure I hoped that I wouldn't regret it when I got older. And I'm happy to say that I never have. I know what it's like to be pregnant, I don't know what it's like to carry a child to term. But I have a great relationship with my son by marriage. I have a wonderful stepdaughter--excuse me, goddaughter and godson. I have lots of kids that I engage with on so many different levels. I get to tell great stories involving children. So, for me, it worked out. For me it worked out, and I'm very happy that it did. I was never, I was never really maternal. I love children, but I get what Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] once said about being a parent, in terms of the 24/7. It really takes a commitment. And I applaud every single parent on the planet because that is a full time job in and of itself. Because you have a human being that you are helping to develop, and then gift to the world. That's an enormous job, an enormous responsibility. And so, I'm glad that for me it worked out the way that it did. Because I love, I love my life with my husband, and I've always wanted to work hard. I hoped that I would find a man, find the right man, and I did. We've been married almost twenty-seven years; and he is an incredible human being. And he's the man of my dreams. So, I'm really a very, very fortunate and blessed woman. Speaker 1: Indeed. Speaker 2: But I don't believe--you know, you hear people say--having it all. I don't believe, I don't believe in that. I think that's--for me that's too simplistic. Because we're human, and so things are not going to be perfect. And why should you have it all? Who's to say that anyone should have it all? If I had it all, my father [Clarence Tinsley] would still be alive. You don't have it all. You have what you have, and just try to make it the best that you can. And, help somebody else along the way, I'm really big on that. Help somebody else along the way, and preferably not somebody who's in your family. Because it's kind of like that's a given--that that's what we need to do. But for me, you know, improve somebody else's life while you're here, because life is brief. And Lord knows, all the stories I've covered, there are people who wake up who don't go to sleep; they don't get that chance to go home. They don't get to see their loved one again, or say I love you one more time. So for the people you love, the people you care about, give them as much of yourself as you can every single day, because we don't know. That's just part of life. And I don't, I don't mean to sound negative, but that's kind of the reality that's always there. So, make it matter, and make it good while you're here. Life is brief. Story_ID: 651528 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: (Sighs) I used to hear my mother [Janet Lampton Tinsley] and my father [Clarence Tinsley] bemoan the fact--there used to be, there used to be a time when you'll hear something happened, and you would just say, "I know somebody black didn't do that." Or, "I know somebody African American didn't do that." And when I was a teenager, and then like a young adult before I started my career, I'd hear my parents and my relatives bemoan the fact that there was a cohesiveness in the black community because of struggle. And their concern was that when things opened up and maybe got easier, that as a people, we might lose that, and not remember our history or not know as much of our history. I don't know to what extent schools do a good job of teaching black history. I don't think it should just be for February [Black History Month]. Black history's American history. Native Americans certainly are not discussed the way they should be. So, my concern is that as a people we need to keep our history alive; we need to know and understand our history as we're moving forward and making these wonderful strides. But we also need to remember there's still a lot of black people who are suffering. There are a lot of African Americans who still are not able to achieve the best of their hopes and the best of their dreams. And it's incumbent upon us to be aware of that, and work to try to make it better--not just for our families and not just for ourselves, but for everybody. And then beyond that, not just African Americans, but just as Americans. I mean, there are so many children living in poverty in the City of Dallas [Texas] that it's just, it's sickening. And these are kids of all races. What's going to happen to these children? They're not just going to go and live on some planet somewhere. They're going to be with us. They're supposed to be our leaders, they're supposed to be taxpaying citizens. They're supposed to be able to have a good education; and then get a great job of some kind. But if they're struggling because they're living in poverty, through no fault of their own, what kind of future are they going to have? What kind of future are we going to have for them, through them? I was at the--we just opened an African--a Martin Luther King center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Center] in the Martin Luther King center museum [Dallas Civil Rights Museum, Dallas, Texas] in the month of February. And the purpose of the museum is to have young people, specifically young people, learn about his [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] mission of nonviolence and learn about the civil rights struggle. Because I think it's easy for kids to grow up and not understand that there used to be different drinking fountains; that you couldn't go to a lunch counter. In order to vote, you're risking your life, or you had to pay a poll tax. And it really bothers me when I specifically, especially, hear young black people say, "Well, I don't vote, it doesn't matter." It's like do you know your grandparents died in order to have the right to vote? They couldn't vote, and you're not going to, because (air quotes) it doesn't make a difference? You're tripping. Who do you think you are? But is it because we don't do a good enough job telling them about that history? Because as parents or grandparents we don't supplement what they're not learning about in school, with respect to their history? 'Many Rivers to Cross' ['The African Americans: Many Rivers to Cross with Henry Louis Gates, Jr.'], the documentary that Dr. Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] just did is just beyond excellent, because it traces the whole history of African Americans from Africa to present day. But it shows so much truth--that people either don't know, or they've forgotten, about what it's meant to be black in this country for us. And it's a, that's a brilliant piece of work. That's something that I wish, not just black kids, but all kids could see. Because it would, I think, have people have a better understanding of really how far we've come, but yet still how far we still have to go. Story_ID: 651529 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Hard work and high standards every day, every newscast. I'm proud to be a broadcast journalist. I'm proud to represent this station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas] and to be part of this team; and to have the skills that I've developed over decades to be able to give people factual information. Credibility is everything, and you can lose it (snaps fingers) just like that. You have to work at it every single day. So, I'm passionate about what I do, I believe in ethical standards; and it's not something that I take lightly. Speaker 1: What is your journalistic philosophy? Speaker 2: Factual information. Not what I think, not what I feel--factual information that happened, whether it's from one stakeholder or ten. They all have to be represented in that story. And it's truth: speaking truth to power, giving people information that's really going to be insightful, to help them make better informed decisions. And it's not about me, it's about the people's right to know. Story_ID: 651530 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Wow (laughter). Gee. Community service is something that is very important to me. I've spent a lot of years doing that, because TV stations can take a lot out of a community because of the kinds of stories that we have to cover. But I think it's also important to give something back. And so, I'm proud that I get groups that call me and ask me to emcee, or to be involved somehow in an event. I never charge for that. I never, ever take money because that's, that's like a gift that I want to be able to give the community. But it gets me out of the newsroom [at KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]. I get to talk to real people, I get to hear what's really going on. You get great story ideas just by being out there. I want to stay open, continue to work on my skills. I'm still learning, and I love that. That's a thing that's still keeping it sharp and fresh for me. So, I guess that's what I'd like to say, until you ask your last question. Story_ID: 651531 Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow. I don't know if I ever thought about that. How would I like to be remembered? As someone who cared deeply about broadcast journalism; who wanted to be able to use those skills to give people greater understanding; as someone who cared deeply about ethics and ethical behavior, and excellence; and someone who had a real joy about doing her job, because I do--even in difficult times I still care deeply about this. And I feel very privileged to be able to have had this career for almost thirty-nine years, thirty-five at one station [KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas]. So, I care about the work and doing the work and that's, that's important for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you...