 Story_ID: 13975 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Welton Ivan Taylor, W-E-L-T-O-N, I-V-A-N, T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Twelfth, November, 1919, Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh, March, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Chicago, in Chatham. Speaker 1: At your home. Speaker 2: At my home. Speaker 1: All right, okay, that's good enough. What is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a consulting microbiologist in partial retirement--when I can't find someone to sign a check. Story_ID: 13976 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Gumbo. Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Early summer. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: It's almost always Africa. Speaker 1: Okay, any particular part? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm partial to east Africa because I go to see the animals. The animals are disappearing. The people are not. So I want to see the animals before they disappear. Speaker 1: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Don't sweat the small stuff. It's all small stuff. Speaker 1: That's a great saying for a microbiologist. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If it's big enough to see with the naked eye, it's not worth worrying about (laughter). Story_ID: 13977 Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family history, how--I mean in terms of the--I guess how far you can go back. How far can you go back in your family tree? Speaker 2: Very limited. On my mother's [Cora Lee Brewer] side, I can go back to my grandparents and to maybe--yeah, her great, great--my great grandparents. On my father's [Frederick Enslen Taylor] side, I can't even go back any further than my grandmother and grandfather. And that's only from the sayings of my father. I have not been able to document. Speaker 1: Okay, what is the oral tradition of your family origin and history? Are there any stories or songs or anecdotes that come to mind? Speaker 2: Oh well, we have members of the family that are famous and particularly on my mother's side. First of all, she was what was known as the Brewers of Florence, Alabama. And it was a big family, Buchanan Brewer and his wife, Millie, are the ones who essentially set the race for us because Buchanan had a father who was full-blooded Cherokee and a mother which was white Irish. And Millie had a mother who was pure African and a father who was German. So that made my mother a quadroon. And on my father's side, the Taylor comes from his mother who is supposed to have been a descendent of General Richard Taylor who was the son of President Zachary Taylor. Zach had four daughters and late in life had a son. And his son was named after Zach's own father, which was Richard. And the son ended up being a general. And he married a Creole girl in a big wedding in New Orleans. And I have the date for that. What I have not been able to find is the connecting link after that marriage, down through my grandmother. And I don't know her first name. Speaker 1: Now, what is the date of that Richard Taylor and the Creole girl? Speaker 2: I'll have to look it up, but I believe it's 1821--not, 1871. But I have it, I have that written down. But it's in the drawer, working genealogical file. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And beyond that, getting the progeny of that marriage is where the problem lies because somewhere in that progeny line is gonna be my grandmother. And where she is related to or how she is related to the marriage, is where the gap comes. And I understand that I will probably be able to get her first name off of my father's original application for social security. Now, I went to the death records for social security and I got his social security number, which I had not written down anywhere. And if the card is filled out the way it's supposed to, it always asks for your mother's name. And that should give me my grandmother's name. Speaker 1: So you didn't meet your grandmother all? Speaker 2: No, she died when my father was ten. That was considerably before the year that I was born. So she died in 1897. And I don't know her date of birth. And I don't know her first name. But she worked for Judge Frederick Enslen in some capacity that I have not been able to find either. I can find his sons, but I can't find the old judge. I understand there is a census of 1880 which will give me that information. And I'll be able to look up both my father's uncle and my supposed grandfather. But the trouble is, that's not widely available. What they have is the record form 1880 that has only the names if they had a child under ten years of age. And evidently, Judge Frederick Enslen's sons were not under ten years of age at that time. And so he's not in it. And without finding him, getting his birth date and death date and things like that, I'm at a loss. I've got to get into the unabridged 1880 census. And that'll have a tremendous amount of information for me about that family. Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you spell Enslen? Frederick Enslen, how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Oh, that's capital E-N-S-L-E-N. Judge Frederick Enslen was supposed to be--well, he was, he was a judge. He was a very important person in the nearby town of Ensley, Alabama, which is to Birmingham as Evanston is to Chicago, was going to be named after him. And he said--all this according to my father, he said, "I don't want to spell the name--the way my name is spelled. Call it Ensley, E-N-S-L-E-Y." So that is on the map. There's no problem about that. Now, whether or not data for Ensley, Alabama is listed under the Birmingham, I don't know. But the sons were all living in Birmingham. And they're in the Birmingham directories in 1903 and 1907, etc., etc.. But I can't find the old judge. Now, if I could have my mentee for whom I am the mentor, who is a University of Alabama, in Birmingham, graduate, got her Ph.D. this spring, if I can have her go down to a Jefferson County building and get into the old records, she may be able to do what I can't do from here because she can get in. When he died, when the judge died, all of his property had to be listed. Now, this is beyond the time of slavery, so he won't have slaves listed, but he may have house servants listed elsewhere. And in the census, he would have to have everyone who was a part of the household, including all the servants. And I suspect somewhere in there I may find my grandmother. Speaker 1: In those days, the servants actually stayed on the place? Speaker 2: That's what I don't know. I'll find out because he has to list everyone who resides on the property. Well, so if he has servants' quarters there and servants stay there, then she'll be listed, if she's a servant. If she is living at home with her brother, older brother, then that may not prove fruitful either. But I can always go to her older brother's name and find out if he's on the census and, in which case, if she's living with him, she'll still be there. So he had only the one sister. My father had only the one uncle. And that's where he went to live when my mother--his mother died. Story_ID: 13978 Speaker 1: What about your mother's [Cora Lee Brewer] side of the family? You said you can go back further on that side. Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family goes back as far as the great grandparents that I told you, Buc [Buchanan Brewer], Buc and Millie [Brewer], grandparents, and their mother and father are the, the German, the African, the Cherokee and the Irish. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are there any stories about any of these ancestors that come down to you, any interesting stories? Speaker 2: The story of my African ancestor. Now, that is a gorgeous thing. Her father was the chief of the village, the king. And he had a wife and two sons and an infant daughter. And the slave traders came to the village saying they were bringing gifts, they were passing through the territory, they were bringing gifts for the chief or the king. And they wanted to meet the king's family. And the king and his wife and two little boys came out, and the slave traders immediately had their men open fire from the surroundings and shot them and killed them. Then as the people ran screaming away from there, they chased them down, and put them in ropes and chains and carried them off to the slave trade. Well, the little girl was an infant suckling. And she had a wet nurse. And the wet nurse concealed the fact that this was the princess. And, of course, the slave traders always split people up because the different tribes had different languages. They couldn't talk, talk to each other. And that was a part of their thing. There couldn't be an insurrection because nobody could talk to anybody else to plan it. And so they--but the idea of the wet nurse was, she was going to maintain the bloodline for the princess's family and when there was a chance to coalesce, all of the members of the tribe would be brought together, and they would recognize the young princess as being the titular leader. But that, of course, never happened because they were all separated. They did not separate the wet nurse from the babe because there was extra money to be gotten from that. You're selling two instead of one. And so the net result was she was allowed to come to the States carrying the babe, and that went on and the child was in slavery until after the old wet nurse died or was separated from her, and finally ended up in the, owned by a German and his wife, who had no children. And she stayed with them and they raised her. And when she finally became pregnant by him, or the baby was born, he and his wife agreed that after slavery was over, that she would never have to look for another place to live, and the daughter would be raised as their daughter. And she said, "No." And she took her daughter and went North, and that's when the daughter was of age and she married Buchanan Brewer. Now, there's a question about what the name of the slave mother was. And my daughter told me just the other day that she has it down in her records as D'Augustino, which means that she was possibly owned by someone by that name earlier before the German bought her. The German's name was Miller. And I suspect it was M-umlauted U-L-L-E-R because typewriters didn't handle that and people who were taking the census didn't handle it well. I know because I have a friend now whose name is Buttler, B-umlauted U-double-T-L-E-R. And they spell it double-I, double-T, L-E-R because the two I's together look like an umlauted U. And so that's the way it came out, and so her name is now Bittler. But I suspect the same thing is true of Old Man Muller, who has become Miller. And I'll have to look under both names to see what the score is when I get back into the genealogy, which I hope to do. I'm starting awfully late. Speaker 1: Well, that's, but that's wonderful detail, you know. It's good that you got started, you know, 'cause you got a lot of detail. Speaker 2: Well, these are the things that I remember that my parents told me, and my mother's been dead since 1949. And the stories that she told me and the ones that my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] told me since are all that I have of my genealogy. Speaker 1: But it's still--it's good by comparison to a lot of people. A lot of people can't--have no records at all and have no stories. Story_ID: 13979 Speaker 1: Alabama didn't have birth records until 1917. I was lucky I was born in 1919, so I have a birth record. But my sister [Mary Blanche Hanna] doesn't. She's 20 years older than I am. And so it became a federal law in 1917 that all states would keep birth records. But see, if you were born in one of the eastern seaboard states, the original thirteen, they had great records. They brought them from England, and France and wherever else they came from. But they came from the old country where birth records had been kept for centuries. So they were not in the trouble that the newer states were in. And it wasn't until 1917 that there was constant birth records kept all over the United States, all of the then existing states. Speaker 2: Now, are there any other stories or anecdotes about your ancestors you remember? Speaker 1: That's it. That's all of it. And that's all I have to go on. And--it's been suggested that my best bet, since old Judge Frederick Enslen was a VIP, there were probably books written about him that would be in the library in Birmingham. And that if I ever got into that library, I might find a tremendous amount of information, although whether it's going to give his extra marital liaisons or not, is something else. But if I can get into the 1880 census, since the 1890 census was destroyed. And that gives you this terrible jump to 1900. By that time, she was dead. She died in 1897. My father was born 1887. So it's the 1880 census that I really need to get into. The 1890 doesn't do me much good. But I just heard from, from a genealogist the other day that the idea that all of the 1890 census was destroyed by a fire in Washington [D.C.] is erroneous. A small part of it was destroyed. But he told me, and this just happened over the phone a couple of weeks ago, the same one that did the genealogy on my wife [Jayne Kemp], her cousin, he told me that what actually happened was, in that 1890 genealogy, they had separated blacks into blacks, mulattoes, quadroons, octoroons, dark-skinned and light-skinned, and said, this was putting an unusual burden of keeping peoples in the closet in the deep South, where white families did not want it to be known that they had progeny that were black or mulatto or quadroons. And said, they insisted that all of that census be burned (laughter), skeletons in the closet and all. So he says, that's the real reason why the 1890 census disappeared. He says in the 1900 census, they don't have any of these fine demarcations. Speaker 2: That's really valuable, what you--you know, valuable information. Speaker 1: That opens a world of question about a lot of things. Story_ID: 13980 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother. Can you give us her name and spell it for us and her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Cora Lee Brewer. And she was born in Florence, Alabama, one of a stack of little Brewers, ten in all. Actually, one of my cousins who's ninety-five and is still living tells me that there were fifteen, five died early on, and ten survivors survived into adulthood. And so the Brewer family was a well-known--now, Brewer happens to be one of those Cherokee names that's well-known out in the east. And the Brewers and the Downings. My wife [Jayne Kemp] comes from the Downing side. And I come from the Brewer side. But they're well-known Cherokee names. The Cherokees did a good job of integrating, most of them. They became doctors and lawyers, school teachers, college professors and all of the other things, like the Jews in Germany. And like the Jews in Germany, it was finally decided that, that the white race was going to have to be protected. And that's when the Trail of Tears came about, as they took those eastern tribes and jerked them up from their homes and put them on the Trail of Tears which wandered up through Ohio--you know, your part of the state, and through southern Illinois, and where the Mormons got killed--southern Illinois is a very hostile place, even now (laughter). And-- Speaker 1: Through Illinois-- Speaker 2: And they ended up down in--what's the name of it, Shelly, Talla--? Speaker 1: Tahlequah. Speaker 2: Tahlequah, Oklahoma was the end of the trail. Well anyway, the idea that they were uprooted brought about this great change. And the Brewers were among the people that dropped off, Buc [Buchanan] Brewer dropped off. He had a white wife [Millie Brewer]. And he dropped off. And they were the clan that had the Brewers of Florence. Florence is in the very northern part of Alabama, just when they sneeze in Florence, they gesundheit in Tennessee. Speaker 1: Now, that's the quad-cities region, right? Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: Quad-city area there. Speaker 2: No, it's not in the quad city, but it's in the junction between Alabama and Tennessee, and very close up. Speaker 1: Florence, Tuscumbia, Muscle Shoals and what's the other one [Sheffield]--there're, I think they're four of them right together. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, those big empowerments, the big dams. Okay, that's in the area, yes, because the Tennessee River dips down into there. So the net result was he raised a--Buc raised a big family there, ten boys and girls. And he sent the boys away to school, but the girls had to stay on the farm and my mother as a result, only had an 8th grade education. But she was a very well-read and very astute person. And obviously, both my mother and father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] had high I.Q.s. And so even though she was an 8th grader, you would never have known it. She was a patrician woman, and hard to distinguish as African American. And that's part of the trouble that got her kicked out of Alabama because what happened, my father was the first African American to have a business on Main Street downtown of Birmingham, Alabama, Taylor the Tailor. He had a tailor shop. My mother did the seamstress work. He was a tailor, trained at Talladega [College]. And he had a shop downtown. Well, my mother and my ninety-five year old cousin, who I went to see yesterday, who was twelve years old at the time, came out of the shop and were stopped at the curb because the Klu Klux Klan was walking down the street, led by three men on white horses at the front of the column. And one of the horses stumbled, and the rider was thrown. And his cap came off. And my mother looked at him and said, "I know you." And I have this on tape from my cousin. She says, "I wish you had broken your dat-blamed neck." That was not the best thing to say under the circumstances, in a crowd where a lot of people heard it, especially since the man who fell off the horse, leading the Klu Klux Klan was the banker who owned the mortgage on our house (laughter) and the shop. You wouldn't have said that that was politically correct under any kind of conditions. But that's the way it worked out. Well, it wasn't long after that--I don't know the time span, but it was shortly after that, that three Klan riders came up to our back door and rapped on the door with a riding crop. My mother opened the door, and they said, "You have two weeks to get out of Alabama or be a widow." I was four months old, and my mother did not desire widowhood at that time and at that place. Two weeks to the day, we were on the Illinois Central headed north to Chicago. And we moved into Chicago around 42nd and Indiana [Avenue] into the house where the twelve year old cousin's family had bought just a few weeks before. And we moved into the first floor. They lived on the second floor. And that's how we came to Chicago. Story_ID: 13981 Speaker 1: Florence [Alabama] is now the shrine of William C. Handy, my first cousin. His mother [Elizabeth Brewer Handy], my mother's [Cora Lee Brewer] sister, both Brewers, and my mother married [Frederick Enslen] Frank Taylor and his mother married [Charles Bernard] Handy. He has his shrine there. His home has been kept as a shrine. And, of course, he has the Handy Park in Memphis, where he wrote the 'Memphis Blues' and the 'Beale Street Blues.' And the interesting thing about the 'St. Louis Blues,' he didn't write that about St. Louis (laughter). See, he was a, a jazz musician and composer and historian. And naturally, all jazz really sprang from New Orleans. That's the home of jazz, the birthplace of jazz. And in New Orleans, there is the Cathedral of St. Louis, the Cathedral of St. Louis (laughter). The Cathedral of St. Louis has a park around it, not large, one block. But that became the hangout for the prostitutes because the levy was right there, and everything centered around Canal Street and the levy. And the cathedral grounds became where you picked up the prostitutes. So when he speaks of "St. Louis woman, with your diamond rings," he is not talking about St. Louis, Missouri, but (laughter) they don't know that. So since they assumed he was talking about them and made that song a shrine to their existence, he let it slide. But he was talking about the prostitutes on the grounds of the St. Louis Cathedral in New Orleans. And that's what St. Louis Blues was written about. Speaker 2: That's very interesting. You know, I didn't know that. I (unclear) (simultaneous) in New Orleans. Speaker 1: Few people know it. That's a family story. Now, you can find out about Handy because he has a whole book written about him. It's in the library. There's no problem, William C. Handy. Speaker 2: The great W. C. Handy. Speaker 1: Yeah, nobody but his relatives know his middle name is Christopher. That's what the C stands for. So William Christopher Handy. Story_ID: 13982 Speaker 1: What year was it when your family left Florence [Alabama] for Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Left Birmingham from Chicago-- Speaker 1: Birmingham, okay. Speaker 2: In 1919 in April. Speaker 1: You were a baby then, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. April of 1919. Speaker 1: All right, well, sir, tell about-- Speaker 2: No, April of 1920. I was born in November of 1919, and we left in the spring when the Klu Klux Klan paraded. Speaker 1: Tell me, did your parents have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: No, you know, I don't really know. My mother's [Cora Lee Brewer] first marriage, when she was young was to a young man named Hanna, H-A-N-N-A. And he was the fourth and youngest son of a family who owned a farm. And he never seemed to get it through his head that when the old man dies, the farm doesn't go to the four sons. That's not the European way. And that's after all, what we were going by. The first son gets the farm. And the other three sons are on their own. My mother couldn't keep him from working the farm with his father and bringing home a bare subsistence. And they lived in a one-room log cabin on the outskirts of the farm. And the son would leave before daybreak in the morning and would come home way after dark in the evening, bringing home whatever food he was bringing home from the farm. And my, my mother with a little, little baby said that she had tried to persuade him to move to the city and get a job to support her and the baby. And she couldn't move him. And one night he carried the gun with him, and that log cabin was in the forest. And one night a cougar tried to get in through the thatched roof where he could smell her and the baby and tried to get in through the thatched roof. And she didn't even have a gun to defend herself. And the next morning, she told him that she was leaving. And she took the baby, and they went, I suppose to Birmingham--or at least to a city of some kind. And later on, she met my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] in Birmingham, where he had come--now, he was born in a place called Wetumpka, W-E-T-U-M-P-K-A. And people try to look it up, and they don't realize that there's a "p" -k-a, and they can't find it. But for those of us who know, it's Wetumpka, and I can find it on the map, with a magnifying glass. And when he became a fatherless, a motherless child at the age of ten, he moved in with his uncle, Paige J. Taylor, P-A-I-G-E. Although if I ever get into the census, I'll have to look it up under P-A-G-E, P-A-I-G-E, and any other thing that sounds like it to find him. And he had one daughter of his own, and my dad as his sister's little boy. So he raised the two kids, and my dad had to work early on in life, but he managed to get to Tus--to Talladega [College], but he couldn't stay there. He had to work, and so he learned his tailoring trade there. And then later on, when he was able to, he opened a tailor shop. Now, I can just surmise that because he was a trained tailor, that he prob--and was downtown, the reason he was allowed to move downtown is because the well-to-do people in town wanted him downtown. And he was their tailor and did their clothing, fit it, cut it, did what was necessary, build a suit from scratch. So the net results, he was kind of a privileged character. But when the incident rose, the banker, what's he gonna do? He was a big man in the [Ku Klux] Klan, and there was only one political party. That was the Klan. You called yourself Democratic and Republican, it meant nothing. The Klan ran the town. Everybody who was anybody was a Klansman or he was nobody. So the businessmen and everybody else that had stature, had to be a Klansman. Well, you couldn't have an African American woman making a public, derogatory statement and let it slide. People get lynched for a lot less than that. So the fact that we only got kicked out, we were way ahead of the game. And, of course, that made it possible for me to grow up in Chicago where we had reasonably good schools, not comparable to downstate, that has some really fine schools. They're not even comparable to Evanston, which has always had fine schools, integrated, but fine. Speaker 1: Now, sir, did your father, was he able to practice his trade here in Chicago, the tailoring? Speaker 2: That's one of the, that is one of the travesties because when you are sent to the promised land of the North, you get up here and you find that you are in a racially segregated part of town, that there's only one black bank in town, Binga Bank, which failed when the big crash came in '29 [1929], '30 [1930]. And everybody, including most of the members of my family that had good jobs, had their money there, and they lost it all. There was no FICA [Federal Insurance Contributions Act] at that time so nothing that you had was anything but raw in the bank. And Binga Bank failed when there was a run on the bank. And that was the bank that had all of the money of all of the black people on the South Side of Chicago. So that plunged us in deep, deep Depression. But my father was not able, even with his track record, it meant nothing, white banks did not lend to black people. Story_ID: 13983 Speaker 1: We were here hard on the tail of the [Chicago] 1919 race riot. And I always tell people that I was waiting until after World War I was over, and the race riot in Chicago before I was born (laughter). I said, I'm not gonna be born in the world with all that going on. So I came along right after World War I and the race riot. We came to Chicago a few months after the race riot. But two of my cousins were taken off of their respective street cars during the race riots and beaten with bats. And both of them ended up with fractured skulls. And one was--a white woman got off the street car and threw herself down on top of him to keep him from being beaten to death because she says, "This, this man has done nothing to anyone. He's not committed any crime, and I'm not to have you beat him to death." Well, others who weren't so lucky were. And the other one--that one, incidentally, sued the city and Mayor [William Hale] Bill Thompson, who was the mayor at the time, I believe, Big Bill Thompson, I believe was the mayor at that time-- Speaker 2: You're right. Speaker 1: --gave him a three-flat so that was his reparation for it. The other one got a free skull. He was pulled off of the Wentworth streetcar, and Eugene was beaten over the head. And they fractured his skull, and there were a stack of bodies were pulled over onto the curb by the policemen, who watched it all happen, but he did dispose of the bodies, took them off as they were thrown off the car. And he stacked them all up and called the dead wagon, which was following the street car. You know, they carried six wooden coffins, and they'd just pick up the body, open up a coffin and drop him in it, shut it up. And then do that until they had their six bodies, and they would go on off to a common cemetery and let you know who they had for burial. Now, what happened was, while they were picking up the bodies, Eugene groaned. Now, Eugene was, I guess a teenager at the time because he wasn't that much older than I, and he groaned, and the policemen pulled him aside and said, "We'll wait for the ambulance. This one's still alive." So he dispatched the dead ones. And when the ambulance came down, they put him on there. He went to Cook County Hospital and they operated and put in a steel plate in his skull. And he had a misshapen head as a result. There was a crease in, like a fedora, his head for the rest of his life. And he was a little--didn't have two oars in the water, maybe one and a half. But he lived to a fairly ripe old age, and he never got anything out of it except the steel plate in his head, which they didn't charge him for. And those were casualties that we took in the race riot. But I have never seen a decent description of that race riot. I know one that was originally the city of Chicago release said that one white person and three black people were killed in that riot. And then I saw on Channel 11, and the number was up into the twenties. But I had a cousin there. And he says when word came that the Back of the Yards crew was coming through 33rd Street under the viaduct--you had a lot of black National Guardsmen, they broke into the--what was then the white armory on Wentworth, and they got out a heavy barreled, 30-caliber machine gun. And they set it up at the east end of the tunnel. And when the crowd from Back of the Yards, with baseball bats and everything lethal that they could get their hands on, started under that underpass, they waited until they got half way through, then they opened, what we call enfilade fire, cross from one side of the street to the other. It didn't matter if it hit the rocks on either side, the stone on either side because ricocheted into the crowd. So they said, every bullet ended up in somebody's flesh. And they fired two strings of ammo, and they said, the ones in the front, of course, began to scream, the one's at the back didn't know what they were screaming about and kept pushing forward. So you had this massive tie-up under there, and the first row laid out flat, and then the second row and the third row. He said, it took them two days to get all of the bodies carried out of there. And he says, it's hard to say how many people were killed and injured at that time. He said, but you will never see it in print. And he was right. He died--he was the husband of my ninety-five year old cousin. And Columbus died in about--fifteen years ago, I guess. But he was there and saw it. So I go on the eyewitnesses who are members of my own family rather than some of the history books because the history books are largely written on perceptions. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: And the things that are true, you can't put into print. And if you print it yourself, your books will be pulled off the shelf and burned. So. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's quite a story-- Speaker 1: But there's never been another race riot since. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Anybody would be a--way beyond being a fool to come into a city like Chicago--I mean, I couldn't understand how they had a race riot when I was in the service still, in Detroit. And I often wonder whether the accounts that I've read about that have any true meaning because if they're no more accurate than the one in Chicago was in the reading of it, it's a waste of time to read about it 'cause it's fiction, not even good science fiction. So that is carried on in my book, which I'm writing. Speaker 2: Now, your family--where did your family live in Chicago when you moved to Chicago? Speaker 1: According to my cousin, that house was about 42nd and Indiana [Avenue] or Calumet, somewhere over in that area. She can't remember exactly. Two-story frame house, and they moved, they moved upstairs and let us have the downstairs. Story_ID: 13984 Speaker 1: I want you to reflect back on your childhood and give us an idea of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] used to take me everywhere. And White City was the amusement park at 63rd and South Park, now King Drive. And it was White City in more ways than one. My father took me to White City, this is all in my book too, which hasn't been published yet, but hopefully, when I was a kid. And we had good rides there, roller coaster rides, a good fun house. And we usually went on free entry coupons which we got from our local stores. And we lived at 62nd and Michigan [Avenue]. 62nd Street doesn't come through on Michigan. So 6161 Michigan and 6201 Michigan are side-by-side buildings with an alleyway between them because 62nd Street doesn't come--there's no 62nd Street between King Drive and maybe Indiana [Avenue]. I can't tell you exactly where, but it's an interrupted street. So that put me in the Sexton School District. And [Austin] Sexton [Elementary] School was not well-integrated. There were a total of about eight black students there. And we would go out to White City with the free coupons to get in. And my father--after we had been doing this for awhile, my father pointed out something, he says, "You know, White City discriminates." And I wanted to know what that was. And he says, "Oh, let me show you." And he picked up some ticket stubs, of used tickets that were on the ground, blowing around out at White City. And he showed me, he says, "You see these ticket stubs. They have a restaurant on here and they have a ballroom." And he pulled out a spare set of stubs that we had used to get in. He said, "Do you see any restaurant or ballroom in there?" I said, "No". He says, "Let's go over to the restaurant and get lunch." Went to the restaurant; they wouldn't let us in. My father pulled out his wallet. And he says, "Here, I want two tickets. Here's the money." They wouldn't let him in. They wouldn't take his money. They wouldn't sell him a ticket, and they wouldn't tell him why. So he says, well, he says, "I think you know there's no need to go to the ballroom. That's not open yet, but when it's open, we won't be allowed to buy tickets for that either." And so that's the first time I became aware of the fact that I was being discriminated against or segregated in Chicago. I'm a little boy. But we just started going out to Riverview which was a really big, much better, three times the size, four times the size on the northwest side. And a nice el ride out to it. No problems. But my father used that as an example to say, "Son, you will find out that places you can go and places you can't go. And you can choose which to do." And he also taught me something else at that time that was, stayed with me forever. He said, "Son, as you grow up, you will always find there are times when you're going to have run or you're going to have to fight." And he says, "If you fight when you should be running, you're a fool. If you run when you should be fighting, you're a coward. Wisdom is knowing which to do when." (Laughter) and that has been, been one of my earmarks. I got a lot of those from my dad. My dad was a very intelligent man. He read a lot. He knew a lot. And we went a lot of places. We went a lot of places where you saw very few--at that time, we were colored, very few colored. And he said, "Well, you know, we can do this, but we do it because we choose to. But a lot of people just don't choose to." And he says, and that again, "There may be barriers that you think are there that are not really there." But he also told me something else at the time. I was flying my little airplanes, and I was making model airplanes at Sexton School and selling them to the kids who couldn't make them. And I'd use that money that I got to build more airplanes and sell them. I had a thriving business going in 7th grade. So, he told me one day, he said, "You know, I see you've got Captain Eddie Rickenbacker's pad, and you're trying to shoot down Baron [Manfred Frhr] von Richthofen, the Red, Red Baron." He says, "But you're old enough to know now," he says, "In World War I, there wasn't a single black pilot that the American army allowed to be trained in flying school and in the Air Force." He says, "We've got one black pilot that went to France and fought against the Germans," said, "But he did it by going to Canada and becoming a pilot in the Royal Canadian Air Force. And when they went to England, he flew out of England with them and shot down two or three German planes." I don't remember, and he didn't remember exactly how many. He says, then in the last days of the war, he was transferred to the Lafayette Escadrille, which Eddie Rickenbacker was a flight leader of, squadron leader by that time. And so he ended up in the Army. But that was it. One, by the back door. So he says, "But, don't let me discourage you." He says, "Times change, things change and people change." He says, "You fix yourself to do the job that you want to do, and the job will find you." And boy, that has been my credo. It has happened dozens of times since then. The job will find you. So that's where I've gotten, the job has been finding me. When I went overseas for WHO [World Health Organization] and lived in Europe, and six months in France and six months in England, at the Pasteur Institute in France, working research with them, and in England, working research at the Collindale Central Public Health Laboratory of England. I was there by request because the chief microbiologist of the World Health Organization was interested in the fact that nobody seemed to be paying any attention to salmonella problems in the United States. And they were very big in Europe, always have been. And they kill a lot of people in Europe. Here, where the food is theoretically fit to eat and the water is fit to drink, salmonellosis is just an upset stomach, two or three days of diarrhea. You don't call the doctor. You get over it. You say, it must have been something I ate and let it go at that. But the refugee problem in Europe, salmonella hits those refugee camps. It lays people out for the dead wagon wall-to-wall. And so they wanted, since I had been publishing on that, and I was at Swift [and Company] at the time, they wanted to know about it. So they called me and asked me if I accepted, would accept a grant from the National Institutes of Health [NIH] and come over and work with them. So my father was right. The job will find you. Story_ID: 13985 Speaker 1: I did want you to tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood. Now, the 'White' amusement park, what did they call it? Speaker 2: White City. Speaker 1: White City. Speaker 2: That doesn't exist now. Speaker 1: Was that a remnant of the old Columbian Exposition [1893]? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. Columbian Exposition was out where the Museum of Science and Industry is now. That's the only vestige remaining of it. Speaker 1: Now, wasn't that--you're talking about around 63rd and Cottage Grove? Where was this-- Speaker 2: It's all the way east, on the lake [Lake Michigan]. Speaker 1: Well, I know where that was, but I mean the White City? Speaker 2: White City was 63rd and South Park, King Drive. Speaker 1: Yeah, where Washington Park is now. Speaker 2: No, Washington Park is--stops at 60th Street, and yeah, South Park runs alongside of Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was on the west side of the street and south, southwest corner of 63rd and King Drive. Speaker 1: So they just borrowed the name from the old White City Exposition, I guess? Speaker 2: No, the White City at the Exposition got its name because of the fact they used a make-believe white marble for all the buildings. It was actually a form of plaster. And it was gleaming white in the sunlight, the whole of the thing, and everybody could use whatever designs they wanted, but they all had to cover in this white, synthetic material. And so none of the buildings, except for the Museum of Science and Industry was designed to be permanent. And so they were all ripped out and thrown away. And the lagoon that was in front of the museum was filled in, grassed over, etc. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up when you were a little kid. What was it like? Speaker 2: Well, Chicago was a very interesting place. We always lived--as the South Side went south, we always moved south with it. And one of the nice neighborhoods was the neighborhood adjoining the north side of Washington Park. And we lived in that area, lived directly across the street from the park on two different occasions. Champlain, 51st and Champlain. And there was a complex of big apartment buildings on Champlain and around the corner on 51st Street. And we had a big lot there which--all of the apartment buildings, just like this one next door, all of the different apartments and backs were on this one common lot. Story_ID: 13986 Speaker 1: The boy that was my good friend then was Carl Cotton. Now, understand Carl, whose father was a doctor, Dr. Cotton, and well known on the South Side [Chicago]. Carl was a scientist from the word go. I had not been exposed to any of this. But Carl came into the backyard one night, one day with a paper bag. And he dumped the paper bag and snakes went in all directions. And Carl was picking them up and putting them back in the bag. And I grabbed some because, after all, as I say, he was grabbing them and they were his snakes. And if it wasn't any problem to him, it shouldn't be any problem to me. So I started grabbing snakes for the first time in my life and picking them up, handling, handing them back to Carl and putting them in the bag. And he was saying that he had ridden the streetcar out, roughly into this neighborhood, which was largely undeveloped and was mostly just open prairie grounds with the streetcar lines and the side streets going through and no buildings. And so in this fallow space between Morgan Park, where my wife [Jayne Kemp] ended up living and north where I ended up living, was this prairie that was a part of the city of Chicago. And so I said, "Where did you get them and how did you them?" etc., etc. And we started riding the streetcar out and get off around 103rd Street, 95th Street, anywhere in there and go out into the grass until we had things running. And then we would run them down and pick them up and put them in. Well, fortunately for us, there were no poisonous snakes involved. Massasauga rattlesnake is not really found out this way. It's closer to the lake, mainly in the sand dunes area of Indiana. And the timber rattlers, this wasn't the kind of habitat for them. They are sort of deep forest snakes. So we didn't have any poisonous snakes to worry about. So whatever was running around in the grass, we just grabbed it. And so that was where I got my first start in science. Scientists come from people who collect butterflies, grab snakes or take home tadpoles and raise them to frogs and things like that. Businessmen come from paperboys. Paperboys grow up to be businessmen. They have collections to make. They have deliveries to make. They have the financial problems. They have problems with people who don't pay for their paper. All these, and they learn all of the in, in things for business. So scientists work the same way. We learn the birds, the bees, the trees. Story_ID: 13987 Speaker 1: When the Depression came and we moved, had to move to Peoria, Illinois because that's where my father's [Frederick Enslen Taylor] job, new job was. His old boss went into bankruptcy. And he was so worried about it that he tried to get friends who were not in bankruptcy to hire his people. And my father was his favorite worker. And so he got a friend who said, "Yeah, I'll take him on, but he'll have to commute because we have deliveries to make down in Peoria. Our press is down there. And we come up to Chicago with deliveries, and we take them back to Peoria, our orders, and we do the work down there, and then bring it back to Chicago. So he's gonna have to commute." And so my father took the job. We were on our knees in church, which is a good place to get good news, I guess. And we were praying, and one of the ushers came and told my father that he had a telephone call in the church office. And Dad went, and that's when his old boss told him that he had found him a job. Okay, we moved to Peoria because living expenses were cheaper in Peoria. Peoria was not being hit by the same kind of Depression that Chicago was, with all of these people out of work. And in Peoria, people were not out of work. Caterpillar Tractor and Hiram Walker [& Sons] and Griesedieck [Brothers] Beer and three other breweries. Speaker 2: What's the name of the beer again? Speaker 1: Griesedieck. Speaker 2: All right (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I knew one of his sons. He went to high school with me. It was a blue collar town and a river town. And the river steamers made their stops at Peoria, and some of them overnighted there, discharged passengers got new--and their bands would come ashore or play on the upper deck of the ships. And I'd have a good time in Peoria. Just go down to the riverfront and sit around there and listen to the bands play. Speaker 2: Now, how old were at that-- Speaker 1: Well, we were down there in 19--we were there five years and came back in '36 [1936]. So we went down in '31 [1931], which was kind of the height of the Depression in Chicago. And we had no Depression when we got down there. I went to good schools. The first thing they did was they told me, "Look, you're in 7th grade. We've already taught high school algebra. We've already done decimals. We've already done square roots. You haven't done any of that in Chicago. So we hate to say it, but you're gonna have to repeat the 7th grade." So the first semester of 7th grade, I had had in Chicago, and I moved back to the first semester in 7th grade. It took me about four weeks and I was up with the class. And from then on instead of being a February graduate, I became a June graduate. And that's when I departed from my wife [Jayne Kemp] because she graduated in February, the way she was supposed to. But I graduated in June. But during that time, that's where a scientist really gets it because the small town boy knows everything that the big city knows, except the drug market, maybe now, but he knows every bird, every animal, every tree, every flower by name, rank and serial number. He knows where to find Indian artifacts. I got more Indian arrowheads than I knew what to do with them. He knows where to find trilobites and other 500 million year old fossils in rock. And he showed me how to dig them out of the limestone with a knife blade. And this was the--my education. And that's where I developed as a scientist. Then my best friend, from up on the hill where the rich people lived--his father was an executive with Keystone Wire [& Cable], which is a prime maker of barbed wire for the United States. They didn't lose any people during the Depression. They hired people. And Frank Hasbrouck was his name. Frank eventually became a professor, I believe, at the University of Illinois shortly after I got to graduate school down there, after the war. I met Frank down there. And Frank's the only guy in Illinois that I knew that had a better butterfly collection than I had. But he and I collected butterflies by day and by night. My father would take us out to Bradley Park at night, and we would take a mixture of stale beer and sugar, get the beer to fermenting again--get the yeast to fermenting, and paint it around the trees on the edge of the forest. And after a couple of hours, we'd take our lantern and go over there and catch a gang of drunken moths and butterflies--drinking fermented beer. They were so happy, they didn't even know when they dropped into cyanide drug. They died happy. And I have a beautiful butterfly collection downstairs right now from those days. And then I read--I came back to Chicago after cutting classes and fishing on the Illinois River with my other friends. And I was a good student, probably in Peoria Central High School. There were not more than three or four black students, and I was on the honor roll, no problem. So when we came back to Chicago, I was a senior. My father's boss got out of bankruptcy, opened up the shop again, printing shop and he wanted Dad back. So we moved back to Chicago because all of our relatives were here. Peoria was not a fun town. Peoria was very southern, very segregated. I couldn't sit downstairs in the theater except if I went with a gang of my friends, where they didn't pay much attention to me. You got into the lobby of the theater. The lighting wasn't that good. And my friends were as suntanned as I was in the summertime. So we went and sat anywhere. We had--otherwise, they had a peanut gallery. We used to say, even when I got in college, once you passed 130th Street, Chicago's south, southern city limit, it's all Alabama because southern Illinois, even Joliet, Aurora, places like that, were so South-oriented that anything that happened in Tennessee and Kentucky and Alabama was here. There was only one standard. Then there was no law. People were left pretty much on their own. In the South, they got laws that forced segregation and prohibited integration. In the North, they didn't have the laws, they just had customs. And Northern slaves that ran away to Illinois were just as apt to be picked up by the slave catchers to be returned South as they were if they were still in Kentucky or Tennessee. So that's why we had the trail led to Chicago. And thence, to Detroit and thence across the river. And you were in God's country, Windsor. And that's why you have such, right now, a huge contingent of descendents of slaves in Windsor and the environs, one of which is Chatham, Chatham, Ontario. Speaker 2: Chatham, Buxton, and all that. Speaker 1: All of that. Large populations and many black names in the cemeteries. Story_ID: 13988 Speaker 1: When I got down to, got up here to Chicago and went to DuSable High School, it was not a problem for me to become the valedictorian. And some of my teachers said, I can't understand why you're always in the auditorium speaking or carrying on some school activity instead of being in the classroom. But whenever you come in, you come into the class and you write a hundred on the exam. And then you go back out because some teacher's asked, send somebody down. They want you to do this and that. And said I just, I don't understand it. Said, but I--what can I do. You've got the grades, so you've got the grades. So I got all S's in my senior year in high school, and I became the valedictorian, graded one out of 202. Speaker 2: And what year was that? Speaker 1: 1937. Speaker 2: 1937. Now, would you tell me who were--were there any-- Speaker 1: [Timuel] Tim Black was there with me, and Dempsey Travis was there with me. And Mayor [Harold] Washington was there as a freshman, my senior year and a tremendous number of the people that are in Dempsey Travis' book are from DuSable. And in the Army, the Grand Old Man of DuSable music, Captain Dyett, Walter [H.] Dyett, woke me up every morning up at Fort Custer, Michigan, playing the Beer Barrel Polka. I'd never got to hate a song so much in my life, hearing that damn band playing it because when they started playing, and then I had five minutes to get my clothes on and get out there and take the morning report from the sergeants, all present and accounted for and come back to my colonel, who was still in bed. That's one of the privileges of being colonel. And I'd have to report to him before he got in his, out of his pajamas, that all were present and accounted for. Speaker 2: Sir, can you tell--now, you say that Tim Black and Dempsey Travis graduated with you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Tim was in my class, and Dempsey was in the class behind me, I believe. I think he graduated in '40 [1940]. Speaker 2: Now, can you tell me, looking back-- Speaker 1: --I mean '38, '38 [1938]. Story_ID: 13989 Speaker 1: Looking back through school, like who were some of the teachers or adults of the community that were, that served as role models for you? Were there any (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the most important person there for my money was Mercedes Rojas. R-O-J-A-S. And she taught Spanish. And she told me, as one of her best students that she gave one S after another. And I wrote 100s on every exam I took from her, she said, "Welton, if you ever tell anybody that I was your teacher and I taught you to speak Spanish, she says, I'll kill you (laughter)." She said, "Because I haven't seen you long enough or often enough in class to know anything except that kid that comes in and writes a hundred on the exam and walks out of the room again." She went to Earl Dickerson--now, you know that name. Earl B. Dickerson was the ultimate civil rights lawyer in Chicago [Illinois], the Grand Old Man of the law profession in Chicago. And she said, Earl, I have a student that is not going to go to college because his family doesn't have the money to send him or they don't think that they have the money to send him. And he's graduating as valedictorian and says, the damn Big 10 has been to DuSable and pulled eleven students out that could run, that could high jump, that could play baseball, that could play football or the track men. And they've all got athletic scholarships to the University of Illinois. And other schools were coming in to try to get men for this. Gladiators, for the entertainment of white people. And she says, do you think that anybody gives a hoot in Hades about a young black boy who's smart enough to compete at any level and be given a scholarship on the basis of his brains, his ability? She says, you guys--and she was talking to him, Theophilus Mann, Attorney Theophilus Mann, Judge Sylvester White, who wasn't a judge then and Theophilus Mann eventually became the commanding officer of the 795th tank destroyer outfit that Jayne's [Jayne Kemp] brother was in, and Crooks the undertaker and I think Lloyd Wheeler, probably, you know, [University of] Illinois class of '32 [1932], still alive and well. He lives right up the street. Speaker 1: We interviewed him last year. Speaker 2: Good, good. He would have been one of the names that I would have put down by far. And she said, your Friday night poker games have three or four times the amount of money in them that it takes to put that kid through college. And she said, I want you to meet him, and if you can in good conscience tell him to just go your way and do your thing and leave our poker games alone, she says, it's up to you. So she told me a few weeks later, she says, I want you to meet some people. She says, put on your best clothes and your best behavior. And she says, I just want you to go down and meet some prominent black people and talk to them. Ask--whatever they ask you, you honestly answer it, and says, and they'll tell you when they're through with you. And you just come home. So I didn't have any idea what I was doing and who these people were. I'd just came up from Peoria. And I didn't know anybody in Chicago that, you know, and especially not people at that level and that age. And I went down there, and evidently I made a good impression because shortly afterwards, she said, Welton, you apply for the University of Illinois and she says, you're tuition's going to be paid. And she says, and those are Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity]. And you're going to live down there. And they will have you fixed up for a meal job so that you'll have room and board. And she says, after that, you're on your own. So I applied for it. And my other teachers said, Welton, you've got to be a scientist cause you can do things that a lot of other kids can't do. You have the interest in it. You have to be a scientist. We want you to go down there in the School of Chemical Engineering. And says, after you get down there and get a few courses, you'll sort out where you want to go. But you start in as a chemical engineer, and then you'll get the background for anything you want to do in science. So I--hell, I couldn't even spell chemical engineering. I didn't have any idea about that. Chemistry was a lot of fun. They had unknowns and I worked out what they were made up of. And it was a game, you know. Kids now play on the computers. I played with the chemistry. And so when I got out of school, they said, at Illinois, and yes, you're the top, top of your class, but you haven't had college algebra. And to get in chemical engineering, you've got to have college algebra because we're gonna start you right in at trigonometry. And so summer school was half over. Summer school only takes six weeks in Chicago, and here I am three weeks down the road. And I've got to get college algebra. So I went over to the summer school which was--I can see the school, just on the other side of the Dan Ryan [Expressway] now. It was a school that had very few blacks in it because when you cross the area of Wentworth, you were out of the black belt. Speaker 1: Englewood? Speaker 2: No, no, no, primarily a boys' school. I'd have to look in my curriculum vitae. It's probably in there. I went over there and saw the teacher. He said, the class is half over. He said, if you start in the fourth week, and there're only six weeks, he says you can't possibly come in and finish the course with us and get a passing grade. I said, what does it hurt to try? If I don't get a passing grade, I can't get into the University of Illinois. And if I don't try, I know I can't get into the University of Illinois. So what have I got to lose? So he said, okay. He says, here's where we started. And he gave me the textbooks. And he riffled through page after page after page, and he says, here's where we are now. It took me three days to do a whole textbook up to that point. At the end of the first week, I was with the class. And I came out of the class with an A. He said, I can't give you an A. He says, you've only been here three weeks. I said, can you give me a B? I said, then I won't have a problem going down to Illinois when I have all S's from my high school up to this point. And if I bring in a B from summer school, and they see that I only spent three weeks doing it, that will be all right. That's not going to--as long as I got a passing grade on my schedule, it won't keep me out of the university. He said, sure. So he gave me a B+ and sent me on to Illinois. And I had no problem. So, the first year down there was so easy for me that I went to the dean and asked him if I could take extra courses. Little did I know, little did I know. I took extra courses, differential calculus, scientific German, cause I'd already had German. I spoke German, scientific German. I decided to take a course in expository writing because I knew somewhere down the line I was gonna have to do a lot of writing. A scientist has to write cause if you do something, you've got to communicate it. So I took that, writing non-fiction. And physics I and physics lab and with, and that filled out my schedule. If I had kept a schedule like that, I would have graduated in two and a half years. Half way through it, I decided there was no way in the world I was gonna spend the rest of my life with a gang of guys that never took a bath and carried--at that time, computers weren't invented, we had a slip stick, which was the nine-column-- Speaker 1: Slide rule? Speaker 2: Slide rule; carried a slip stick and ragged pants with dirty feet and sandals and wore the same shirt, year in and year out, and smelled bad. When I took a course up on the campus where there were pretty girls that smelled good, that wore bobby socks and saddle oxfords, I had it made (laughter). Story_ID: 13990 Speaker 1: I changed my field, yes. Got out of chemical engineering and moved into the real world--co-educational and took microbiology, Bacteriology 101 and read the life history of Louis Pasteur and that was it. That was going to be my true love forever, just like I've been married fifty-eight years to Jayne [Kemp]. I was married to Louis Pasteur ten or twelve years before. Speaker 2: Now, what was it about the life of Louis Pasteur and his work that attracted you? Speaker 1: He attacked problems in fields that didn't even exist. He was a chemist. He wasn't a doctor. He went into the silk industry to find out why the silkworms were dying before they spun the cocoons from which silk was made. If they die before they spin cocoons, I mean it's like your animals dying off on the farm before they get old enough to be sold. It's just the loss you take. And he didn't know why they were, but they called him in as a consultant. And he went through there and he looked at the--he says, you notice all of these with little black spots on them, he says, get all of those caterpillars with the little black spots. Put them in a waste basket. He says, then build a bonfire and take that damn waste basket full of those caterpillars and throw it in the fire. I don't even want the waste basket back. He says, in three or four days, some more will come up with little black spots. Every time one comes up with a little black spot on it, take it out of there, he said, because they're the ones that are diseased. I don't know what causes it. And I'm not even gonna find out what causes it, but I do know if you do that, you'll end up with a healthy crop. And you'll get your cocoons and your moths will come--for those that you want to breed, otherwise, they'd kill them in the cocoon and unravel the cocoon for silk. And then the winemaker says, hey, you did a great job for them. What can you do--one third of our wine is turning to vinegar. And, you know, everybody uses vinegar, but, hell, they don't need that much. We need wine that can sell for wine prices like this (demonstrating fingers apart, large space), not vinegar that sells for vinegar prices like that (demonstrating fingers apart, small space). So he looked into the thing and bacteria by that time had been described. They had never associated them with anything in particular, except you saw it in pond water, along with a lot of bigger things, well, protozoans and he found if you took the vinegar--there was one particular kind of bacteria growing in that vinegar. And if you took that vinegar bacterium and you put it in a perfectly good bottle of wine, and left it alone, that wine would turn to vinegar. And he looked in the wine bottles that were good and none of those organisms were in the good wine. So obviously, it's this organism that is changing your wine to vinegar. Well, how do you get rid of them? I tell you what you do. Bring all your wine to a boil before you bottle it. Then when you bottle, take the kind of wine organisms that were on the grapes that made the good wine and put them in the bottle. So you reseed it with the good bacteria, and the bad bacteria's been killed off. But the good one has been reseeded. And instantly, the wine industry turned out a hundred percent good wines; zero percent vinegar, unless they wanted to make vinegar. So they could make vinegar when they wanted to and get good wine when they wanted to. And Louis Pasteur just did it, and no big cogitating, no big making a deal out of it. He solved the problem, as a consultant is paid to do. Then when a kid was bitten by the rabid wolf, which was common where the loggers were going out, woodcutters were going out. And they were working in the territory where there're big packs of wolves. And the wolves would attack them. And the wolves would bite them because they were in their habitat. No person ever bitten by a rabid wolf ever survived, never, not in 4,000 years. We had tracks going back into Confucius, where people were bitten by wolves with rabies and mad wolves and nobody has ever survived, not to this day. If you're bitten by a mad dog and you don't do something about it, which Pasteur discovered--we're still using his treatment, don't do something about it, you will die of rabies. Once the symptoms show, 100 percent of the people die. Okay. He was not an MD. He was not authorized to work on people. He was a chemist that worked on chemical products. And he took this 12-year old kid, and he took him into his house. And he had found that the brains of these dead animals that he had kept preserved for a long time, might work as a, had worked in anthrax. His anthrax discovery was, again, an accident. He got the anthrax bacillus out of animals dying with anthrax. And they put a culture collection away of them. As more anthrax would show up, he would always take out an organism and put it on the shelf. And one day, he had a group of Japanese scientists coming over. And he was going to demonstrate to them how he could kill at will with anthrax. And he a little flock of sheep, and put them in this stall here, and he went out and he got one of these old tubes of anthrax organism. And he says, see, I'll inject these sheep with this anthrax organism, and tomorrow when we come down after breakfast, they will all be dead. So he injected the sheep and (laughter) he brought the Japanese down the next morning, the sheep were just going around eating grass and nothing had happened. And he says, what's going on with this? This has been killing sheep--I've been killing sheep with this stuff for, for months. And so, and he cogitated all that. He had made to look like a fool because he was going to show the Japanese how he could kill these animals and it didn't work. So he said, maybe it's too old. I'll get a new one. So he got a brand new one, got a group of sheep over here and a group of sheep that had been inoculated. And he put it in the new sheep, put it in the old sheep; came back the next day. All the new sheep were dead, 100 percent. Dead with anthrax. All of the old sheep were still alive and eating grass, charging rent. So he says, I think I've got something here. And that's where the field of immunology was born. So when the kid came down--he found that what we had--the word attenuated comes up in there. The old anthrax organism had lost its virulence growing on artificial media, not blood. And in the process, it was still antigenic, which means it was an irritant to the body. And the body produced antibodies against the thing. He said, this is a foreign substance. It doesn't belong here. Roll it off, build a wall around with it . Change the assembly line downstairs in the bone marrow and send up some stuff to counteract it. And that's what it did. By the time you got around to using that batch of sheep again, they were immune. So the live virus--virus--the live or organisms couldn't attack it because when they enter into the body, the body attacked them, killed them and discounted them. And the sheep lived. So he said, I wonder if the same thing might be true of this old rabies culture that I've got stashed away here, this old brain. Let's grind up a little of that stuff. It's months, months old now, grind up a little of it and inject it into this kid. I don't know how much to inject. I don't know I'm doing any good. I didn't know whether if I inject it now, he'd be dead tomorrow morning. But he's going to be dead if I don't do anything. So let's try it. And he tried it. And nothing happened. So he came three days later. He gave him another shot, and another and another till he'd given him 21 shots. And he said, well, I don't know when to stop, but he's still alive and well. And he stopped giving him the shots. The kid never came down with the, with, with rabies. The first known person on earth ever bitten by a rabid dog and been saved. So and he worked over a period of time, other people worked it out. And they found that the 21 shot Pasteur treatment would work in the most severe cases and save the life. And if you didn't know whether you were actually bitten by a rabid dog or not, didn't want to take any chances, fourteen shots was enough. And that's what we're doing to this day. And Louis Pasteur died in 1897 before Nobel's prizes started. So his competitor, Robert Koch, from Germany--Dr. Robert Koch, M.D., found the cholera organism, etc. and got the first Nobel Prize. Louis, by that time, the Institute Pasteur had been set up in Paris, and gradually enlarged till there're eight of them around the world. And I worked at one, the one in Lille, France, up in the northern corner, northeastern corner, where the Germans always come through in their wars. They come through Belgium. They don't come through France. They come through Belgium and the Netherlands. And Lille sits right up there, this far from Belgium. We used to drive over to Belgium, go through customs and eat over there. It was cheaper. And the food was great. And the portions were large. And I had a family to feed. I could go over there with $3.00 American and we would eat like kings, the whole family of four. So, anyway, everything I learned about Louis Pasteur, and I said, that's for me. I want to be a microbiological detective, solve problems. Story_ID: 13991 Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from the University of Illinois in what year? Speaker 2: '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: Forty-one. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And by that time, the war had started? Speaker 2: Oh, I anticipated that, and I'm so glad. When you go to the University of Illinois or the University of Indiana or any other land-grant college, it is required by law that if you're under 21 years of age, you will become an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] enrollee for two years. Your basic ROTC is required. And I went to the library from whence all knowledge cometh, and I looked up the mortality rates from the first World War. And here I found infantry was 16 percent of the population of the fighting men, but they had 64 percent of the casualties. Light bulb, don't be an infantryman. And I read further down and further down and further down, and I got down to field artillery. Field artillery's casualty rate was 0.04. That means that four out of 10,000 are casualties. Four people out of 10,000. I certainly wouldn't be one of the four, not at those odds. So, and the second thing is, field artillery comes in, two, two varieties, horse-drawn field artillery, like it was in the First World War and truck-drawn field artillery, like it is now. If I go in the horse-drawn, I'll always be riding a horse, which is better than being, riding in the back of a truck and smelling the fumes. I'll have my own horse. I went in the horse-drawn field artillery. So I ride a horse in the parades instead of walking, and I don't have to breathe all the gas fumes from the trucks. And the chances of my getting killed are nil. So when--I took to that very well. I loved it. I loved the artillery firing. It was a game, you know. Here's a target out here, and you got the shells dropping. And they drop on this side of the target and they drop on this side, and they drop onto the left and to the right. And you'd have to move your guns around until they drop on the target. That's fun. That's a game. I mean you're doing the same thing with video games right now, and I was able to do it and loved it. So in addition to that, I was good on a horse. So the commanding officer let me, my sophomore year, and gave me a corporal stripes and gave me a riding pass and named me a part of the equitation team. Now, I could go over to the stables and get a horse on Wednesday afternoons, Saturday afternoons and Sunday mornings. And I picked out a horse that I'd been riding, Big Red. He was a big devil, sorrel, 14 hands high. And I loved him, a little clumsy. He wasn't, he didn't, he didn't work out well on the riding--the jumping team. All the jumpers that won were cavalry horses. They're 200 to 400 pounds lighter. And they're much more agile. But Big Red was really such a good-natured guy, and I really loved him. And I'd take him out, and we would ride all through the south barns and all the way down to Tolono, Illinois, which is 20 miles away, just meander around and ride. And so that was pretty good. Well, the colonel got, got used to me to the extent of saying, Taylor, I want my daughter to go riding. And I've decided that, I think you're the guy to take her out. And here's my commanding officer, PMS&T, Professor of Military Science and Tactics, is trusting his only daughter with me, to take her out riding. Well, that's a lot of confidence--and a lot of risk on my part (laughter), cause if she's a bad report in any form or fashion, I'm history (laughter). So, anyway, when--everything went fine. I got good grades everywhere down the line. And I had a straight A in military science and tactics and field artillery. Story_ID: 13992 Speaker 1: So it comes 1939, I'm now a junior, and I've finished my two years. I don't need to go into ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] anymore. I'm through with that. That's history. Now, I'm a civilian and a junior in college. The world is my oyster (unclear). When I get down on the campus, the day that I get down on the campus, in 1939 in September, is the day that [Adolf] Hitler invades Poland. It hit the fan in my mind. Light bulbs. In the first World War, America didn't get in until 1917. The war started in 1914. The Germans and the French and the English were fighting to beat the band from 1914 all the way up until after the Lusitania was sunk and the Americans used that excuse to get into the war and turn the tide of battle. And the war was over in 1918. I said, if you don't know the stories of history, you're gonna repeat the mistakes. I'm not gonna wait for there to be a draft and America to try to get into the war and save the French and the English from the Germans who have been on world conquests. And the time to do it is now. I'm in ROTC or I've just finished ROTC. I'm eligible for going into Advanced Corps. Well, not so damned fast. And that's what Dempsey Travis's book is about. I went right to the armory and asked the colonel if I could in the Advanced Corps. And he said, Taylor, he says, you were here in May when we said, if you want to get into the Advanced Corps, for the next two years, sign up now. Says, you were right here and you heard that, didn't you? I said, yes, sir. He says, why didn't you sign up then? He says, you realize now the Department of Defense has already--or the War Department in those days, the War Department has already written the contracts. They have arranged for the pay for Advanced Corps Officers get $21 a month, like a private in the Army. They're cadets, but they get $21 a month. And he says, all of those things are engraved in stone now. And says, now, here you come and you want to get in. I said, sir, I had no intention in May of going into the Advanced Corps. But I said, a war hadn't started in Europe that looked like it was going to engulf us; the Germans had not invaded Poland and Czechoslovakia; said, the English hadn't declared war, and the French hadn't declared war this week. I said, but things have changed. And I said, knowing us, with our interests abroad, we can't afford to not get into the war. And I said, when you do, you're going to have to conscript and I'm damned if I'm going to sit around and wait to be drafted as a private when I can be one of the officers that you're gonna need to train all those privates that you're going to get on to the civilians. He said, well, my hands are tied. I can't do anything about it, Taylor. I said, will you do this? Will you let me attend classes with the Advanced Corps in field artillery just as though I'm a member? And whenever the Army decides that the idea of getting more people in comes about, I'll be ready. I'll take all the homework. I'll do all the things that are assigned. And I will attend all of the classes. I'll fire all the problems, and I'll take all the exams because somewhere down the line, the Army is going to want me, and I'm going to be there. Six weeks went by, and I'm going to the parades on Friday. Everybody's in his beautiful uniform with his sand brown belt and the metals that he's earned on his chest. And I'm there in a green, pressed, pressed shirt. The--my creases in that shirt would slice butter (laughter). I had corporal stripes. These are all second lieutenants, first lieutenants, captains, majors, and I'm out there, with a bankroll, my corporal stripes on, and my (laughter) life raft leggings (unclear), and they've got their polished boots and their wide britches and their high-brim hat. I haven't even got a campaign hat. I've got a crushed hat, but I'm there. And I'm the only black face there. So my fraternity brothers say, Welton, did you get a call or a card to show up at the armory tonight at 8 o'clock? I said, no, I didn't. They said, the guys from one fraternity and the guys from another fraternity, where they work, not--they were Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi] , but they were work, Alpha Sigma Theta and [Omega] Psi Phi House and things like that. They said, hey, all the guys in Advanced Corps got these postcards, said, but you didn't. I said, right. Says, well, you know what it's about then. It's about you. Why would anybody send out postcards to everybody in ROTC about me? So these were all complaining. They all show up at 8 o'clock at the armory. And they say, you don't know why you're here, but I'm gonna tell; said, you all know Welton Taylor. He says, he's the kid that's going to class with you with his corporal stripes on. And everybody laughed, and said, yeah, we know him. He said, well, now, this is where the rubber meets the road. He says, at the end of this year, your junior year, you're going to go up to Camp McCoy, Wisconsin. And there're gonna be six weeks of bivouac up there where you do live firing ammunition with the big guns cause that's a field artillery range, says, you're gonna perform every duty that a field artillery officer can do, reasonably expected to do in wartime, said, but where it's gonna need you, is there're gonna be four men to a tent. And the Army is not going to put up a separate tent and put a black soldier in it and have rank discrimination and segregation backed up against him, says, we'll have every black congressman in the state of Illinois will be on our case. And says, we're not gonna subject the Army to it, and we're not gonna subject the university to it. But you're the guys who are gonna have to live with him. You make up your minds now whether he's in or out because if he's in, his name's going to come up. And you're gonna live with him in the tent wherever the alphabet takes you. And if you decide you are not willing to do that, we will just say that the War Department has not been willing to make an exception in his case. He's not signed up for it. He's gonna be entered in the Advanced Corps, and we'll tell him to stop attending classes. So some guy, fortunately, you know, it works, an amazing thing. There was one guy in the ROTC that everybody hated. He was a guy from downstate. He had all the unlovable characters that you could thing of in a caricature, caricature. And when he said, I won't have him living in a tent with me, a host of people said, well, I don't give a hoot if he lives in a tent with me. And one of them says, he smells a lot better than you do (laughter). Those were the exact words. I got the blow-by-blow from the guys the next day. They were all talking about it in their fraternity houses. And, of course, the waiters all come home and tell me every word, (laughter) the inflection, who said what. So I got the whole story the next day. And so when the, when the thing was over and the half a dozen guys that said, he can live with me, change his name and put him in my tent. So he says, well, let's have a vote on it. He says, all of you that are willing to have him come in full status, raise your hands. And he said, hands all went up. He says, he's in. So the next morning, I got a call directly from colonel, who incidentally was a major at that time, Major Snappy Cole, a member of the Army Polo team. And Major Cole called me in--he got a colonel before it was over, he called me in and said, Taylor, he says, you can take off those corporal stripes now. He says, and put them under glass as a memento, he says because as of now, you signed this paper here, he says, you are cadet lieutenant, cadet second lieutenant, Welton Taylor. Congratulations. And we shook hands. And I had the kind of grin then, that I have now. And he said that, can you be back here about 2:00 o'clock? I said, yes, sir. And he says, at 2:00 o'clock, there will be a tailor over here to measure you for your dress uniform and your boots. But he says, it's gonna cost you about $80. He says, but on the other hand, he says, you've got a couple of months' pay coming. He says, and I will have the checks ready here for you to deposit in your bank account. And that will give you at least a down payment on your uniforms, and that can be stretched for a few months. Story_ID: 13993 Speaker 1: So that's the way I got my commission. And I graduated in--June the 9th, 1941. Twenty-eight days later, on the 7th of July, 1941, they ordered me to active duty at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Then I found out how the Army regarded me, as an officer and gentleman. We got on the train down at the old 12th Street Station--you're not a Chicagoan, so 12th & Michigan, Roosevelt Road and Michigan Avenue was the IC [Illinois Central] Station. And the IC is the one that runs south. And got on to the station with a gang of the other guys that I'd been in camp with up at Camp McCoy, Wisconsin. And we had three schools up there. We had Michigan State [University] and [University of] Illinois and--I don't remember the third one, but they had a very small contingent of, of soldiers. And I was still horse artillery so I had a horse to ride around the place, up where the shells were. And got along fine; had no problems. And one of the pictures that I had out there, has me standing in front my tent with the names of my roommates, Sweet--Swanson, Sweet, Stone and Taylor, alphabetically. Those were the guys that I lived with; no problems. So when I got on the train, no problems. And we went on through Illinois, on through Missouri and while we were in Missouri, and I'm sitting with all of them, the whole car is brand new second lieutenants like me. We're all from the same graduating class. And kindly old conductor comes to me, and he says, he says, we're going to cross into Oklahoma. And he says, that state requires that you change to the colored car, up front behind the coal fender. And I said, wait a minute, I said, thing number one, I'm an interstate traveler, and therefore, I'm not subject to the state laws of any state. I'm getting on in Illinois. I'm passing through Missouri as we speak, and I'm going into Oklahoma. There're three states involved there. I'm a federal traveler. Secondly, I'm a second lieutenant in the Army of the United States, traveling under orders, official duty, to report to Fort Sill, Oklahoma. He listened very nicely to me. And he said, I'm gonna be back here in five minutes. And if you're still here, he said, I will reach up and pull the cord at our next whistle stop. And I will have you escorted from the train by the sheriff, in a one-room jail. And you can explain to him all of your rights under the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Now, I hadn't said a damned word about the NAACP. I mean I'm talking about federal law. That's all. And those were his words. You can explain all your rights under the NAACP to him. Back to what my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] said, you have to make up your mind when you're gonna fight or run. If you stay to fight, you're a fool when you ought to run. And if you run, you're a fool--you're a coward, if you ought to fight. I packed up myself, and I moved up to the front car, open windows, row seat, one other occupant in there in overalls. We nodded and smiled at each other, and then I sat on one side of the bench. He sat on the bench on the other side, and we didn't speak to each other for the rest of the trip. When the train pulled into Lawton, Oklahoma, I got off and rejoined the guys. And when I left the car, I said, you know, none of us know whether we're gonna get our heads blown off in the next few months or the next few years. I said, but I wish the hell I had a chance to enjoy democracy the same as you are--have if I'm going to pay the same price. And then I turned and walked out of the car because that man didn't spot me, in my color in the summertime, with everybody suntanned. You couldn't spot me. Somebody tipped him off, that you've got one of them up there. So I said, well, this is the way it's gonna be. I'm in the South now, and it may be a very tough one year, 365 days of service. And then I go back to my civilian status as an--off, off of active duty, inactive duty reserve officer. Five months to the day, Pearl Harbor, December the 7th, 1941. Okay. All of this is in my book that I'm writing now, 'How I Won World War II and Three Race Riots' (laughter), that's the title. Don't use that title now. That's getting copyrighted. Speaker 2: All right, sir. Speaker 1: That's the working, working title of my book anyway. Story_ID: 13994 Speaker 1: In this situation [in the U.S. military], I had all kinds of problems, which were the problems of the Civil War, had nothing to do with the damned World War II. And I left the South and left the States and left the Army firmly believing that of the two wars, in the Army and in the South, there was only one and a half war. One was to keep the precepts of the Civil War intact; the other one is, if you could, win World War II. But first things first. And I found that all the way through the war. And right up to the last battle of the war that was fought in Europe, we had no known integration. Colonel Lee--general--I'm sorry, sorry, general. General Lee, who was [Dwight D.] Eisenhower's roommate at West Point and a direct descendant of General Robert E. Lee, who was at the time the Civil War started, the PMS&T [Professor of Military Science and Tactics] of West Point. People don't know that. Most of the officers in training at West Point were Southerners. And when they declared war against the Union, the Southerners and Robert E. Lee all left. And Robert E. Lee's famous words, everybody knows, "I will not turn my back on the South." So all statutes of Robert E. Lee are facing South. You didn't know that. Speaker 2: I didn't. Speaker 1: Learning experience. So that, that was brought out to me when I was at Fort Sill [Oklahoma], the first black field artillery officer ever at Fort Sill because Fort Sill wasn't built until after the, after the Civil War. So while there were black officers in the Civil War, lots of them, none had ever been at Fort Sill because it didn't exist. So, Fort Sill was set up primarily to take care of the Indian population, and they captured Geronimo and kept him in jail there. Geronimo broke out, got a horse, and we had four big cliffs over a river, called Medicine Hill One, Two, Three and Four, going up in size. And with the cavalry hot in pursuit on his borrowed horse, he rode up the Hills One, Two, Three and Four, and he got to Four, and there's nothing there, but a sheer precipice. And he held his nose and said, "Go," he yelled, "Geronimo," (laughter) and went over the side. And the cavalry got there and looked, and they didn't see horse nor rider, just the swirling white waters of Medicine Creek. And they said, well, so much for Geronimo. When the body washes up downstream somewhere, we'll send a detail out and bring him in and bury him up here at the camp. Well, next time they saw Geronimo, was at a war party, where he was the main speaker. So (laughter), so much for Geronimo. Story_ID: 13995 Speaker 1: Fort Sill was a place with a lot of history, and I was part of it. I wasn't discriminated against at first. And they put me in the bachelor officer's quarters with the rest of the, the white officers. The first day I was there, somebody stole one of my beautiful pink shirts. And it cost a fortune. And I reported it to my commanding officer. And he got the impression that that sort of thing was going to go on constantly while I was in there. There would never be anything overt, but there would be manifestations of dislike. And so he says, look, our battalion is setting up a tent city for officers. Every officer gets his own tent, which is what we used to call a wall tent, a small wall tent. It was about eight by--eight by ten I'd say. And you had your bed in there, and you had toilet articles and a little dresser, etc. And that was fine, duckboards for sidewalks. And they'd line them all up. So they gave me one. Well, that was all right. We were not--I was not being discriminated against because all of our battalion officers were living in those. That was officer's country. The net result was that--oomph--that wasn't good--The battalion is big enough to warrant a chaplain. So they brought in a black chaplain. This was, this is something I'll have to tell you. All of this is in my book, which is--the manuscript is completely finished. I'm going through it now, paginations and that sort of thing and getting it ready for publishing. When I got down to Fort Sill and got off with the rest of the people, they said, a sergeant, stripes from here to here, a 20-year man, plus, said, lieutenants, I'm going to give you your assignments. He assigned this lieutenant, that one, this lieutenant, that one, and this lieutenant. He got down to a lieutenant, he said, now, the 31st Training Battalion, he says is a colored outfit. He said, but you'll find colored soldiers make just as good soldiers as white soldiers. There's only one thing you have to remember. They eat a lot more bread. So go up three or four times as much bread rations. And the guy's face fell. And then he got to me. I was standing behind him. And he said, Lieutenant Taylor? I said, yes. He says, you're a, you're horse artillery. We're assigning you to so and so, mountain artillery. He says, you know those are 75 millimeter guns with mules. And I said, yes, I know, sir. I said, sir, would you want to trade with me in the 31st String Battalion? And if it's all right with the sergeant, would you trade with me? Would you like to trade with me? He said, oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes. And I write in my book. This is the first time I ever found out that some officers would rather serve with mules than with colored troops. So I served with the 31st Training Battalion, all colored. And when I got there, I was assigned to A battery. And they assigned me to a man who was a captain and a tall, gaunt captain, impeccably dressed, who let me know instantly, he was Boston Back Bay, of the pedigree, the ruling class. And I think that the reason they assigned me to him was, well, you know, he comes from the abolitionist North, comes from Boston. So I will have no trouble being the only black officer in the unit if I'm going to serve under a Bostonian. They were dead wrong. He was an alcoholic. He spent all of his time in the officer's club. I had to run the outfit for him. I became his executive officer, and I had to run the outfit for him. There was no other lieutenant in the office. So I was the motor officer, the mess officer, the recreation officer, trading officer and meteorologist and bed pan emptier. Everything that had to be done in the field artillery battery had to be done by me because he was an absentee captain. He never viewed me as a person--again out of my book, he never viewed me as a person. He viewed me as the vindictive act of a small and petty-minded group of officers beneath him regardless of rank, who were out to get him. So they took the only black officer at Fort Sill and made him the second in command under him. Nothing was done from my standpoint. It was all what they were doing to him. It could have been a very rough ride for me if I had been left to his devices. But my commanding officer of the battalion was a Texan, a big, rugged, good-looking Texan and was one of the finest men I've ever served under. And his second in command was a large, roly-poly major, with a Southern accent that you could have spread on (laughter) like butter on bread. And I said, that's got to be South Carolina, South Carolina, South Carolina, tidewater, Georgia, maybe. Anyway, it's far Southeast, far Southeast. They were the two greatest guys that I ever served under. One was a major, one was a lieutenant colonel. And I'm a lowly second lieutenant, a brand new second lieutenant. And they just did everything possible for me. Well, we've got two people now. We've got Chaplain Holder, who was a first lieutenant, and chaplains come in as first lieutenants, like doctors come in as first lieutenants. So Chaplain Holder ranks me, but he's black. And there are four bungalows at Fort Sill and only three generals. So what better way to segregate, to give these two officers a general's bungalow which has a spare room for the chaplain's orderly and an outside entrance. Speaker 2: That's what you got? You got the-- Speaker 1: That's what I got. But we would discriminate them, against them at mess time. So we have a huge mess hall out there in the desert and the wind blowing dust and dirt all over everything. You have to take off your uniform and brush everything off everything every time you go out. And when we'd go out to dinner, we're walking towards the mess hall. And here's a huge line of Chicago, a block long or longer, lieutenants, captains, majors, lieutenant colonels. They're all standing in line. As one batch of officers leaves, another batch moves in. And they're standing out there in that blazing sun. And you hear a voice; a young sergeant with a red head, carrot top, sticks his head out and says, Chaplain Holder, Lieutenant Taylor, your table is ready (laughter). We have a table for two set up there. This mess sergeant was from California. He says, you know, we don't do things like this in California. He says, but they told me you have to be separated from the other officers. He says, you'll have this table any time you come here, whether I see you or not; just walk on past everybody and come in because your table will always be set up for you. Nobody else can sit there. Whenever you come in, I will come over, and I will serve you. And every day there was a bud vase on that table with a bright red rose in it. And if you don't think that burned up the guys that were standing out there in line, colonels and majors and captains, while we walk in and sit down, anytime we want to and luxuriate around the table, stay as long as we want to. Nobody's waiting for it. It's our table. We can do any damn thing with it we want to. Now, the moral of this story is, if you're going to be discriminated against, do it in style. And Chaplain Holder had one to it. He says, make that it with aplomb. And so from then on, we decided we would be segregated and discriminated against with aplomb. Well, I lived the life of Riley there. I have no complaints against it. We adjusted very nicely to living in a general's bungalow, and having our tables always set up at the mess hall anytime we wanted to do, no waiting. Story_ID: 13996 Speaker 1: Then football team, said the lieutenant, we'd like for you to be our coach. We had a battalion football team. Some of these guys were in the National Football League [NFL] cause, you know, when you segregate people, you get all kinds of people. So you get everything that you can think of. And so I said, fine. I had never even looked at a football game. You know, built like me. What did I care about football? I'm a track man. So what happens is that they started playing. The quarterback would come over here and say, what should we do in this next play? I said, that's easy. Ask your linemen who they can beat, and then run the play through him. We won the Fort Sill championship. Speaker 2: With you as the coach? Speaker 1: I didn't know a Red Dog from a Green Dog (laughter) and so it worked out. The guys came to me, and they said, look--what I said to them, when I got there, I said, look, you're non-commissioned officers, all black, corporals, sergeants, master sergeants, etc. I said, you guys, some of you are old Army that'll stay in. Some of you are conscriptees like me, that'll be out of the Army just as soon as the Army is ready to let you out. I said, I didn't come in here with the idea of making this a career. I said, but all eyes are on me because I'm unique. I said, let's make a little deal here. You know the Army and I don't. You know the pitfalls and you know how you get waylaid. Now, you keep my nose clean and let me put in my year in the Army and get out. And if there's anything I can do for you, you've got a friend. Now, this is not according to the book. There's rank in the Army and it's a caste system. And if you're an officer and a gentleman, you live on a different plane from the enlisted men and the non-commissioned officers. You scrub my back, I scrub your back. I never got waylaid the whole time I was in the South because I got the warnings, reported on all the pitfalls, and they showed me all the times when I should zig and not zag. I kept my nose clean, and when the time came for us to do anything, they did it with aplomb. So down at Fort Sill--I was there for eight months. And during that time, and they would come to me, they said, gee, you know, this a desert, but if we had grass seed, we could make this area the greenest spot in the whole dat-gum outfit. So I said, well, I'll see if I can get you some grass seed. A lot of these guys are farmers. They know what to do. I'll try to get you some grass seed. So I went, not to my captain, who I couldn't find anyway, and when I did find him, he would be drunk, and went to the battalion commander and asked him, if there any chance for us to get grass seed. My men say that they'll do. They'll do this on their own time after they're through with their duties before dark. They will plant grass and they will take care of it. But I have no grass seed. He said, well, he says, I want you to go to the commanding general this afternoon and ask him for some grass seed. Second lieutenants going to the commanding general to ask for grass seed! Who ever heard of that? He says, I'll set it up for you. So, he told me what time to go. I went. The general met me. I reported in to him and told him what I wanted. He said, says, I've got two 80-pound bags out there for you. He says, that, that ought to be enough. He says, if it isn't, come back, and I'll give you some more. And I saluted, and said, yes, sir, and I left. Now, like I said, second lieutenants don't go into the general's quarters and ask for favors. My battalion commander set it up. And I know how he's done it. I want you to meet this--he says, he's the only black officers, as you know, down here. I want you to see him and talk to him. See what you think. That's how it was done. I know that. I've been in the Army too long not to know how it's done now. And everything in the way of a barrier was swiveled down for me. I lived a life of privilege down there in the deep South in Oklahoma, where I had to stand up in the bus to keep from sitting in the back, when I got to Lawton, Oklahoma. But the chaplain had his car down there, and we went everywhere in Oklahoma. We went to Anadarko and the Indian powwow centennial, and saw the Indians from all over the world who gathered there. And when they took off their headdresses, they wore zoot suits just like the rest of us (laughter). So, there was a real education. Story_ID: 13997 Speaker 1: And then on the weekends, since there was nothing happening in, in Lawton, Oklahoma [at Fort Sill]. I hate to speak badly of the town, but there was not much that happened that I remember as being good. The airport was, one of the airports was right off of downtown or just a few blocks. And I'd look out there and was standing there, looking through the chain wire fence, and a kindly old gentleman tapped me on the shoulder. He says, lieutenant, why are you standing out here looking at other people fly planes when in five minutes, I could have you in the cockpit of one of those airplanes and you would be flying it yourself. Well, that blew my mind. And I said, really? How much? He said, you can get a 10-hour time slot for $60.00. And he says, at eight hours, if you're ready, you can solo. And you'll get your student pilot's license. And then you can go anywhere in the country and go out to the airport and rent an airplane and fly. He says, when you get 30 hours, you can take the exam and become a private pilot. And then you can carry passengers for pay, okay. So I went out there, and that's where I spent my next four weekends. And at the end of four weekends, I was flying, I was piloting the plane. The only interesting thing about that was when I finished my eight hours, with three minutes over. Story_ID: 13998 Speaker 1: I then decided to push my luck, and I told my commanding officer that, I said, you know, our fellows don't find Lawton, Oklahoma a particularly friendly place to them. And said, and that goes for the PX's [post exchanges] on either side. They're not really all that welcome. We could have a PX here if we took that old abandoned barracks building and did a little remodeling. And the guys would come to me or the non-coms [non-commissioned officers] would come to me, and they'd said, they've got guys who worked for contractors. And they could do what they need to do with just a little bit of lumber, and make that into a PX and a recreation room. And they wouldn't have to depend on the relatively hostile units on either side and certainly not in Lawton. So I said, do you think there's any chance of that? So he said what he always says, "I'll arrange for you to talk to the general about it." (Laughter) He set up the date. I went over to the general. The general says, how much lumber do you need? And I had it all written down. I said, so many, so many board feet, this in two-by-fours and this in one-by-sixes and this in ferring strips. And he says, send your crew over tomorrow. I sent a truck over there and loaded it up with their lumber. And we were building a beautiful recreation hall and a PX. And I was feeling very logy, didn't have a runny nose or anything, but I was just getting so weak. And so I had gotten in the habit of having them take me out in my jeep over to the workshop--work area, and set me up in a chair. And I'm sitting up there directing traffic and getting the things that they need to get, and making lists of what, and here comes an ambulance and my battalion commander and never my battery commander. He's still drunk at the officer's club. My battalion commander comes over here, and he says, Lieutenant Taylor, and he says, get out of that chair and get on this stretcher. Yes, sir, I don't, I don't need a stretcher, sir. One of your sergeants tells me you're running a temperature of around 103, and you're still out here working with the crew on this. And we're gonna take you over and let the doctor take a look at you. The doctor says, he belongs here. We'll get a hospital bed ready for him right away. So they put me in a four-bed room, with three empty beds. And I don't know whether the hospital just didn't have many people or again (laughter), but I had four-bed room all to myself. (Laughter) Ain't discrimination wonderful (laughter). And the nurses that go with it all to myself. They didn't have any other duties. So I get lots of attention. I'm getting weaker and weaker. And years later, I find out that what had happened, we had the--everybody had gotten shots for yellow fever-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. We're picking up that noise. Speaker 1: Jayne--and so it turns out, from what I found out later, years and years later, I had picked up hepatitis B from the contaminated blood that was used to make the antiserum to yellow fever. Yellow fever is a mosquito-borne viral disease. And so you can't cure it. But you can prevent it the same way Louis Pasteur did with rabies. You can get vaccinated before you have the disease, and then you'll never have the disease. Well, that wasn't available then. The yellow fever vaccine is only maybe--I mean the, not the yellow fever vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine is only about 10 years old. And it works beautifully. Everybody should get it that's gonna be in a situation where it could be necessary. And they called it influenza, and I spent 10 days in the hospital. And when I came out, I went back to duty. They had finished the rec room, but they wouldn't let anybody in it until I came out of the hospital. Then they had a big bash and an open house, and everybody was in it. Facilities were so good and it was so new and everything was working so well, it became instantly integrated. And I learned another thing. Instead of the guys having to go next door where they were going, guys came over from there, and they were welcomed. So we ended up with the best rec, rec room on, on the base. So when you work within the framework, sometimes it works out. Sometimes you find a little place where you can stick your finger and turn the fabric a little bit, and it works. But I went on and got my pilot's license (laughter). My solo flight, I had just landed with my instructor. He got out of the door, and he says, take it around once and bring it over to the fuel pump and gas it up. I said, yes, sir. I slammed the door, took off, about 400 feet in the air, and started to make my first turn to go up to 600 feet, and suddenly realized (laughter) I was by myself. It scared me constipated. My God, I'm in here all by myself. The guy that knows how to fly this thing is way back there on the ground. But the plane didn't know that. And I said, I didn't fall out of the sky. And I'm only doing what I've been taught to do. I'm supposed to go up to 600 feet and turn left again, go up to 800 feet. Then slide the traffic pattern and come back two square turns and come on the runway. So I did it. But when I got to the runway, making all my turns right where I'd made them before, I was 50 feet in the air. So I hit the throttle and went up again, and while I was going up, I said, why am I 50 feet in the air? Because I left 160 pounds on the ground. I'm by myself. I'm not two people in here. So I had to go a little bit further, a little bit further, a little bit further and come in and get rid of that 50 feet. Greased it in, three-point. Went over to the pump, and everybody's out there on the field applauding me. And the kindly old gentleman who got me started, he says, now, comes the painful part, lieutenant, cause you'll have to buy drinks for everybody that's out here (laughter). So, fortunately, it was soft drinks. They don't sell anything hard at the airport. But--now, I don't know to this day whether they ever knew that I was African American or not. But if they did, and it didn't matter, I'm happy about it. The only other thing that happened in Lawton that I can think of that was nice, I was standing out on the street corner, in boots and britches, dress uniform, preparatory to catching the bus back to camp, cause I had come in for something and it's not a town to be caught in. And I was going back. And a cowboy came down the street riding one of the most beautiful palomino ponies that I'd ever seen. He was gorgeous. That tail, the white tail almost on the ground, and that mane this long, hanging over his shoulder, gorgeous horse. And I said, my God, that's a beautiful horse you're wearing--riding. And he says, would you like to take him, take him around the block a couple of times? I said, wait a minute. You're going to let somebody that you have never seen in your life get on a horse like that and ride away out of your sight? He says, lieutenant, he says, anybody with an eye for a horse much like you've got, knows what he's doing. He says, here's the reins. I rode that beautiful palomino around the block a couple of times. And it was like old times. I thanked him profusely. I said, you have made my day. And he--glad to abide. And he went his way with his beautiful horse, and I caught the bus back to camp. But other than that, the flying and the horse, there was nothing good to be said about Lawton, Oklahoma. Story_ID: 13999 Speaker 1: You left Lawton [Oklahoma] and moved on to-- Speaker 2: Well, right after I came out of the hospital, my commanding officer said--the battalion commander called me in. And he said, we want you to take your gun crew out to Medicine Creek and set up an OP [observation post] there. And there'll be some officers sent down. Well, now, I'm in a training battalion. They have what's known as school troops. These are the best artillerymen in the world. They do the same thing every day for every group of officers. And every week, there's a new group of officers coming into the battery officers' courses that they teach. This is a field artillery school. And those officers come in for 90 days. And they go through all of the things that you have to learn because they are, for the most part, they've gone through [Reserve] Officer Training Corps [ROTC]. They were civilians, and they've come through Officers' Training Corps, and now they're officers. And now, they've got to learn field artillery. So, what I did in four years of college, they'd only do in 90 days. So that's why they're called 90-day wonders. So I'm surprised. I'm not schooling troops. These, this is, this is a raw gang of recruits that are gonna come in 90 days and leave. And we're gonna get another batch of boys from Arkansas, Mississippi, Georgia, wherever they come from, mostly from the South. And then we had to make field artillerymen out of them. So he says, take your best gun crew and go up to Medicine Bluff and set up an OP. And we'll have some officers out there to fire. Yes, sir. I get out there, my God, there are 10 black officers up there. I've never seen another black field artilleryman. It turns out that it's the old Eighth Infantry Regiment out of Chicago here that came back from World War I. And it's just rotated up--newer people come in as older people dropped out. And what the Army did, they ordered them to active duty, and they converted them from infantry to field artillery. I always thought that was a punitive action because if--down at college, you couldn't be field artillery unless you had math through trigonometry, science courses in extangent, cotangent, and--because your firing tables are based on those. Everything that you fire is a matter of angles. The greater the angle, the greater the range. And so the idea of transferring perfectly competent infantry officer, overnight, into field artillery seemed to me to be a lose-lose situation. However, they had a few young officers in there. And they learned fast. And so they had been boning up on field artillery. When these officers came down, it was a group of a couple of young officers, and most of them were captains and in charge a major. And I found out who they were and where they were from. And we went through the firing. And I did what I'm supposed to do. When they made a mistake, I stopped them, held up the guns until they found their mistake and corrected it. And then I gave the order to fire, and we did it, the way the book does. And when it was all through I suddenly realized what I think the situation was. They ordered the black officers who had never seen anybody but white officers and white field artillerymen, when they came down there and took gunnery, which was the heavy course. That was the course that made or broke it for you. If you couldn't do gunnery, you've got no business in field artillery. And if you can, you're welcome. So what happened, they got a chance to see black recruits just out of the cotton fields and whatever, out there handling those guns, firing long turns, 155 millimeter rifles; damned things fire 16 miles, if necessary. And here's a black officer, a second lieutenant out here that's sitting in judgment on them, to tell them when they're doing it right and doing it wrong. Maybe it's (laughter) some hope for the race yet. And I think that's why I was sent out, to give a demonstration of what could be done and where they could go. That's the only explanation I have for it. So there's one person on one side of the fence there that's doing everything he could do to discredit you. And there's another guy on the other side of the fence, says, over my dead body. I'm willing to give them a hand. It takes all kinds to make a world. Sometimes you run into the bad ones; sometimes you run into some of the good ones. It worked out fine for everybody because Major Ray, Marcus Hanner Ray, major, 184th field artillery battalion, battalion commander to the 2nd Battalion, Major Ray, and later to be Colonel Ray, asked me afterwards, he says, Lieutenant, what are you doing tonight? I said, nothing. He said, would you be willing to come over after dinner to our barracks. We're in Barracks Number so and so, and give our men some paper firing for gunnery? Sure. Did that every night until they were ready to go. They were in gunnery for six weeks of their 90 days. And by that time, we were going everywhere together. They had cars down there. They knew people in the big cities and the universities, and I would always go along with them by their invitation. In fact, December the 7th came, and we were in Oklahoma City. And I was at the house of a fraternity brother that I had met who happened to be an Episcopal priest. And I was sitting in the front room while he prepared some food. And I heard this announcement, "We're breaking into this to say that Pearl Harbor has been bombed." And I jumped up, and I said, it's war. That means war with Japan. And his wife said, he didn't say anything about Japan. I said, who in the heck that's out in the South Pacific is strong enough to challenge the United States except the Japanese? And then they made the next statement, which I knew that they would make. "The Army has cancelled all leaves, all Army, Navy and Air Force personnel will report back to base immediately." All leaves are cancelled, all furloughs are cancelled. About a half an hour, the captain driving picked me up there. And we went back as a carload. Nothing changed. The class was finished. Colonel Ray, Major Ray and his group went back up to Battle Creek, Michigan, which I refer to as God's country and left me down there with the scorpions and tarantulas and the rattlesnakes and discrimination. But Colonel Ray had said, before he left, he said, Lieutenant, would you like to be transferred out of here to our unit at Fort Custer? He says, you would be in our battalion, of course. As I said, it took maybe three milliseconds to say, yes, sir. And then I forgot about it. They left. Their class was over. They all left. They all passed, they all passed gunnery, I'm happy to say. And the rest was no problem. The gunnery was the problem. And I went on with my business. We had--that group of people left, and we decided to put on a real show when the graduating class leaves and the new group of recruits come in. And the guys that, see in the movie in which there'd been some razzle dazzle moving around of the troops and all kinds of fancy formations cutting through each other, the kind of thing that the marching bands at the black colleges were doing after the war, that were so outstanding. Well, okay, they asked me if I could--if they could do it. And I said, sure. The only thing, do it by the book. Don't use any commands that are not in the normal sequence. I said, we don't want to get anybody down on us for showboating. I said, do what you can do within the framework of the military procedures. They said, we will do so. They went out somewhere else and practiced. And when the day came for the big parade, my battery showed up, and they announced on the loudspeaker, you will now be given special march formations under directions of Second Lieutenant Welton Taylor. Now, I give--that's the battalion commander doing that because Old Back Bay Bottom would be frothing at the mouth. And he was my immediate superior. But, anyway, they did me proud. All I did was just stand out there and turn it over to the sergeants. And there they had guys going in all directions, some of them trotting and some of them in right flank and some at the left flank and some splitting up and curling around and--you'll never get all of these guys. They're spread out all over the country. You'll never get them all together. Then the sergeant blows the whistle, and guys came from all directions. And the next thing you know, they're packed together, in line, in formation, ready to pass in review. And I step out there, and I go out in the front. We pass in review. And we don't have side arms so we go with eyes right and salute, because we don't have carbines or anything to carry. The generals, they're all out there, watched it with approval, but the civilians invited to this sort of thing, they went ballistic (laughter). I'm saying, if we're gonna do it, let's do it with aplomb. So by the end of that day, that was pretty much my swan song there because now it's January. Story_ID: 14000 Speaker 1: And the last of January orders came through transferring me to Colonel [Marcus H.] Ray's command at Battle Creek, Michigan. Speaker 2: That's Fort Custer. Speaker 1: Fort Custer. And so I got called in by, again, the battalion commander. I, I had nothing to do with my battery commander. I never see him. He never sees me. If something comes up, I get on the phone and call the officer's club and tell him what the situation is, and I'm just as apt as not to get cussed out and told me to do what I want to do or to do this, or do that. Don't bother him. And so the battalion commander calls me, and I go over. He told me to report right away. And I go over to battalion headquarters, and he and his XO [executive officer] are sitting there. And their faces are like thunderclouds. And I said, oh, my God, what I have done now? Have I stepped on the toes of some general and he's put his foot everywhere it needs to be put, all the way down the line to me. He said, Lieutenant Taylor, your orders for Fort Custer have come through. That sounded great to me. What is everything so angry about? They said, "We want you to know that captain what's his name, Old Back Bay Bottom, has written you an unsatisfactory report." I'm running the outfit. It's getting kudos from all over. We have done everything that we could be expected to do and then some. We got the rec [recreation] hall; we've got the most beautiful lawn in the base; we've got the best drill team. We've got the best gunnery team. What in the world can I possibly be getting an unsatisfactory rating for? And he says, I brought him in--he says, you know, anytime you change post, your commanding officer has to write a rating for you to go to the next post before you get there. So they already know what kind of duty you're going to be held for, accountable for, because they know what you did at your last place. And he says, every six months your commanding officer has to write up a report on you or whenever you leave the camp, it has to go. Now, we called him in and we told him, we know about what you have done and how you have done it and how you have saved his butt, time after time after time. And we told him that an unsatisfactory report would last with you for at least six months, until the next time you're re-evaluated. He said, but it will prevent you getting a promotion. You have to have satisfactory, very satisfactory or excellent to get a promotion. So we told him that if you get an unsatisfactory report, he will get an unsatisfactory report. And we will request that he be released back to inactive status for the benefit of the government. That is a sort of a court martial without a dishonorable discharge. It's a, it's a discharge without honor. It's neither good, nor bad. You're--for the benefit of the service is the way it reads. The Army doesn't want you. It doesn't say whether you're good or bad. It just says the Army doesn't want you. So he's a career Army officer. He intends to stay in his 20 years. He is fit to be tied. And he blustered and everything else. And they said, don't say anything, Captain. We know Lieutenant Taylor far better you will ever--would have ever known him. And we want you right now to sign off this paper, which we have written for you. Put your signature on it, and then go back to your officer's club. But we're not gonna let you send Lieutenant Taylor out with an unsatisfactory rating. So he had to sign it and I got a satisfactory rating. And that was the first and last time I ever got a satisfactory rating. Every rating I got for the duration of my stay in the Army was excellent. And when I came right back to Fort Sill and took the bachelor officer's--battery officer's course because Colonel Ray said, you know, you can teach a course, but you don't get credit for it. And he says, in this man's Army, you get credit in the service schools that you have attended. And he says, now, you can go on back down there as a student in the service school where you used to teach, and he says, now, when you graduate down there, I'll get your promotion for you. And the first thing he did when I got up to Fort, Fort Custer, was put in my promotion for first lieutenant. So I got my promotion three weeks after I got there. Story_ID: 14001 Speaker 1: Moving up to Fort Custer, Michigan was the big thing, got my promotion. They sent me to intelligence school. And I did that okay. And then the time came for me to come back down to Fort Sill. And I found out some things about how it feels to be colored. Lieutenant Bob Landrum from the first, Robert Landrum, from the First Battalion and I from the Second Battalion were sent down to battery officers' course number 58 at Fort Sill. And it's a 12-week course in which we learned motor transport, housekeeping, how to move and shoot and communicate, and then, of course, the big one in the center is gunnery. And that's where the rubber meets the road. Well, I had no problem with any of it. And it just so happens, I wasn't trying for grades. I was just doing the job. It ended up with my being the top-ranked student in every one up till gunnery. And then top-ranked student in gunnery. And they only had one, one or two more courses. And one of them was communications. And I can still remember to this day, the BD-40 switchboard with 40 holes in it to plug things into, carrying all these conversations coming from all over. And I learned how to use it and learned how to wire it, but this sort of thing is done by enlisted men. What do I need to know this for? I mean this is hands-on stuff. Well, I have a communications section, with a good sergeant and corporal. And if there's any wire laying to be done, I have privates in that section. They'll lay the wire. If there's radio communication to set up, I have people that are trained to do that. Anyway, I got my head in an unmentionable position. And I came up with mediocre grades. They were passing, of courses. You couldn't help but pass it, but nothing special. I wasn't leading the class in it like I did all the way up through this. And I got called in by the general in charge of the school. He says, Lieutenant Taylor, he says, I am very upset with you because you have gotten mediocre grades in the easiest course that we teach down here. But he says, there must be a reason for it, he said, because I know you're capable of better work. And he says, and incidentally, you have spoiled a perfect record. I didn't know if you knew that or not, but you have a perfect record. You have maxed every exam that has been given in the nine or the 12 weeks you're due to be here. Max means I'm getting the maximum grade. That's the term they used down there. So I said, well, sir, we have a communications unit. We have a communications sergeant. We have communications corporals, three of them. We have a whole host of communications people to lay wire and lay cable and put up radio communications. And I said, it seemed to me that I was being trained to do the work of the private. He says, Lieutenant, when you get in combat, your only communication with the outside world lies in that, that unit that you're talking about. And when they get shot up, if your communications sergeant gets carried out on a stretcher or in a body bag, who's going to tell people what to do? When you get new people in that don't know it because they're raw recruits coming in to fill up vacancies, somebody's got to teach them what to do and show them what to do. If you can't do it, whose gonna teach them? What happened to the rest of your communications unit, the guys got shot up by, that lay wire, etc. I said, I'm sorry, sir. I never thought of it in that terms. I said, I just sort of felt that I'd been born with a communications section that's already trained and knows what to do. And I said, I see that I was wrong. He says, yes. He says, but you're going to make it right because you're not leaving Fort Sill until you repeat that course. I'll be taught again in two weeks. And he says, and Lieutenant, you'll go through that course and you'll max it. That's an order. Dismissed (laughter). Well, youthful arrogance got its comeuppance. And I've always remembered that. That was a valuable learning experience because I got it kicked and I got it chewed out. And I went back and I maxed it. Story_ID: 14002 Speaker 1: But I couldn't go through what I went through coming down with Bob Landrum. When Bob and I left Chicago in his car going down to Fort Sill, he drove like a maniac. I said, what's the hurry, Bob, we've got three days to do it in. We could stop off at a nice place and have dinner and spend the night and then start it early the next morning. Bob didn't say a word. He reached down on the seat between us and handed me the Green Directory. What is a Green Directory? It says, Places of Lodging and Food for Colored Travelers. I didn't know that we can't stop at any restaurant and eat. I don't know that we can't stop at any hotel or motel and get a room. I'm a Chicago boy. When they kicked me out of Alabama, they kicked all of Alabama out of me. So here I am, open-mouthed in amazement, and he says, when you leave the East Coast, where there're dozens and dozens of places where you can stay, owned and operated by colored proprietors, colored restaurateurs, and you get out here, south of the Smith and Wesson line, as we call the Mason-Dixon line. And out here on the other side of the Mississippi River, places are few and far between. We have got to make it to Springfield, Missouri tonight or we don't eat and we don't sleep. And I said, to him, can't you drive any faster (laughter). So we went there stopping at places where we had to call in advance because the place would have its dining room shut down before we got there. And we got to Springfield, Missouri after driving from Chicago way after dark, around 8:00 o'clock at night. And they had saved a good meal for us and had a good bed for us in a clean room. And we paid, and the next morning at daybreak, we were up and out and back in the car, with bad tires, which we had to change twice on the way to Oklahoma cause they kept blowing out on us. And you couldn't get tires. Gas was rationed, tires didn't exist. You went with what you got. And we stopped twice more to trade in old tires on slightly newer tires. So I didn't have to do that going back because they kept me until after Bob had to go back. And I flew back. So that was, hopefully, the last time I'm going to see Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Not. I will be back (laughter). Story_ID: 14003 Speaker 1: One of the things that happened in class to let you know that you were not always in a perfectly congenial place was one of the students in my class, class 58, asked one of our instructors--who turned out to be a pilot. I didn't know it at the time. He asked him, what happens if you're flying one of these observation planes and you run afoul of the Messersmith 109? The guy looked at him and says, you've got as much chance as a watermelon at an "N" picnic. And Bob [Robert Landrum] and I were sitting on opposite sides of the room. And we didn't say a word. Both of us stood up and walked out of the classroom. And we converged on the commanding general's office. And we went in and asked for an interview with the commanding general. And we told him what our beef was. And when we're running the risk of getting killed just like everybody else that's down here, and we're gonna do our jobs just everybody else that's down, and you have our grades. And you know that we're doing a satisfactory job down here, but we don't feel that we have to be exposed to that kind of remark. It's demeaning. He said, I agree with you a hundred percent. That officer will be reprimanded, and I had--you have my word. There will be nothing else like that, that will happen to mire your stay here, while you learn to do your duty better. So we saluted and left. (Sigh) I thought that was the end of it. Wait until I come back down to Fort Sill as a pilot to get the final touches on me before I go overseas as a liaison pilot. He is an instructor. He remembers me, just like I remember him. And he accosts me on the street one day--we're both first lieutenants now. And he accosts me on the street one day at, post field, and he says, Taylor, if you've kept me for a check ride, you will not get your wings from Fort Sill. Now, check rides are what you get at various stages of your development. After you've gone through this phase, a seasoned pilot flies with you and see whether you learned it. And if he doesn't think you learned it, you're out. You go back to the infantry or wherever you came from. But you're not a pilot. So you have to have several of those before you're through. Now, when you come up for graduation, you've got to have the last one. And that's the check ride that puts the satisfactory or unsatisfactory on your record for your whole stay there. You either get your pilot's wings and leave for a combat unit or you lose your pilot's wings and you go back to a combat unit in some other capacity, whatever you were before you started flying. So when the time came, I said, I hope I don't get him for a check ride, but the next worst thing is, maybe I'll get his best friend, who he's already told to give me the shift. And so I went out for my check ride. And the first one wasn't too hard. They don't tell you anything until you get in the air. Then the guy hands you a map. He says, land where this X is marked. And I look at the map, and I say, a race track? He says, where the X is marked. Okay, I go in. I make a curving approach. I look the ground over carefully. There're no potholes. I come back around low, and straighten out just as I touch the ground. And I stop way before I get to the next curve. So I cut the plane back to idling. And he says, all right. He says, here's your map. Go to this place. And he has an X on the map. I take off, and go to that place. I make a landing. No problem. Then he hands me the map. Go to this place. And I look at it. Here's a lake and here's a mountain range behind it. Rattlesnake Acres. We have 18 practice landing fields that we work off of. And there're a couple hundred of us down there, all the planes in the air at the same time. And the deadliest spot that they have is one called Rattlesnake Acres because you have to land on the side of a mountain with the foot--at the, at the foot of the mountain is a lake. If you come too low, you swim; you come in too high, you can't get on the landing strip--landing strip? It's just a bare-rock side of a mountain. And you have to land going up the mountain, no matter which way the wind is blowing, you've got to land going up the mountain. And you've got to take off going down the mountain. And they're twin peaks like that with a tremendous rush of air coming through there, funneling through. So it is the most dreaded spot on the place. And so I've drawn it. That's my last spot. So I said, well, we make it or we break it. And I turned to him and I said, can you swim? He says, land on the X. No smile, no nothing, uncommunicative. Land on the X. So I go out there, and I navigate over to it, hit above the lake, hit four feet above the water. And right where, what you laughingly call a beach starts where the crushed rock off of the mountainside meets the water. As soon as I hit that, I put it down, and I'm rolling up the hill. I taxi on up the hill the rest of the way, and I turned around at the top. And I asked him if he wants to, to get out. He says, no. I said, well, may I get out and relieve myself? Yes. So I look very carefully before I get out because the reason that's named Rattlesnake Acres is one of our pilots that flew up, turned his plane around and got out, and when he got out, there was a rattlesnake there. And he stepped out of the airplane and got hit on the ankle by the rattlesnake. So Rattlesnake Acres. Well, I made it okay, and I graduated. And then they offered me the chance to be an instructor down there. And I said, why can't I go back to my unit? Colonel [Marcus H.] Ray sent me here as a round-trip ticket. I was to come and get my pilot's wings and come back and be liaison pilot for the, by that time the 930th field artillery battalion. And he says, it doesn't work that way. He says, we've got a lot more people that need liaison pilots than there are liaison pilots. So liaison pilots are now-high priority item. Only an outfit that is on a red alert or a yellow alert, which is 30 days or 90 days short of a red alert--red alert means you're going overseas within 90 days. Yellow alert means you're within 90 days of being on red alert. And sometimes it goes blip, blip like that. And you get there before you can get loaned going out. So anyhow, he said, we can't send you to any of these other units because the only black unit that is authorized to have liaison pilots is the 93rd Division, and they're not under the alert. So why don't you just sign on with us as an instructor, and you can stay down here. And you can teach these other fellows to fly. And you stay here the whole war. You will never be shot at by a German or an Italian (excuse me) or a Japanese plane. You've got it made. When the war is over, we'll wave good-bye to you and go back to Chicago. I said, look, I saw seven planes crash in seven weeks. Each plane had a pilot that was a skilled pilot, instructor and a green student. And I said, why, with a skilled instructor in the plane, can a green student kill both of them because seven plane crashes, 14 bodies. And the reason is very simple. When a student is scared, he has the strength of a 600-pound gorilla on steroids. And there's no way in the world the pilot can take the controls away from a scared student. And the student is determined to kill you both. And he does it time after time after time, after time, seven times in seven weeks, 14 dead. I said, I would rather take my chances in combat outfit overseas, with me flying the plane the way I've been trained and taking my chances against the enemy. So they said, well, you can stay on then. We'll make you a staff pilot down here, and you stay on here, and you can fly the box lunches to the pilots at these different airfields every day. And that'll be your only duty. Fine. So that's what I did. I stayed there, and I'd go out to the airfields where they were doing their short takeoffs over barriers. Then I would go out there, take the short, over the barriers to show them how it's done by a graduate student. It was fun. So I stayed away from the rest of Oklahoma. I lived entirely on post. I didn't even--since I had the airplane at my disposal, I didn't have to go into town and get an airplane. I've got my own plane. So I didn't have anything to do with the guy that wanted to flunk me out. He and I were both instructors together. So I had nothing to do with him, and he had nothing to do with me. Texas standoff in Oklahoma. So the net result was, a few weeks, seven or eight weeks later, the word came through and the 93rd Division had just gone on yellow alert. Story_ID: 14004 Speaker 1: They [military officials] came in and said, "Taylor, your orders are being cut." You're going to the 93rd Division in California. Hoorah, California, the Mojave Desert on maneuvers. It's all right. A lot of the people in the 93rd Divisions, particularly in the field artillery, had come out of the old 184th. And they were all friends of mine. And what happened, when they built up the 92nd, here's 184th, which was a field artillery regiment of two battalions, and there is no such thing in the Army. Field artillery battalions are attached to infantry regiments. The field artillery regiment doesn't exist. But since it had been an infantry regiment, they kept it, and they had two battalions of field artillery. And what they did, when they split them up into battalions, they sent excess officers, 23 of them, out to Fort Huachuca to be made into the 93rd Division. So now, I'm joining all my old buddies because they're in the 93rd Division. So I get out there. They tell me how glad they are to see me. And they said, you'd be surprised; said, do you know, you just got an officer promoted? All they had to do is take one look at your orders when they came in two days ago, and they put up an officer for promotion. I said, how could I do that? They said, well, it seems you have a lower number. You rank him. And in the Army if go into any place and you have rank on the person, you can say, by virtue of rank, I hereby assume command. You're relieved from duty. And that's designed to make it possible for you to send officers in, in combat when people are getting shot up. And your company commander, your bat--your battalion commander gets shot up, and you raise somebody to the rank, field grade rank. When they send somebody with a true rank, he could walk in on you and since you're a Johnny-come-lately, all he has to do is just say that and relieve you of rank, relieve you of command. So he said, the air officer for the division has a higher number than you have. You rank him. Well, the only way they can keep--the Army precept is, no colored personnel will ever be in a superior position to existing white personnel. Now, they can't have a black pilot coming in and becoming division air officer, when there are white pilots there. So their cap--lieutenant, that I ranked, had his captaincy put in the day that they got my orders. They put in a captaincy for him. And they moved him from the position which I was to take, the 596 field artillery, which was the medium artillery of the units. They had three, light artillery and one medium. And we were the medium. So they sent me to there, and I would have been the air officer. But what they did was, while he was waiting for his captaincy to come through, they transferred him up to the general staff so that way, he is not gonna be under me. Now, this is the Army policy, this is the Army policy. It's not written anywhere. You won't find this in the officer's guidebook. They don't tell you this at West Point, no Naval Academy. But that was the policy. And it was set by the same kind of people that dropped out of West Point and became Confederate officers and their progeny, kept it going in the Army. And so that's why I refer to my service in the Army of the Confederacy because it was run on those bases. And when we got overseas, which we did, for 21 months, it was the same. We had this constant problem of the African American officers didn't get promotions. The only way an African American officer could get a promotion was like George Layton. George Layton was a first lieutenant. He was out of the National Guard in Massachusetts. Well, when the 390--369th was sent from Massachusetts, George was assigned to it. But the officers in there, all the way up to the rank of colonel, were black. George rose like cream to the top, and they gave him the captaincy. And when we were overseas, George was the commanding officer of the prisoner of war camp. But Lieutenant Taylor was a first lieutenant for seven years cause Lieutenant Taylor seemed to have a knack for doing things that the commander general didn't like. But Lieutenant Taylor ate high on the hog because Lieutenant Taylor was the only officer, the ranking officer, where the captain came out to the desert and said, I want to see your ranking officer. And the captain, who was the division air officer was never around. But I was. I loved to fly. I was doing the thing that I loved to do. I stayed in the air so much, my flight sergeant had to tell me, Taylor, if you spend more than eight hours in the air on any given day, I'm gonna ground your butt. You can't do that. Your reflexes go. You're gonna kill yourself. He says, you're out of the air after eight hours of the daytime. So I was in the airport and this captain comes over, long story, which you can read in my book. He tells me that, to keep my flying skills up, he wants me to, every weekend--now, we're out in the desert in Arizona, California-Arizona Maneuver Areas, CAMA, C-A-M-A. Every weekend, I have to fly 150 miles, making at least three stops, every weekend while I'm in there. Do you realize that means that I can fly to Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Death Valley, Thunderbird Field in Boulder, all of this, the salt and sea and fish. All of this, I have to do. Boy, you talking about throwing the rabbit in the briar patch, I keep coming through these things, and I'm coming out smelling like roses. Forget violets. So I get to fly to all of these places and do all of these things until they finally tell us, and I didn't give you all the beautiful details in there--they're worth reading my book, until we get orders to go overseas. And then the company clerks, who know everything, this is the one time that the company clerks don't know where we're going and when we're gonna do it. All they know is that we've got to get out of the desert and go to Camp Stillman, California and get on a ship. And we're 14 days at sea, had two Japanese subs trailing us. We outrun them cause in the daytime, they have got to stay submerged. They could only make eight knots. We are on a troop ship that's fast. We're making 23 knots. Story_ID: 14005 Speaker 1: We get to Tulagi Harbor [Solomon Islands] 14 days after we left. And our ship is sitting in harbor. And I go up on the deck at night. It's after 11:00 o'clock. And I'm leaning over the rail, and one of the ship's officers comes up beside me. And I'm looking at the lightening and thunder on the horizon, the light flashes and the noise. And I said, that's a quite thunderstorm they're having over there. He says, thunderstorm? He says, that's the Japs trying to retake Guadalcanal. He says, those are battle ships firing at Guadalcanal and shore batteries firing back. He says, but, of course, you'll know all that tomorrow. I said, what do you mean? He says, oh, what time is it? It's a quarter to 12:00. He says, at midnight, they're gonna open the orders. And you're gonna--your general is going to find out that we're putting you ashore on Guadalcanal at 8:00 o'clock tomorrow morning (laughter). Oh, that just filled my heart with glee seeing all of that activity going on and knowing that I'm gonna get off at 8:00 o'clock in the morning. Eight o'clock in the morning, our ship is at anchor. They've got the ropes thrown down over the side. I'm loaded to the teeth. I've got my .45 and two belts of ammunition. I've got two bowie knives which are my personal property, not Uncle Sam's for close-in combat. And everything that I own is hung on my back, and they said, open up your, your gear so if you're thrown into the water, you can get out of it because it'll take you right to the bottom. He says, get out of your gun belts and get out of your gear. Then he says, wait until the coxes of the boat tells you to jump. And then wherever you are on those ropes, when he says jump, you jump because it's swinging in against the ship and swinging away. And if you drop in between, that boat is gonna crush you. And says, you won't have time to get out of your heavy gear cause you won't be alive. Okay, I did everything they said. And when they got ready to go ashore, and they were getting dropped, dropped down to the boat, I had my .45 out. I had my knife in this hand, and I was a fighting man. I am armed and dangerous. I'm bad. I go ashore, and there they are! Elderly white women of the Red Cross bringing hot coffee and cookies and welcoming us ashore on Guadalcanal. I've never seen this in anybody's book of the war. But that's the way it was when I got off there. So I had to holster my gun, put my bowie knives back in a pocket where they belonged so I'd have both arms free, one for the coffee and one for the cookies. And as I say, in my book, those were the best cookies I ever tasted. I wasn't being shot at by anybody while I ate it. Speaker 2: So you actually thought you had to hit the beach and take a beach head? Speaker 1: Well, after seeing what was happening the night before, they were fighting over there. That was the war. My book chapter, it says, "Welcome to the war - Guadalcanal - May the 18th, 1944". So, anyhow, Guadalcanal was fine. I lived the life of Riley. It turns out that black troops were not sent overseas to fight. Black troops were sent overseas to be in the Biblical sense hewers of wood and carriers of water. We unloaded ships. We loaded other ships. While all this is going on and all the officers are rotating through, there're periods of sitting out on the beach in their jeeps, watching the ships being loaded and unloaded and dispatching the trucks full of ammunition or whatever, fuel, ammunition, food, whatever, and signing the chits and sending them on their way, so that the black marketers could stop the trucks at gunpoint and take off what they wanted (laughter)--black market worked very efficiently. You could get anything you wanted on Guadalcanal or anywhere else in the Army if you had anything in the way of folding money or a ration of booze. So in other words, it worked on the same principle as it does in civilian life. And they just change the ranks, that's all. Story_ID: 14006 Speaker 1: What happened is that, we were on Guadalcanal--it was two months, and that was, and no airplane. And then finally a sergeant came up to me and said, he's got a crate of, a big crate in this warehouse. It says L4H on it. And did I know anything about it. And I said, those are airplanes. Those are our airplanes. And we'll get over there, we'll go over there and sign for them, sergeant, and take them off your hands. And you can deliver them, since your truck will hold them and ours won't, you can deliver those two crates to Fighter 2, where we're in a space, parking space. So then I got my airplane. I painted Black Fury on the side of it because I was the civil rights activist at that time, and always. And it showed a bursting shell with the red flames and the yellow flames coming out of it and the name Black Fury and Old English script underneath. The other guys were naming their planes, Winnie G, after the girl that, that lieutenant was going to marry. And my co-pilot, other pilot, Leander Hall, named his Lady Gwen. And they had all innocuous names. Only mine was named Black Fury. And that said it all. So, when Black Fury and I got together, we spent all the time in the air. We spent all the time in the air. Nobody could tell me where to go. Nobody could tell me what to do. I had my own airplane, and I did what I wanted to do. If I wanted to fly over to Henderson Field, which was one of the four air groves we had at Guadalcanal. And being in the air meant that I didn't have to spend any time on the boat docks, loading ammunition and signing for it, okay. That is boredom to the nano degree. So that was fine. Then lots of stuff happened on Guadalcanal. And I'm not even going to say anything about seeing Colonel [Charles A.] Lindbergh fly and taking pictures of his plane when it was a red air space, and I wasn't supposed to be. But nobody told me. So I have beautiful pictures of Colonel Lindbergh's plane that he brought over there to show the 8th Squadron how to fly, go from P-38s, which they were flying to P-61s, Black Widow night fighters, which were twin-tailed, twin engine too, bigger plane, radar-domed nose. And he flew it. And I won't tell you about--unless you read my book, how he shot down a Japanese pilot when technically, he was a civilian under the Geneva rules. But I can say it now because that finally appeared in a magazine about four or five years ago. I read it in a magazine, and I laughed because I was there. I saw it. I saw him. I took pictures of him and his plane and would have gotten court martialed-- Speaker 2: It was the kind of information, which you already knew. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: It's the kind of information, what you already knew. Speaker 1: Well, the--I'm going to the darkroom to develop my pictures that I take. I'm getting free film from the Air Force. They don't know it. But the Air Force guys are giving me free film. And I'm taking my pictures, and I'm taking them to their darkroom and developing. And then I swap with them. I run off copies of my prints, prints of my pictures and swap the pictures of theirs. And so I'm, I'm getting a, an eye view of the whole dat-gum Pacific from all of these different sources. And it turns out that the first thing that happened with Lindbergh, after his plane was being done and he flew it the next day, I took a picture of it when it was being assembled; then another picture of it after it was assembled. Then the next day, I came out to the air strip, and I heard this roar. And he was already in the air. And here comes this P-61, 10 feet off the runway, like a bat out of you know where, one prop feathered, standing still. He did it on one engine. He pulls up in a victory roll and rolls over and goes away. And I don't know who it is at this time. I know somebody's flying that P-61 cause there's never been one going off the field. And there was a sergeant standing down there, which--from the Air Force. And I said, you know, that was one flying SOB [son of a bitch]. And he said, sir, that flying SOB, is Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh. I said, I told you that was one flying SOB (laughter). So that was my contact with Lindbergh. But I was not to hear the last of that. First of all, Lindbergh went out the next day with a flyer, P-38, and he flies a P-38 too. If it's got wings, Lindbergh flies it. He flew the P-38s and they said, Lieutenant--Colonel, if we get into trouble with the Japanese, which we intend to do, just hang around up there until we're ready to go back home. And then fly in formation with us. Well, you can't tell Lindbergh to sit up there, fat, dumb and happy, with a plane with eight machine guns on it and watch a Japanese pilot smoke one of those kids. So Lindbergh came down off of this high horse and blew the hell out of the Jap plane. He can't do that. He's a civilian. He went out there to show this airplane from Northrop. He's a consultant from Northrop Aviation that built that plane. He's to come out there and demonstrate it as a reserve officer, not on active duty. So technically, he's a civilian. When they came in, the sergeant went to the commanding officer and said, was Colonel Lindbergh with you? He said, yes. He said, the whole fight? He says, yes. He said, why do you ask? He said, well, his plane has one-third of a gas tank full of fuel. And you guys came in and you don't have enough tank--fuel in your tanks to put a Zippo on a lighter. Now, how did he do that? So Lindbergh took them back to a course in Aviation 101. He says, when you have a controllable pitch propeller, you put it on high pitch to get the maximum torque to take off. As soon as you're in the air, and you've got your wheels up and the drag is down, you start coming back on the propeller pitcher--I'm sorry, you take on full roll pitch, gives the maximum RPMs [revolutions per minute], the blades are almost flat to each other. And as you get, you turn the blades so they get a bigger bite; that's called pitch, the distance forward it moves in one revolution. You change the pitch to a higher pitch, it moves further in the same revolution. And then your plane can keep the speed up, but cut the gas supply down because the engine is running slower. The propeller is running slower, the engine is running slower and you're saving fuel. So as soon as he got at altitude, he was on full high pitch. And those other guys are still flying on lower pitches, and they're burning more gas. So when you get into a battle, you may go into a lower pitch because it gives you greater torque, greater maneuverability. And as soon as you get out of that, and you start back home, you go back to full high pitch. Well, they weren't doing that. Now, if I haven't slept through Aeronautics 101, because I knew that, and I didn't have a high pitch, a low pitch or anything else. I had a fixed, wooden propeller, a carved wooden propeller; no two alike. And so he explained to them that he had gone into high pitch as soon as he got off the runway. He switched to whole high pitch. And so he was cruising right with them on their wing tips, but burning less gas than they were. Well, that increased their gas mileage another couple of hundred miles. They could go a couple of hundred more miles and make Japanese pilots unhappy during their day. And the other thing that came up, what is this I hear about the Colonel having smoked a Japanese plane today? And the commander, battalion commander, squadron commander said, he did what? He says, yeah, Lieutenant so and so had a Jap zero on his tail, and the colonel came down out of the sun, and burned it. And Lieutenant so and so is out there having dinner right now, happy. And the guys said, oh, my God. He got on the phone right then and there and called Washington. He said, would you do me a favor right now? Cut orders dated yesterday, making Colonel Lindbergh on active duty in the South Pacific. He said, yesterday? He said, don't ask questions. Do it yesterday, date it yesterday. So Lindbergh was covered by the fact that they backdated his orders, putting him on active duty and therefore, making him a legal combatant. He can shoot down as many Japanese planes as he wants to. And we will let him. He went out the next day and shot down two zeros (laughter). Well, so much for Lindbergh. Story_ID: 14007 Speaker 1: Next thing I know, my commanding general and my battalion commander are getting out of their jeeps on the air strip. And I trot over and salute. They said, Lieutenant Taylor, is it true that you have taken pictures of the Black Widow fighters? I said, yes, sir. And the general wanted to know where I got the authority. But my commanding officer--again, I've had people on my side, happens to be an Oak Park lawyer, who was a chicken colonel. And he said, well, general, he is licensed photographer because he is a unit's historian. And he has an Army photographer's license. And he says, the 8th Air Force is our air arm. They protect us, and therefore, he has--and as a liaison pilot, particularly, who has an interest in the Air Force, he has every legal right to take pictures of them because that's a part of our history because they're our compatriots. They're at air army. But then the Air Force man speaks up and yes, but this is a red area. There are no photographs to be taken. And then my colonel turns to him and says, did you inform our units, the ground units or the Royal New Zealand Air Force that this is a red area, and this plane is top secret? It turns out the Air Force had never said a word to anybody but the Air Force. Then he says, well, then, how then can you expect the ground troops on the field with you and the New Zealand Air Force across the field from you, would know that. Dead silence. So then he turns to me, and he says, Lieutenant Taylor, give me your camera. And I handed him my camera. And he opened it up. And he took the roll of film. Then he pulled it out and exposed. And he put it in his pocket, and he gave me my camera back. The general says, pull his license. So I took out my photographer's license, Army photographer's license and handed it to the general. And the general tore that up. And he says, you will confine yourself to things which you are legally empowered to take pictures of. Yes, sir. It's the first time I think, maybe, the general ever knew, First Lieutenant Welton Taylor, but it was not to be the last time. And when I left the 93rd Division, when I got ready to come home, there would be somewhere out there, there was a two-star general that hated my guts. And if I didn't accomplish anything else during the war, that made me happy because that so and so was from Anniston, Alabama. I'm gonna get into Birmingham yet (laughter). So anyway, what they didn't know, and I didn't bother to them, I'd already taken the roll of film with Colonel [Charles A.] Lindbergh's pictures on it and brought them over to be developed and put a new roll of film in my camera. So when he opened my camera and took out the roll of film and exposed, it was a brand new roll, just as virgin as it could be. And I kept the spools and went back over and reloaded off the Air Force. And that's where I got all of the stories about what happened to Lindbergh because they were talking about it over there in the darkroom. Well, my general was angry because he had to first testify that I wasn't a spy. He had to answer to the Air Corps general that I wasn't a spy and secondly, that I was only dealing with what you could reasonably expect me to do, and thirdly, of course, that really griped him was the fact that I had every authority. And I'd never been informed by anybody that it was a red alert area. But then it happened again, same way. We were in--Lae was breaking and the whole 93rd Division had been pulled out of the Solomons [Solomon Islands] to Hollandia, New Guinea. And there I took pictures of the Lae invasion. And here comes my colonel again with the ship's captain. Says, this is a red area and no photographs are allowed. Lieutenant Taylor, give me your camera (laughter). I gave him my camera. This time, it was loaded. And all those gorgeous pictures of the largest naval armada of all times, to be exceeded only by the D-Day invasion forces, the only thing bigger. So what did I do? Unrepentant that I am, I went down to my cabin and I got a folding table, made an easel out of it, got some wrapping paper, pasted it up on there and sat up there and sketched the ships. I have the sketch downstairs now. I have it. I may put it in my book. I sketched the ships making up the Lae invasion force. And I won't say any more about that. Story_ID: 14008 Speaker 1: The next time we run into trouble with the general is when they suddenly take $25.00 out of my paycheck. I said, what is this? Officer's club dues. We haven't got an officer's club. You have now. Fine. Okay, we've got an officer's club. They're taking $25.00 out of my paycheck, and they're gonna do it every month. My dues will be $25.00 a month. So I load up with a couple of captains and another lieutenant in my jeep. And we go to the officers' club that night. And we're stopped at the door by a sergeant that says, I'm sorry, sir, you're--by orders, I'm not to admit you to the officers' club. And I said, not admit us! We've had $25.00 taken out of our paychecks for the officers' club dues. We are paid up. And I said, let me speak to your commanding officer. And he goes, and he comes back, and he says, the commanding officer has sent his regards to you and tells you that colored personnel will not be admitted in the officers' club. Oh, boy. I didn't drive home with gas. I'm driving home with steam coming out of my ears. I'm steam propelled going to, and drop off the officers at their units. And I get on the phone, and I call George Layton. George is Harvard Law School. George is in a protected unit, where all of the officers in his unit are black, including his battalion commander. So I said, George, who do I write a letter to and tell them about this? He says, oh, you write it to JAG, Judge Advocate General in the Pentagon. I said, fine, I'm going to write a letter, and I'm gonna tell them exactly what happened. He says, no you're not. He says, you can't write to them directly. You're an Army officer. You have to go through channels. You write a letter. It goes to your commanding officer. And then he sends it to his commanding officer who signs it, and his, and his, and his till it gets up to the general. Then the general sends it to the Pentagon. I said, are you out of your mind? How is this letter ever going to get to the Pentagon? It's going to be wastebasketed by the first guy that sees it. It's a hot potato. Nobody wants this letter. He says, I'll teach you how to do it. So George taught me how to write the letter. He says, be very concise, very accurate, tell exactly what happened. Don't moralize, don't go off long-windedly. I don't know why he said that (laughter). But make it short, and make it to the point. And I said, what's to stop it from being thrown in the wastebasket? He says, down at the bottom, where you have carbon copies, you put that in cc for carbon copies. And the carbon copies says, a copy of this letter has been sent directly to JAG to hold for the one through channels. Now, JAG knows about this letter. And they're waiting with baited breath to see it come up through channels and come to them so that they can put the two letters together and make an action on it. So that carbon copy on the bottom means who wants to be the one to drop the letter in the wastebasket when they know that JAG has already seen a copy of it and is waiting for the one coming through channels. So you don't drop it in the wastebasket. You give it to the next guy and let him drop it in the wastebasket. And the next guy gives it to the next one, and it gets up to my commanding general. And he looks on there, and he sees Lieutenant Welton I. Taylor. Next thing that happens, a letter comes down. And, of course, our clerks see everything because the clerk opens the mail and gives the mail to whom it's addressed to. So if you want to know anything, have your clerk call the general's clerk because he knows everything. He sees it before the general sees it. So the word comes down that, the word came from JAG. He says, you have two options. You can open the officers' club to everyone who has paid to become a member or you can close the officers' club and give back the money that you collected for its dues to everyone who paid dues. So being in the Confederacy, they closed the club. I got my two bits back. So when the Lae invasion made up, they came through and stripped out all of the officers that they could get to fill up the units that were going in the Lae invasion. And our air officer was the only pilot they took because he was white. They were not integrating, but they did ask for me. And my commanding officer said, "Over my dead body". He is the eyes of my artillery, and I am not going to be without him. So if they had been of a, inclined to integrate, it died right then and there. So we left there and went on to, back to Finschhafen [New Guinea], and the whole unit was there. Story_ID: 14009 Speaker 1: The other interesting thing that happened while we're there in the harbor, building up, all of the ships left the harbor one day. And we suddenly found we had an empty harbor. And I hadn't finished my picture. So I've got the unfinished sketch. And then the word came to us that an officer had been bypassed. They didn't want to send him to Lae. And they were going to send him to my unit as a commander. And I don't know if he knew about me or not, but anyway, he put the muzzle of his gun in his, in his mouth that night and blew his head off. And I made some remarks about that. But, (sigh) New Guinea was a great experience. The best thing about New Guinea was that I found a wreck, a crashed aircraft about 30 miles away from our aerodrome. I had my own private strip anyway. And I found this, and I flew down and looked at it closely and it's missing, missing all of the plexiglas. The engine was gone. The wheels had been taken off, that sort of thing. It was a wreck. I have pictures of it all. This was one of the nicest things about my lies, I can show you a picture in color of them (laughter). So I went back and talked to my sergeant--Hawk can do anything, Sergeant Hawkins, from Oakmulgee, Oklahoma. And he was a man of many, many skills. He was somewhat older than I. But he had been places and done things. And he had a myriad of skills. It wasn't anything I knew of that he couldn't do. I said, what do you think about it? He says, well, let's see. Let's go out and take a look at it and see what, what needs to be done. So I went over, nerve never hurt, went over and asked the Navy about a plane that was crashed out there. They said, oh, yeah, that's a dead aircraft. I said, how did it happen? They said, well, some Marine flyer came in. And he wanted a plane to fly around and look at the place. So we gave him one; and says, he flew around, fat, dumb and happy and ran out of gas. I mean the most stupid thing you can do with an airplane is run out of gas. There're no filling stations up there. So what happens is he ran out of gas and crashed 30 miles away from base, from the airport. So he says, we sent a crew out and we stripped it. We took the engine out of it and things that we could use, the instruments, the--brought it all back and wrote off the carcass as a dead aircraft. I said, can I have the carcass? Said, sure, said, you don't even have to ask us. Like I said, it's a dead aircraft. It doesn't exist. So whatever you do with it, it's up to you. I said, okay. Can I borrow a coxen and an (unclear). I'll have to take a truck out there. He says, what time do you want it? I said, what about 8:00 o'clock the next morning? Fine. Sun's up at 6:00 o'clock, sun sets at 6:00 o'clock. We're on the hori--on the equator. All days and nights are 12 hours. So we go out, and we look at the wreck, and I said, Hawk, what can we do with this? Should we just forget it? He says, Lieutenant, why don't we take the wreck back to camp and make a decision after we get it there, and see exactly what I have to do and what kind of supplies we can get, make a decision, then, not now. So we took it apart and put it on our truck, carried it on down, came back home. So the next day, we take the truck over to their air base. And Hawk says to me, says, Lieutenant, why don't you go back to camp in the jeep; says, let this be a thing between sergeants. Well, I've been in the Army long enough to know the Army is run by sergeants. You want something done? The sergeants will do it. The sergeants know how to do it. And now sergeants know who among the other sergeants they can work with. So tell your sergeant what you want, and then walk away. And when you get the phone call, the sergeant says, Lieutenant, that stuff you wanted is here. That's the way it's supposed to work. Now, if you're stupid and you think that because you're a lieutenant you can tell your sergeant what to do and how to do it, you'll always be a lieutenant. You'll never be a captain (laughter). Well, Sergeant Hawkins comes back the next day, and he says, we can do it; says, I'm building--and it's got a crushed longeron. I'm gonna cut out that piece and splice in a larger piece of metal. And he says, we're gonna uncover the plane and then recover it new because he says, you can poke your finger through the fabric. It's dead. He says, they're gonna have to rebuild the landing gear. And he says, and you'll have to get some wheels for it. And he says, a new prop and a new engine. And he says, but they'll be doing all the body work while you get those things. So I said, I can do that. We had Nadzab, N-A-D-Z-A-B. Nadzab. I think it means New Zealand Air Base, something or other, but I don't know for sure what it means now. And they have the largest supply depot for the Air Force in the South Pacific. So I went out with a list of things that they would need, and said, we'll talk when you get back. See if you can get the stuff first. Then we'll do what we have to do. So I wrangle my way on a P-47, which the pilot let me fly; didn't know that I wasn't qualified to fly big airplanes with big twin engines. But I enjoyed it very much; easier to fly. It flew like an old cow. You turn the wheel to turn, and hit your rudder, and nothing happened. You said, what's this? And you put it back in neutral, the plane turns (laughter). I mean, you know, flying my cub, I decide to make a turn, and I've already done it (laughter). So anyway,-- Speaker 2: Slow response-- Speaker 1: It was nice flying it. I enjoyed it. And I would not be afraid to fly that particular plane anywhere, anytime. But--in fact, that has been called the greatest airplane of all time, and I wouldn't argue a bit with it. So--and many of them are still flying. They were built in the 1930s. I got everything I wanted; ended up with a brand new engine, nine propellers. I don't know what I'm gonna do with nine propellers, but would you believe I put every single propeller on that engine, to see how many RPMs [revolutions per minute] I could turn up because they're all hand-carved and laminated hand-carved oak, and chose a propeller that gave me the best performance. And I got the wheels and they got all sorts of things for the other planes which the Army owned, but my personal airplane--this is my personal airplane. And when I got back with all that stuff, and we unloaded the C-47, Hawk came over. And he says, what have you got to trade? This is a, you scratch my back; I scratch your back. I said, well, I have four bottles of rum that have just come in on the black label, four bottles of rum, a half a case of beer and one bottle of Scotch. He wrote it all down. I'll see you later, Lieutenant. He came back a few hours later, says, Lieutenant. You just bought yourself a brand new airplane. And he says, they're going to work on it right now. He says, you'll be flying this plane by the end of the week. And he was right. Now, I don't know what that plane cost then. I know it would cost now perhaps $65,000 or $70,000 new. But then in those days, probably, it only cost $10,000. It was a Stinson. It had a big engine in it, 180 horsepower. And the flaps, self starter, electric start and all that kind of good stuff that I didn't have on my cubs. And I had bought it for the equivalent of $24.00. Now, let's face it. You don't buy a brand new airplane for $24.00 when you start with something that has been thrown away by the Navy that's a wreck. Nothing is happening on Guam--on New Guinea. We were doing the same thing on New Guinea that we had done at Guadalcanal, taking stuff off of the ships coming from the States and loading it onto the ships that are going up into the combat zone. So our men are out there, officers and men, just doing that scut work, like quartermaster, doesn't matter if they're the world's greatest artillerymen, to hear me talk about it, we're doing quartermaster duty. So forget about what the Pittsburgh Courier and the Chicago Defender says, why aren't our men in combat? They say, they're in combat in the South Pacific. Combat nothing, no Japanese. So what happens is that, the air crews have nothing to do. So it's a challenge to take this wreck and make an airplane out of it again. And I ended up with a gorgeous Stinson L5 that belonged to me personally, not to any form of government; my airplane, bought and paid for with $24.00 worth of liquor and beer. I flew that plane until the end of the war. And I left it on the airfield. And then after I did that and was going home, I said, oh, my God, I could have torched it, I should have torched it. I know that lard bottom, two-star general over at 93rd Division has undoubtedly commandeered that plane because that's the only liaison plane he can get his fat butt in. I'm not the forgiving type. And so, all I can say about the general's hatred for me and the reason he wouldn't promote me to Air Officer was doubled in spades from where I sat. And I really didn't care about becoming Air Officer, especially if I was gonna have to fly him around. I was perfectly happy to stay with my Oak Park lawyer, Colonel Wagner, in the 596. So I left my plane on Moratau at the end of the war, and took a DC-4, started home in it. Story_ID: 14010 Speaker 1: I had to hitchhike the rest of the way home [from Papau New Guinea] because this DC-4 dropped us off Biak Island, and Biak had been shut down. And here I am with 10 officers and 13 enlisted men, officers from the rank of colonel on down. We were the first people to leave the 93rd Division because I have beaucoup many credit hours. They want you to have 95 to go home. And I've 115 or 120. I've got air metals and other metals. And I was in before Pearl Harbor, and all these other guys came in much later. So I've gotten my time in. I've paid my dues. So they put me in charge. I'm still only a first lieutenant, and I've got a lieutenant colonel, a couple of majors, several captains, and there're a couple of other lieutenants that are friends of mine, personal friends--some of which ended up at my wedding party, which I have a picture of upstairs. So I went home from the war [World War II]. And when we came ashore in, on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay--there's Angel Island and then there's Alcatraz. Everybody knows about Alcatraz. I know about Angel Island. For the first time in almost two years, real milk, real heads of lettuce, ripe tomatoes, all of that kind of foreign stuff that we hadn't had for almost two years, eating out of cans, and a steak, cooked the way you want it; just tell them how to grill it and they grilled it for you while you waited. Hog heaven. And then I was allowed to make a telephone call home. And I called Jayne [Kemp], and the first thing she said--this is the end of October. She says, will November the 21st be okay for our wedding? It's okay with me as long as nobody's shooting at me, nobody's dropping bombs on me. Sounds fine. Then I went back to my quarters, and pondered the fact that all of the waiters and busboys, etc. in the dining room at Angel Island were German POWs [prisoners of war] and had been there for the last couple of years or so, while I'm out in the South Pacific, where I can get my head blown off if I'm not careful. And why wasn't I smart enough to be a German POW and stay there with all the good food and movies every night, and just live the life? Let's see, you mean to say we won the war, and these guys lost the war, living like this. Story_ID: 14011 Speaker 1: We got married, went on our honeymoon to Washington, D.C. and then came back just in time to sign up for the University of Illinois grad school for both of us and my $90.00 a month from the government. So I went back to school and we had some times there too because Urbana-Champaign were very Southern. You couldn't eat in any restaurant even between cities. When I first went there as an undergraduate student, the Illinois Central Railroad station had a restaurant. And you could sit down and eat, order from a menu, order from the cafeteria, sit down and eat. So the powers that be decided that was a bad example to set. And they told the Illinois Central they would have to take out the restaurant and the cafeteria and just put in candy butchers, slot machines for candy bars and no chairs. And they had stools and a little platform, but they said, no, that's got to go too. We don't want people loitering in there. So, the theaters had galleries marked off for colored students. And my fraternity house wouldn't go, but there was a co-ed theater on the campus. And so we went there. And there was a cafeteria in the Union Building at the university so we ate there. And most of us didn't have to eat anyway because we all got meal jobs when we waited table. I started off my freshman year that way, and by the time I graduated, I had been the head waiter at that fraternity house for two years. When I came back after the war [World War II], they looked me up. Remember what I said about my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] said the job will find you? They found out I was on campus. I didn't tell them. I was a married veteran under the G.I. Bill. What do I need with them? I have a house, which I had to fight to get because somehow or another, they overlooked it. And I had to talk to the secretary and the president, who happened to be a fraternity brother of mine, the secretary to the president. And Cal said, don't, don't call the congressman, Welton. Let me speak to the, the president. And I'll tell you when to call the congressman. And so he came back the next day, and he says, there'll be somebody over tomorrow morning to show you the little family buildings that they have in the south campus, and let you pick out one. The next morning, all kinds of profuse, profuse apologies. It turned out to be the brother of a best friend of mine down there eventually. And he said, we don't know how you got overlooked, with your combat record and the length of time you spent in the service, and the number of points you had to come home on, you would have been a first choice; says, we don't know how it got mixed, mixed up. So I got it. So now, Jayne [Kemp] and I are the only colored family in the student, married student housing, veteran's housing. Next thing I know--I wasn't even invited. Somebody, somewhere had a meeting, and now, I'm the alderman without no other black students. I'm the alderman. Speaker 2: Now, what does that mean on campus? Speaker 1: Well, they set up some sort of a ruling body, and without knowing anything about the body being set up or anything else, I'm named the head of the body. So, again, you know, the job is finding me. Then after that, here comes Quentin Reynolds. You know Quentin Reynolds? You know, Ernie Pyle? Speaker 2: Un-un. Speaker 1: Quentin Reynolds was a legendary newsman, the Walter Cronkite of his day, that sort of thing. And Ernie Pyle was the inter, infantryman's news man because he wrote back from the front. He went everywhere the troops went. And he wrote the stories with a personal touch on them. And everybody in the Army revered Ernie Pyle because he told it like it was so the people at home would know what we're going through. Quentin Reynolds was before Ernie Pyle, was the big man. Quentin Reynolds shows up at my house, knocks on the door and I open it. I'd recognize his face just like the president of the United States where I'd recognize his face too. And he says, I'm Quentin Reynolds. I said, yes, (laughter) I know. And I shake hands with him and invite him in. Why are you here? And he says, I want to hear about your experiences down here for Life magazine. So I told him about life on the campus. And he said, now, like you do, tell me about your life down here? What are you and your wife experiencing down here? And we told him. And then later on, it came out in Life magazine. I think I got four pages in Life magazine back in those days, before Ebony. And when, next thing I know, I'm seeing this little old lady on campus, that always speaks to me and knows me by name. And you know, she's in her 60s. I don't know her from Adam. And I keep going home, and I said, Jayne, that little old lady accosted me on the way to campus again, and has invited us to something. I said, do you know anything about it? She says, that's the president of the university's wife (laughter), says, and we're invited to a soire over at his home Saturday evening. And things like that went on. We became very--VIPs on campus. In fact, my fraternity brothers got together and voted Jayne and me the Most Handsome Couple on Campus, not including the husband (laughter). So VIPs. Story_ID: 14012 Speaker 1: But we did make changes down there [at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign]. We found out that the situation was intolerable for people that were Army veterans, and that I would have the veterans behind me. So they had set up a Student Community Interracial Committee. And the Young Communists on campus had set it up and owned and operated it. And I heard about it, and I got a call. And they said, Taylor, why don't you go to the next meeting because there's going to be an election coming up soon. And why don't you go to the next meeting and see what these people are about. They've got the right name, but nobody on campus will touch them with two hot--two ten-foot poles. They were Communists. So I went over and (laughter) again, it's the Interracial Committee, and there's not a black in it. So I go over, and I listened and they asked me if I'd like to join. And I said, yeah, what are your aims? Says, make this campus integrated. I said, oh, that sounds great. So, yes, I'll join. Well, the call came and said, do you think you can take over the organization? Says, why don't you get the campus behind you, the A, A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha] and the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha], any Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta] and any Q's [Omega Psi Phi] that you have and see what you can do. So I asked my buddies to show up at the next election. They all showed up. They all joined the organization, and we all voted. So guess what? I was elected by a landslide. Now, I will own and operate the Student Community Interracial Council. Then I get a call from the, a lady whose husband was the attorney general. And she says, the League of Women's Voters are now satisfied that the Student Community Interracial Committee is going to be able to do what it, we fervently hoped it should do, which is break up racism and discrimination in this town. It's been long enough that black students and Indian students and other dark-skinned students can't have a place to sit down and eat a meal or go to a show without being shown the peanut gallery. She says, you think you can handle it? I said, it isn't a matter of whether I want to want to handle it or not, am I gonna get the tools to work with? I said, it doesn't matter how large the number of students I have, if I can't go into a show without going into the balcony or I can't be seated in the restaurant, I said, we're paper tigers. She says, the League of Women's Voters intends to make sure that you're not paper tigers. And she says, my husband's the attorney general down here, state's attorney here, and says, they will do what they have to do to cooperate with you. I said, how are you gonna get them to do that? She said, did you ever hear of having to sleep on the couch? I said, oh, ah so, ah so, now I know how it's done. Well, we talked to the attorney general himself. And he says, you're not gonna sue anybody. He says, what you're going to do, is you're going to be witnesses for the state of Illinois, and the state of Illinois are gonna sue their pants off. And they're gonna get a sis--cease and desist or they're gonna be fined or they're gonna go to jail. So he says, I'll tell you how to do it. So he outlined it very simply. A husband and wife friends of ours lived next door to us in the thing, and Jayne [Kemp] and me, and another husband and wife that lives out there, we all go to a restaurant. The first husband and wife goes to the restaurant and all of the tables have reserved on them. They said, oh, gee, we don't have any reservations. I suppose we can't get in. And the owner said, come right in. The table's reserved for you. We just do that to keep undesirables out. So they go in and the menu comes over and they're being served. Jayne and I walk up and we're met at the door. And I said, two for dinner. And they say, I'm sorry, do you have a reservation? I said, no, should I have? And they said, yes, we're expecting a big party. You can see all the tables have "reserved" on them. We're expecting a big party tonight, and there's no room. I said, oh, all right. In that case, I'll, I'll make reservations next time. And Jayne and I walk away. Well, there's a couple standing right behind us, the third couple. And they say, oh, we didn't have any reservations either, and I heard what you said to them. So I guess we'll have to call in reservations also. They said, come right in. That was for them. This is for you. And all of them ate, and when they came back, they went to my house. And we all sat down and wrote depositions and had them notarized the next day and presented them to the state's attorney. Story_ID: 14013 Speaker 1: After all these years, it looks we've won the battle for the public facilities down there in Urbana-Champaign, making it a little easier on the students that come after us. I had a couple of hurdles. The advisor that was in charge of my doctorate thesis was my department head and mentor, and he treated me like his son. But when I came up for my-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. What was his name? Speaker 1: Dr. Fred Tanner, T-A-double-N-E-R. And he was the head of the department and one of the world's experts in food microbiology. In fact, his book, which I have downstairs is 1,492 pages, and he wrote every word himself. And his wife typed every word that he said. Now, you know, it's a conglomerate. You may have 300 authors for a book this size. So there were giants in those days. Dr. Tanner said, Welton, you're ready for your exam. There shouldn't be any problem. Dr. Tanner had a heart attack the week before my exam came up. The second in command was a man who had said, no Negro or no Jew would ever get a degree from him. He was in charge. And so here we are back to Old Back Bay Bottom Boston, just like in the Army. I've drawn a cropper again. Well, he kept me in there, and all of the people--I had gotten at that time all As for my Master's degree and for my Doctor's degree with the exception of one B I got the very first semester I was back on campus, after five and a half years away from microbiology. I come back in February '46 [1946]. And I took a course under a man who was going to become top man at the big dairy downtown on Michigan Avenue. I can't think of the name of it now--Kraft, Kraft. But he said that when I came into class, I had forgotten all of my microbiology. I didn't know how to stain an organism or how to identify them under the microscope anymore. But I caught up. And by the time I got to my final exam, I was writing one A after another. And he says, I can't give you an A. He says, what about the kid that did A work from the very beginning. You worked up to it gradually. Yes, you're as good or a better student than anybody I have in the class, but you didn't pay your dues in the same way that they did. I said, I would think that having to learn the refresher course by myself would qualify me for having everything it takes to, to get an A. His choice, he gave me a B. That was the only B I ever got in graduate school. So when I came up for my exam, all of these teachers who had given me As were the professors on the exam, five of them. After I finished answering the questions, and I answered every single question that was asked. And I had been steered away from this man by my mentor in, the department head. He says, Taylor, he will, he will sabotage you. He says, he's done it once before on another student that was a black student, a colored student. And he'll do you in too. So he says, learn his subject without ever taking his course. So I learned his subject that he taught. And when he hit me with the best shots that he had, I answered every one of them. So no matter how many volleys he turned over, I returned the serve. They kept me on the frying pan until the other doctors began to look at their wristwatches and everything. You know, what does this guy have to do? Does he have to sprout wings and fly away to Heaven to prove that he knows what he's doing? So, they finally kind of said, enough. And let's vote. And so they sent me out of the room. And I stand out there in the hall. And I stand out there in the hall, and I'm out there in the hall. After an hour afterwards, I'm still out there in hall. Well, you know, all the grads students have gone through. They go through 15 or 20 minutes and come out in the hall, and in three minutes the guys come out, and they all shake hands with him. And that's that. Well, I'm something like three hours over, with over an hour standing in the hall. But I understand from what happened, when one of my good friends that wanted me as a graduate student came out, he came out with his face like a thundercloud. And I said, oh, boy, where have I seen that before? And then he gets up to me, and he sticks out his hands. He says, congratulations, Welton. He says, you made it. He says, with, from where we sit, with flying colors just as we expected you to do. And so then he says, I'll tell you about it some time soon. So I made it my business to visit him. And he says, what happened, says, we were told, "Well, he answered all the questions. It's obvious that he has photographic memory. And that doesn't mean that he is in any form or fashion competent to solve problems, which is what the PhD is all about." And he says, I'm not going to give him a pass on this. And the house of cards rolls around the red queen, and they said, you don't give him a pass, we take this case directly to the dean. And we'll charge with the discrimination, racial discrimination because there's no way in the world that a student that every one of us has given straight As to and has never had a grade below B in the graduate school, and he only got one of those, is going to not be competent. Says, this man is a decorated war veteran. He's had command responsibilities for years now, and you're trying to say that he doesn't know enough with the answers he's given to be getting, getting a degree. So they all signed and they signed--they left the space on the top for him as the convener; says, you can sign this one or we take it directly to the dean's office; your choice. He signed. Years later when they set up the American Board of Medical Microbiology, as top above the society, the crme-de-la-crme, that professor called me on the phone and told me that it was being set up. And he wanted me to be a charter member. And I thanked him, but I didn't see any need for it. And, you know, it's just another professional organization. Everybody in town knew me, and my, my income is here. I didn't need it. And so finally waited until another friend of mine said, Taylor, this is my nickel. You get down there and sign up. They've already started closing up the, the grandfather's clause. You're gonna have to take an oral now. And I guarantee you that there will be some people on that oral that don't like you. Says, but you go down now before it gets any worse. They'll waive the three hours worth of written exam that you have to take and just give you the oral. So I did. I had to fly to Detroit and to the American Public Health Association meeting. And they had the booth there, and they set me up. Sure enough, my worst enemy and greatest competitor was on the board. And he took over, and he asked me 80 percent of the questions that I was asked. And I answered them all. And I passed. And I flew back to Chicago, and the people said, did you pass? I said, I don't know. I haven't gotten the results yet. And somebody said, well, if Taylor didn't pass, who the hell is going to (laughter) because by that time I had, oh, 10 years post-doctorate. professor at the university, head of the department of microbiology at Children's Mem--at Swift & Company and which, was a duck shoot. But in all of these things was always, you know, nothing ever goes smoothly. It's always a crack in the thing that you have to get over somehow. Well, I keep running into these little glitches, little glitches, all through my life, there're glitches after glitches after glitches. And practically all of them are racial. And that's been the problem that I have had. But I, as I said, I have come through it all smelling like roses. And I just can't help but think that somebody up there has me in his sights and wants me to do the things that he wants me to do, and whatever they are, I must be doing them. Speaker 2: Well, it sounds to me like you're prepared, you know, for the challenges. Speaker 1: Well, that's what my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] always said. He said, be prepared to do what you want to do, and the job will find you. And like I said, it keeps doing that time after time after time. Story_ID: 14014 Speaker 1: Then I graduated [from doctoral program in microbiology--University of Illinois], wrote out 50 letters, got two back. One of them said they would keep me in their files for three years. And the other one said, from the University of Hawaii, from Dole. It said, you know, we can't place graduates of the University of Hawaii on the mainland in jobs. So we have to hire them here in Dole so that they have a chance to live up to their skills; says, and therefore, Dr. Taylor, we won't hire anybody from the mainland as long as the mainland won't hire our graduates from the University of Hawaii. So now you've a diverse--a reverse discrimination goal. You discriminate against my people; I discriminate against your people or you give my people jobs; I give your people jobs. I was very appreciative of that letter. And I wrote them a nice letter back, explaining something that was a quandary to me and seeing at the same time, I'm not the only one involved in this. All kinds of things are happening that are based on racism. So, well, I got desperate since none of my 50 letters had worked. And again, my father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] said, Welton, it doesn't matter whether you send out 50 letters or a hundred letters or 500 letters, he says, the first one that says, yes, you have got a job a hundred percent. Well, I didn't know anybody else to write to so I picked up the phone and called the University of Illinois Medical School, which I knew existed, to talk to the laboratory to see if I could get on as a lab technician, shh, don't let anybody know I'm a PhD. I'm just calling to see if you've got an opening for a lab technician to work at the bench with his hands. I can do it. And the operator said, you mean the department of microbiology? Well, I didn't know that they had a department of microbiology, and I said, yes. I called, and the department head answered the phone. And so since I'm talking to the department head, I might as well go for it all. And I told him I was a new PhD from downstate, and I was looking for a position with the university in whatever capacity, if he needed a microbiologist. So he talked to me and asked me about my background. And I told him. And he said, do you have references? I said, yes, sir. But I said, why don't I suggest that the fastest way to get an honest picture of me is just call Dr. [Fred] Tanner, the head of the department of microbiology down there. I worked for him and with him, under him for three years now. And I said, he'll tell you over the phone things that a person wouldn't put in print. So I said, you'll probably get a more honest evaluation that way than if I came up with a whole gang of letters from people who don't really know me, but have high positions and toss them out as PR [public relations]. He called Dr. Tanner. And the next day, he got back to me. He says, can you come over today and take a look at a contract? I had my first job, which was good because my wife [Jayne Kemp] was pregnant and school was out. And I wasn't on the dole from the government anymore. So it became very important again. And he said, after the report that Dr. Tanner gave to me on you, he says, it's not necessary for me to see any more references. He says, and I can make, I can arrange for you to start a little above our normal starting salary for, for young instructors. So he started me at a salary a couple of hundred dollars above the, the pitiful amount that I was paid anyway at that time. And then when I got up to $5,000 a year, I was sailing. That was assistant professor's rank and then some. So he started me out. And I got my job. Story_ID: 14015 Speaker 1: No sooner than I got into it [position in microbiology at University of Illinois], things hit the fan my first day on the job. And he said, Taylor, go down to the hospital and get a patient down there with gas gangrene. And you've worked with botulism and that's all in the same family, Clostridia. Go down there, and see what you can do. I went down there, and I watched them operate on this young guy. He had been on a motorcycle accident and thrown over the handlebars and slid along in the gutter like that. And wrists were lacerated, and they were cleaning it all up. And they found that he had crepitation gas in there, it means gas gangrene has set in. And they're trying to save his hand and his arm. And so they're cleaning out the wound, and I stand there looking at them, waiting for to give me a specimen. And finally the nurse pops up and says--after it's all cleaned out, said, don't you think we should give microbiology a specimen? The doctor says, oh, yes. And he takes a sterile swab and dips it in a nice, clean wound that's all cleaned out and gives me the swab. And my reputation was made from that moment on. I said, "I don't want the soup. I want the meat". And I dived down into the wastebasket and got one of those orange gauze pads with all the pus and corruption on it. I said, this is the specimen, not the swab. So. Speaker 2: Can you just repeat the last part of what you said, cause he couldn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is the material, not the sterile swab. And I put it in the envelope and took it upstairs. And when I called back the next day and told them that not only did he have gas gangrene, he also had tetanus. And I said, look up his record and see if he's a veteran, cause if he's a veteran like me, he's been inoculated against tetanus. And that's why he's not showing the symptoms of tetanus. He's only showing gas gangrene, which he has not been inoculated for. So as of that day, I got a nickname, Blood and Guts Taylor because everybody--that went through the hospital and through the school like wildfire. This guy says, "I don't want the soup; I want the meat," and dives down into the wastebasket to get a swab full of pus and corruption. Well, it was all uphill from then--or I should say all downhill. I published at the rate of five papers a year. If nobody got money for animals or anything else that I needed, I got it first. The department wasn't publishing five papers a year. I was publishing five papers a year by myself. I published some 20 or 30 papers with the university in the period of the next five years. And I worked on all the detailers on preventing gas gangrene, and now, I would say anthrax and tetanus, the wound organisms that kill and wound, botulism. And I worked at how to do it, what to do it with, and not to have to give people tetanus shots, which had antitoxin in it because people were dying with anaphylactic shock because they had had horse serum antitoxin somewhere else in their life. If they had ever had it before, you can't ever give it to them again. If they had it as children for diptheria and you gave it to them for a wound to prevent tetnus, they died, within two or three minutes. And then you don't get the needle on--I remember a case where the doctor was gonna do a boy that stepped on a pitchfork, farmer's kid. And it ran through his foot. They pulled the pitchfork out and sent him to the doctor. And the doctor said, have you ever had any other inoculations? The kid didn't know. He said, well, we'll find out, gave him a little inoculation in the skin to see if there was a reaction to it. There was no reaction. He said, well, I'll be on the safe side anyway. I will put the, what they call atropine now; it had a different name then, to restart the heart. I will put that syringe here full, and I'll take this one and I'll give you your shot. And he gave him a shot of tetanus antitoxin. And he pulled out the needle, and the kid was dead. Adrenaline, it's now atropine, but it was adrenaline in those days. And his adrenaline didn't do any good. The kid was dead. So that's how fast the reaction is when you go into anaphylactic shock. Story_ID: 14016 Speaker 1: As you can see in my CV [curriculum vitae], I got kudos from all over the medical field about the ability to use penicillin and aureomycin at that time, two of the only three antibiotics we had. I was a great lover of penicillin. And when I crashed in the jungle on Moratau [Papau New Guinea] and was in the jungle for two days, and everything in the jungle has thorns. It tore up my legs, and when I got rescued by one of our, our patrols that was out looking for me--they weren't supposed to be. They were supposed to stay at home until somebody found the crash so they could know where to go. But he said, he couldn't sit there on his duff while two men were out in the jungle, and he had a patrol available. So they went out a day early. And I walked into their patrol on the second day that I was out. And they took me to base hospital on one of the PT [Patrol Torpedo] boats of a fellow by the name of John F. Kennedy, who was a lieutenant in charge of PT Boat Squadron 10, 109. One of his boats took in, and I never had a chance to find out what the number of the boat was because I passed out. And when I woke up, I was on the boat. And I asked, where am I? They said, you're in torpedo tubes three and four on a PT boat. We're taking you back to base hospital. And I said, oh? And I passed out again. So I saw [Charles A.] Lindbergh's plane, but I didn't get to see John F. Kennedy or find out whether I was on his partic--specific ship or not. And then woke again, I was in the hospital. Well, they had my legs up in traction for a while. This is all in detail in the book. But the thing that they were putting in looked like lemonade, had a big jug of lemonade hanging over me, and my legs were up in traction like that. And they had this needle running into my arm, and I was getting this lemonade. And they would wake me up every four hours and pull the needle out and put in a new bottle and put the needle back in. I said, why can't you just leave the needle in and disconnect it and put a new bottle on it. He said, if we do that, you'll flinch. And when you flinch, you may break that needle off inside of you. And he says, it's just easy to pull it out and put a new needle in. So we have to wake you up to do. We can't do it in your sleep. So 28 days, I was out of the hospital. If they had kept me two days longer, they would have had to send me back to the Presidio in San Francisco. They could only keep me 28 days. 30 days. So they got me out and ready to fly. I came back out. I had a brand new airplane. Black Fury was scattered all over a mountainside. And some pieces of me are out there with it. And I got the new plane, had a controllable pitch propeller. I have the only dat gum plane, the L4H, in the South Pacific with controllable pitch propeller. I could out-climb, out-run any other L4H in the South Pacific. So I named it Lady Jayne. Black Fury had done its job. The war was winding down. So I chose a nice name. Story_ID: 14017 Speaker 1: After I got back to school, that was--to the University [of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign], that was fine until one of my students, you're gonna get a call from Swift and Company. And I'd just been through contract negotiations, and the Republican state of Illinois controlling the money, has a grudge against the University of Illinois whose president was a rabble-rousing Democrat in their minds, the next best thing to Communists. And they wouldn't give any money for raises. They had to raise the salaries of the elevator operators, who told them, look, you don't raise our salaries and you raise the professors' salaries, and you don't raise ours, no elevator in this 18-story building moves. We'll cut off the power and we will walk off. They got their raise. The window washers got their raise and professors did not get a penny. So they offered me a contract for two years with a $100 raise in pay. Swift & Company came along and said, we'll double your salary. Speaker 2: So you went to Swift. Speaker 1: Being of sound mind and having a pregnant wife [Jayne Kemp], I went to Swift. And my salary went up by 10 percent every six months for the almost five years I stayed at Swift. So I made a good deal more money at Swift as compared to the university. I loved the university. I would have stayed there the rest of my life, but it was not fair to my wife who has just as much desire for a decent car and a decent place to live and fur coat if necessary, if all of her other friends are wearing them, she has the same desires. I can't take a low salary because it satisfies me and let my wife and kids live on poverty. So, yeah, I went to Swift. I could stand it for five years. And I worked on salmonella because that's why they hired me. They were poisoning children by sending them out an egg product to be the first solid meal for the chil--the infant. And they didn't pasteurize it. And they canned the egg product in an old poultry room with feathers stuck to the walls and ceiling. And they had the world's greatest meat microbiologist on the floor below, need to know. They never let him know or anybody in the microbiology department that I was in, two floors below, know what they were doing. And then when they started sending out the food and kids began to come down with salmonella and died because it's very rough on newborns. They die. Old people and new people don't live in that, in a era of tolerance. Story_ID: 14018 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, Welton I. Taylor, W-E-L-T-O-N, I, for Ivan, which is my middle name, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 15th of May, '03. Story_ID: 14019 Speaker 1: We were talking about your employment with Swift Meat Company [Swift and Company]. Now, you left the University of Illinois, and you were hired by Swift and because of the great salary and benefits, you know, that were available from Swift. And you were talking, I think when we last--we were discussing your discoveries with salmonella. Speaker 2: Yes, I was hired by Swift because one of my graduate students had gone to work for Swift in quality control in bacteriology for them. And when they asked him who did you know, that knew anything about salmonella? He said, my old professor, Dr. Taylor. And they said to him, where is he? He's at the University of Illinois, assistant professor of microbiology. And they said, do you think we could get him to leave there and come here? And he said, try offering him money (laughter). And it worked. I wouldn't leave in the middle of the year and I gave the opportunity to my department head to try to match the salary. And he went to the powers that be. And he said, no way. He said, the best we would be able to do would be to give you a $1,500 raise. And at that time, they were offering me more than $5,000 to come to Swift. Speaker 1: Okay, now, we covered that part. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: We got to the salmonella situation where the-- Speaker 2: Well, the reason that they hired me to come was they had just been caught poisoning babies, infants by advertising the first solid meal that the infant should have would be their egg, which was bottled like Gerber's baby food, but never pasteurized. And that egg was up to here (motioning to chin high) in salmonella. And it had killed several babies and because salmonella curve is, the high mortality is in the first year, and then it levels off after the age of 12 or so. And then after 55, it goes back up. So you kill people on the horns, very early or very late. In between, you have what's called the age of immortality where if you hit them with a car, you have to back over them to make sure they're dead. But those are the resistant years to disease. And salmonella works on that same principle. And what happened was the head of public health in New York--I can't think of his name now. But there's a statute of him in front of the City Hall in New York to this day, he said, somebody's killing my babies here in the state of New York. And I want it stopped. And since Gerber's and Beech, Beech-Nut, I guess, had been making baby foods for years and there's never been a problem. Suddenly, Swift comes into the business, and we start having babies killed by salmonella. He says, therefore, it's got to be Swift. Find the product that has the salmonella. And I'll take them off of the market, every shelf and every store in the United States. And they couldn't do it. The reason was very simple. There were so many contaminants in there since that was a, basically, a raw product, you couldn't find the salmonella needle in the haystack of all of the E. coli, etc. that were in the same product. And so the--they hired two graduate students at the University of Chicago named (unclear)--I can't think of their name now. It started with an I, I something and McCulloch. And they found, over a period of months, they found they--I think they diluted the product down to the point where the salmonella could be isolated and seen for itself. And as soon as they did that, they wired or called him in New York. And he says, that's it. Pull them off the market, every Swift baby food product on every market, every store in the United States. And so they did that. And that's when they hired me. Now, they had the best meat microbiologist in the world working on the eighth floor of their big research building, which was the largest in the food industry anywhere in the world. We had almost 550 researchers, from bachelors degrees up through MDs, PhDs and veterinarians. And the best microbiologist in, in meat, Dr. Floyd [B.] Jensen, was there, second president of the Illinois Society for Microbiology. And on the floor above him was an old chicken-plucking floor. And, with feathers all over the walls and the ceiling and everything else, contaminated with salmonella, which is a normal chicken disease. They brought in plant material to bottle raw egg and--or slightly cooked egg which was re-contaminated there. And since it was cooked before it was bottled, and that contained the salmonella. The world's great authority on the eighth floor, and they did this on the ninth floor and there was no need to let him know what's going on. Speaker 1: That's a problem of coordination. Speaker 2: Well, I've found this in big corporations and in the Army, everywhere I look, the failure to communicate in the words of Paul Newman and (phone ringing)-- Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling again. Go ahead. Speaker 2: You're ready? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Okay, so the problem was solved by pasteurization. So it took--however, it cost them millions of dollars. And interestingly enough, every executive in Swift & Company that was involved in that fiasco got promoted or a pay raise. And this is the corporate mind, got promoted or a pay raise, and hired me to take care of future things. Speaker 1: Now, did they continue to sell baby food for a while? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I notice they're not in the baby food business. Speaker 2: No, no. No, they regained the public trust for baby food after that. What happened is that my specific title, job description with them was to find and eradicate sources of bacteria of public health significance, was the way they put it. So that put me square in charge of finding the salmonella in your plants and eradicating and the same for staphylococcal, which is a more common food poisoning. Nobody seems to know that because we don't have a good test for it. But staphylococcal food poisoning is more common and even clostridial infection, food poisoning perfringens, clostridium perfringens food poisoning as a--we don't have a test for it. It's a routine laboratory test, research laboratories can find it because they have other techniques that they're willing to spend time and money on. But we can't do it on a routine basis. So that became my job, and I did it well. And I invented media to take care of some of it and was doing real well with them. Story_ID: 14020 Speaker 1: Somebody came up with the idea of something called orange egg--Cosmopolitan Magazine or one of the other women's magazines, told about how you could mix eggs with orange juice and give it to school children as a part of their lunch. And the orange juice covered the taste of the egg-- Speaker 2: It's sort of like a orange julius or something? Speaker 1: Yeah, only with egg in it. And you came closer to being like a full meal. And they said, we have tons and tons of powdered egg, yokes, whole egg and egg white. Now, egg white, they don't have a problem getting rid of because the bakers use that. It's used in cake mixes. And so, they said, but we have a warehouse full of it in Seattle. And it turned out that this is the same egg that they were sending to the Army, you know, the powdered eggs that we ate in the Army during World War II. And the English said that they had contaminated England with their damn powdered egg. And it's true. They did because it, was sent by the ton to soldiers everywhere. And the soldiers would trade off cans of eggs powder for all kinds of favors from the local population. Speaker 2: But the egg powder was making people sick? Speaker 1: No, it shouldn't if it's well-cooked. But, you know, that dust gets carried around on different places. You get it on a salad that's not going to be cooked, and it sits out for a couple of hours. Then you feed that salad to everybody, and they're down with salmonosis. All it takes is a few hours of incubation. So what happened is that I said, you are going to use powdered egg, full of salmonella in something you're going to give to school children. You have the most dangerous pathogen and the most susceptible population. They said, Taylor, we're paying you to get rid of the of--to solve the problem. So I solved the problem. I went through all of the organic acids and inorganic acids. And I found that lactic acid, which is the acid which is naturally made in the fermentation of cabbage into sauerkraut. Sauerkraut is a protected food and yogurt is a protected food, again lactic acid. I said, let me see what I can do. So I set up the different acids and I set up lactic acid. And I found lactic acid was three or four times as good as citric acid, which was three or four times as good as acidic acid. So the organic acids worked real well. And I had a little thing called a Dixie Canner, a little hand-operated thing that brings your cans around and puts the cap on them and seals it. And I set up my orange juice with egg. And I found that 80 percent of the egg nutrient is in 40 percent of the egg, which is the yoke. So I did away with the egg whites and just put the yokes in. And that way, I got the maximum nutrient for the minimum amount of space occupied. Then I went to the commercial form of orange juice, which is four cans of water to one can of orange juice instead of three and one. And so that's more concentrated. And then I found that I needed to boost up the favor a little bit, so I put in some flavoring from tangerines, which is stronger than orange, the same flavor. And Dr. Rice, who was their nutritionist, PhD nutritionist, and an older man, said, you know, calcium is the big shortage in the American diet. Says, why don't we put in dry milk powder and boost the calcium. I said, fine with me. I can handle it. And when we did that, it made it very creamy. We would call it a smoothie now, I guess. And the nutrition was the equivalent of a breakfast with a piece of bacon, a piece of toast and two eggs and a glass of orange juice, all in one glass. And it should have been a big seller. And Swift and Company uses Flint, Michigan as their guinea pig town. So they put it out on the, on the counter free, Flint, Michigan. And the questionnaire that you took was that, "Would you buy this in preference to orange juice you're buying now, once you know that this is a full meal in a glass?" And that the people who don't have time to eat a big breakfast before they dash off downtown to work, and depend on their nutrition they're getting a donut and coffee at the coffee break, those people will have a nutritional boost which is far better than that. Knowing this, would you now switch to this. Sixty-eight percent of them said they would. And those horse's patoots at Swift and Company said, well, we can't use it because we go on the basis of 70 percent. And I had two bio-statisticians working with me. And they said, 68 is not a finite number. It represents a population density between 66 and 74, and said, it's just a coin flip which way it would go. And says, this is entirely satisfactory for our 70 percent acceptance. They said, 68 is 68 and 70 is 70. And we won't make it. The two bio-statisticians quit the next week. They said, if this is the kind of mentality we're working with here, we don't want it. We can get a job anywhere. Bio-statisticians are in great demand. We can get the jobs, and we can get the salaries somewhere, where we're working with somebody that are intelligent enough to use it. So they moved. And shortly after that, I did too. I got on the plane and I got my agent, and I said, get me out of here. But do it with a raise in salary. And that's when she got me an interview with the university--at, at Children's Memorial Hospital as a head of a laboratory there, micro and a faculty appointment at Northwestern [University]. So I was in both Northwestern Medical School faculty and University of Illinois Medical School faculty, cause I stayed on the faculty at Illinois, as a non-salaried instructor, professor. Speaker 2: Now, what year is this that you're referring to? Speaker 1: I was at Swift from 1940--'50, '54 [1954]. It ended up from '48 [1948] when I graduated and to '54 [1954], and assistant professor. And '54 to '59 [1959] at Swift and Company. And the nice thing about Swift, every six months, you got a 10 percent salary raise. But at the time that I started looking for a new job after the orange egg--and incidentally, I made 24 flavors for them. I was the first one to do mixed flavors using the world's fruit. I had mango juice. I had mango and guava. I had mango, guava and passion fruit. I had all kinds of combinations like you see now, you see cranberry-grape, cranberry-apple, cranberry-raspberry. I did all of those and made up originally a six-pack, and then I expanded to a 24-pack. And I was just so far ahead of the common wheel and their little tight thinking of, you know, we've been in business a hundred--this is their statement always: "We've been in the business a hundred and seven years and we've made money for everyone of those hundred and seven years, and we've never done this." When I tried to persuade them that the Negro market in the United States is larger than the total export market for Swift and Company. It meant nothing to them. I said, why don't you do this with Swift and hit that market, which is not being served by anybody. The Hispanic market. I said, why don't you do this with Swift. Put out Swift tamales and sell to the Spanish market. Ready-made, you can buy it at the store. You won't have to wait for the little guy with the push-cart going around selling hot tamales out of the top of his push cart. Oh, they couldn't see that. And they didn't pay me a dime for that. They were supposed to pay you if they used anything that you suggested, and they were supposed to give you a bonus for it. Nothing. Got three patents for them. I got one dollar for the first patent. The second and third patents, I got $10.00, each patent. And when I finally got something that I could patent and use, I was away from Swift and Company and I got my patent on my own stuff, and opened my own business. Story_ID: 14021 Speaker 1: I left them because of some of the other things that I did. When I found out that they were selling their salmonella, and, in livers, the way they were being processed. And every liver was contaminated with salmonella, and when they got unloaded on the docks in Stockholm, the veterinarians there found that the livers were contaminated with salmonella. And they wouldn't let them unload them. And so when they got the wire saying that they couldn't unload their, couldn't unload them out of the docks. And the ship said he's got other things to pick up, he had to unload them. And they wouldn't let them throw them in the sewer because the Swedes didn't want the sewers contaminated with the salmonella, not that they made any difference. They were already--but anyhow-- Speaker 2: You'd think the sewers would have plenty of salmonella. Speaker 1: They have. And so what happened was, they said that, they said, well, what are you going to do about it? They said, it's not our problem. It's insured with Lloyd's of London. So they have got 90,000 pounds of frozen livers of Swift and Company's that can't be unloaded. Call Lloyd's of London and tell them the Swedes want them off the dock, and we want our check. I don't know what Lloyd's of London did with 90,000 pounds of frozen livers that are salmonella contaminated. But they did something. So they said, Taylor, go up there and find out why the livers are contaminated. I said, I said, I can tell you without leaving my seat, but I said, I'll get a company car, and my kit. And I'll go up to South St. Paul, which was the largest meat packing plant in Swift and Company then, 240 of them, and that was the biggest. And that's where those livers were shipped from. Went up there and found that--I sampled the liver, as it came out of the cow, when they did the ventral cut on the cow and opened it up. And they took out the organs. Then they have three round tubes that go down to the next floor. See, in the food industry, the cheapest form of energy is gravity. So you dump something in a hole in the floor and it slides down to the next floor. Then they take what they want off of it and dump the remains in another hole in the floor and it goes down to the next floor. By the time they get down to the basement, there's nothing left but the hides. So when they take the livers out, there was nothing wrong with the livers. Cattle don't normally have salmonellosis. Pigs, poultry. Cattle don't. I tag the liver and the liver is clean as a baby's bottom. It goes down that slide to the next floor and comes out on a long table, a 20-foot long table, five feet wide, guys working on each side, taking apart what's called the tracheal tree. It has the trachea, the lungs, the liver, the spleen, the gall bladder, etc. all attached. When it gets down there, each guy takes off what he wants. One guy's taking off livers; another one is doing gall bladders for gall stones, which sell, at that time, for several hundred dollars an ounce to the Chinese that use it in their medicines, gall bladders--gall stones. Sells for much more than gold. Gold at that time was .32 cents an ounce--$32.00 an ounce, but they were selling over, over a hundred dollars an ounce, a gall bladder--gall stones. Anyhow, at the bottom of the slide, I sample the same liver that I just put my red tag and my name on. Then I dash around and come down the steps and get over there. When it comes down there, they're holding it out for me cause it's red tagged. I sample it. Every one of them had salmonella on them. Then what do they do with them? They have big bathtubs which hold maybe 600 pounds of livers. And they pull them off. They inspect them, stamp them with the government approved on it and drop them in this bathtub. And it fills up, and as it fills up, it squeezes the way it squeezes the blood out of the liver. And by the time you get up to the top, the whole thing is swimming in blood, four, four inches of blood on top of the thing. Then it is taken over to the elevator and taken down to the basement to the cold room. And they have vertical, eight-foot-high racks with every foot and a half or so, hooks on it. And they take them out of there and hang it on a hook, hang it on a hook, hang it on a hook. And then the next row of hooks and the next row of hooks, and the next row of hooks. Each row is dripping blood from the top and down onto the second layer. Then the two bloods down to the third layer, etc. So if you didn't have a hundred percent, now you have a hundred percent of them contaminated. I said, your system has got to stop. Where are we getting the contaminate on the slides? We wash those slides down every couple of hours with Clorox solution. I said, okay. Plant manager, I said, I'm gonna have dinner, and I said about, about 8, 8:30 or 9:00 o'clock tonight, meet me at the plant with flashlights. And be sure to tell the guard so we won't get shot while we're trying to get into the plant, okay. I met him. We walked in. I said, don't turn on the lights. And we just hit the flash beads around and we hit the lights. The eyes of rats. I says the rats eat the little snippets of flesh that are snipped off as a liver goes over the joints in the tube--they're open sided, they're half, halfway, the little snippets of flesh taken off of the livers as they slide over. And what's left there, the rats are climbing up on those slides at night and eating that liver. And they're depositing their thank you cards after they've had their meal. And so as long as you've got rats in the plants, you're always going to have that. And I said, if you don't have rats, there'll probably be something else that will go around those slides later on in the day that do have salmonella, and they'll be contaminated anyway. Story_ID: 14022 Speaker 1: I solved the problem, I devised an A-frame [in his work at Swift & Company], put the hooks on it, so that when you took the liver out of the cow on the top shelf, you put it right then and there on the A-frames, let the government inspectors inspect those livers hanging on the A-frame, and stamp them, and then put the A-frame on the elevator and take them down to the basement to the cold room, and push them up against the, and stack them up against the wall overnight. And then the morning, they were packed. No salmonella problem. As clean as they could be, right out of the cow. Speaker 2: But what about the rat problem? Speaker 1: Well, you don't have the rat problem because you'd get rid of the slides. You were handling it right on the eighth floor where they come in, and taking them right down in the basement and put them in there. The next thing is, they're--by morning, they're frozen; you pack them and ship. Clean product. Speaker 2: Did they have an effective way of getting rid of the rats? Speaker 1: You know, that they said that the cost of making those--this is--I designed it out of regular plumbing pipe, two-inch, outside diameter, plumbing pipe. Anybody could have gone to something like Home Depot now--Home Depot as they say up here. It's "depot" in Peoria and Southern Illinois. It's "depot" up here. Home Depot and put it together for $150 at today's prices, $30.00 at those prices then or less. You know, they said, it was too much. And so I didn't hear anything about it for a couple of weeks after I came back with all the details and what I'd told the manager, plant manager. And I asked my big boss, division head, "Whatever happened to the livers and the salmonella?" Said, well, you know, the company's run by businessmen, Taylor. And their decision was if they don't ship those livers out of the state, then the FDA [Food and Drug Adminsitration] doesn't know about it and has no jurisdiction over it. FDA can only cover interstate commerce; keep it inside of your state. We have nothing to worry about, but the city inspectors or the state inspectors, whichever ones, they give to you. And you can take care of them by giving them a turkey at Thanksgiving and a ham at Christmas and, or vice versa, ham at Easter and a Turkey at Thanksgiving. So whatever, says, and they won't ever blow the whistle on you cause you've got them in your pocket in a manner of speaking. So I said, okay, what you're saying is, we don't ship anymore to Scandinavia or any other intelligent company--country that could find out that we're sending salmonella abroad, but what we will do, we will sell it all in the state of Minnesota. So lots of luck Minneapolis. Speaker 2: That's horrifying (laughter). Speaker 1: That's what they did. That's exactly what they did. Speaker 2: So when you left Swift-- Speaker 1: I couldn't stand it. I couldn't stand it. I couldn't stand the, the business ethics. Speaker 2: Um-hum, sure. Speaker 1: What's the old statement? Daddy, what are business ethics? Son, business ethics is what keeps you from making money. Swift and Company, or any of them--you know, that's just one of the mass. That's one pulled out of the mass. These are standard practices everywhere. So I was having trouble stomaching that. And then the orange egg brought it to a head cause I'd invested too much of my time and energy in making a product which would have been a real boon. At that time, there was no such thing as a breakfast food substitute or anything like that. Speaker 2: It wasn't until, I guess, the late '60s [1960s] and [Nestle] Carnation came (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: --up with something called the Instant Breakfast. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: (Unclear) a lot of stuff. Speaker 1: Right. The nurses were drinking more of the baby formulas--I can't think of the name of the first one now, the formula made for babies that weren't on mother's milk or on milk substitutes like--I was an Eagle Brand baby myself. My mother [Cora Lee Brewer] was too old to nurse. And they had this--it starts with P, I can't think of the name of it. But they were using it in the nurseries and all of the hospitals. And the nurses were drinking three times as much as the babies were drinking. And the hospitals began to look into this. What, where is all this stuff going? Found the nurses were using it like a milkshake for lunch on the premises. And that's where it is going. And we put our own babies on it when they were coming along. But the market is there. But the market doesn't exist unless it exists above the eyebrows of the executives. And as long as it's not implanted up here, it doesn't exist. So it was years and years later before anybody started putting out a breakfast drink, and still many more years later before they began to mix flavors. Story_ID: 14023 Speaker 1: You went on Children's Memorial Hospital (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: On to Children's Memorial Hospital in '59 [1959], yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell me, I guess, what you would consider the highlight of your career as a biochemist. Speaker 2: Microbiologist. Speaker 1: Microbiologist. Speaker 2: Oh, I think the highlight of my career came while I was at Children's. There were several of them, but my favorite one is where I was on vacation, and I was at home painting my rooms, bedrooms, interiors. And I got a call from Children's, and they said, Dr. Taylor, we've got a call here from a gentleman who's from Europe. And he says, he must see you. And we told him that he's, he's on vacation. He said, well, then give me his number at home. They said, we can't do that, but we will call him and tell you where to call to reach him. So they called me, and I didn't know the man's name. And so I called him. And he said, I'm the head of food microbiology for the World Health Organization [WHO]. And we want you to come to Europe and work with us. Bring your family and stay. And we've already made the preliminary talks for the NIH [National Institutes of Health] to support it financially. And all we have to do is to know that you're willing to do it. So he says, can we sit down and talk? Says, I'll be in my hotel, three hours from now. Can you come down and we can sit down and talk this over? Sure. So, it ended up with my getting about six weeks' notice that I was to leave the country and go to the Pasteur Institute in France, first in Lille, L-I-L-L-E, upper, in the northern corner, on the Belgian border; first city to fall to the Germans in both the first and second World Wars, first French city to be conquered. And this is under the World Health Organization, Dr. D-A-A, Mossel, M-O-DOUBLE-S-E-L, food microbiologist and head of the division for the World Health Organization, working out of Utrecht in northern, in Denmark [sic, the Netherlands]. And, yeah, I think it's Denmark. I can't remember now whether it was Denmark or--it's not Germany. It's Denmark. I'm pretty sure. And he set it up for me to go to the Pasteur Institute in Lille. The Pasteur Institute has eight laboratories scattered around; the one in Paris is medical, but the one in Lille is the food. And that's where the Louis Pasteur students did a lot of their work. And Louis, himself, died before the Noble Prize was invented. He did--predeceased Nobel and his prize. So Dr. [Heinrich Hermann Robert] Koch, in Germany, got the first Nobel Prize, two years--three years after Pasteur died. The Pasteur Institute is founded in his honor because he had saved the tails of the French businessmen in so many fields that the least they could do was set up an institute, research institute in his honor. Well, I went there and had an absolute fabulous time. I went there with no credentials except that Dr. Betty Hobbs from England who was the head of the department of food microbiology for public health in England had visited Swift [and Company] and had met me. And we had so much in common that she was the one that initiated the idea that she wanted me to come and work with her in her lab. Betty Hobbs is the lady that invented [sic, discovered] staphylococcal food poisoning, which was happening onboard ships. And the Public Health of England put her on a ship to India and back. And she found that the people who ate at the earliest setting of breakfast, lunch and dinner, never had seasickness. The ones that ate at the second setting had some seasickness, but the ones that ate at the last setting, the late sleepers, had all the seasickness that they had. And it wasn't seasickness. It was staphylococcal food poisoning. And it was the steam table that was keeping the food in the incubation temperatures of the staphylococci and other organisms that would grow in the gravy, and the sauces, in particular, and be ladled all around your food for you to eat in the evening. And those were the people who were getting seasick. It was not seasickness. It was food poisoning. And so she single-handedly discovered the salmon--the staphylococci that were doing it. And those, incidentally, are the same ones that are now involved in toxic shock syndrome, same identical strains. So anyhow, she wanted me over there, and she talked to the Pasteur Institute and the German bureau of meat industries. And so they all wanted me, but it would have taken too long. My family didn't want to stay away that long. But we managed to stay six months in France and lived in Lille and six months in London, up in Stanmore, in the north end of London and worked at the Central Public Health Laboratory there, where my laboratory was across, was with Dr. Hobbs. And Dr. Joan Taylor who was the salmonella person in London, had the laboratory across from me. And John Taylor was a director of the laboratory, a regular clinical laboratory, underneath me. So when people would come in and say I'm looking for the laboratory of Dr. Taylor, they'd always say, which one (laughter)? Cause there's John, there's Welton and there's Joan. Joan Taylor is the one who's the co-honoree with me for the organism named after both of us, Enterobacter tayloriae. I have the original paper, all autographed by the writers downstairs on my wall. That was, that was fabulous. I--there's nothing that I can say that compares to, to living abroad in a place where you speak the language poorly. And I, I hadn't had French until I had to take my Doctorate exam. And I didn't even know "oui" and "non." And so I sat in on a French class, taught by a graduate student whose husband was a graduate student and learning French. And I sat in on the class for six weeks, and then I was told to, quit sitting in on the class. You know your grammar now. Go to the books that you have to read for your language exam and read them and read them and read them. That's what I did. I wrote a perfect French exam and got my language out of the way. Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that story from the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I did the German, which I had had since high school so that was not a problem. And that French didn't do me a bit of good. Speaker 1: Not a--okay. Speaker 2: I couldn't have ordered the dinner. I couldn't have asked the cab and told them where to go and take me. And I couldn't use the telephone. That was not the kind of French that I learned. So I had to start from scratch once I got there, but I picked it up fast. Now, the redeeming quality is the fact that everybody, practically everybody at the Pasteur Institute wanted to practice their English on me. So I had to make sure that they understood that the brand of English that I spoke is what's called Midwestern College English. And they have English lined up in different categories. And so we speak Midwestern College English. And they would speak only--as close to Parisian French as they could when they were talking to me. So I didn't pick up the accent which they had from--a lot of them were Belgians actually. And they crossed the border every morning and every afternoon going back and forth home to work. But then when I left there, after meeting good, good friends and having given, given a paper at the French Society for Microbiology annual meeting, in French, and published it in the annals of the Pasteur Institute, en route to England. And I published two papers of the work I did there. But I found salmonella twice as often in France as I did in England. The English and I tied, but the English spent three days and ran every negative a second time, oh, for about a five percent increase. I mean it--uneconomic, a hundred percent increase in the work, but five percent of, increase in the positives. But then that was a research technique and my regular technique to, developed for Swift and Company, which involved one plate of medium and two tubes of enrichment broth, did just as well. And, but I was unhappy with the fact that I hadn't really clobbered the English like I did the French. But the French dropped their method of doing salmonella and adopted mine in total. And I lectured to their foreign students that were at the Pasteur Institute, which at the time I think 19 different countries involved, including some from behind the Iron Curtain, which had published some very, very flattering publications naming me and my work. Story_ID: 14024 Speaker 1: How did that make you feel to go to France and to the Pasteur Institute to a place named for a person that you idolized and to make, change methodology-- Speaker 2: That, that--when you say the high point, that's, that's it because validation of your worth, by scientists or anybody else, when somebody recognizes you for your ability in anything, that, that's what it's all about. And you can't put a price on that. But Dr. Bacheul (ph.), my boss there at the Pasteur Institute, the assistant director of the institute at that time, head of microbiology, gave me when I got there and told me that it was routine for everybody that came to the Pasteur Institute, for them to get an idea of where this person was on the continuum as expert to beginner because they had people who were heads of public health departments in their various countries in Poland and Czechoslovakia and Italy; one of my best friends was the head of public health in Modena, which is [Luciano] Pavarotti's home town. And he and I became great friends. And he was at my house just as often as he was at the Pasteur Institute. And he gave me all the low-down on what was happening, what was being said about me by Dr. Bacheul. Now, Dr. Bacheul, when I first got there, I asked his secretary, I said, may I see Dr. Bacheul's publications? And she said, oh, la, la. He has 270 publications. I said, my God (smile)--I had at the time perhaps, 20. And so I said, well, give me a list of them. And I looked down the list, and there were whole books written by him. One on salmonella sur mer, salmonella of the sea, salmonella and the droppings of the sea birds and in fish in close-in waters and in deep waters. He'd done all of that. What in the world does he need me for? So when he gave me this 20 organisms to identify, and he says, you'll have 48 hours. And here's a grand gallery of the materials you can put them in to find out. And the petite gallery, the petite gallery of 14 tubes and the grand gallery of 30-some tubes. So I had about 48 tubes, all totaled that I could set up. And I looked at these, and I said, you know, at Swift and Company, we get by on five. So I set up all the tubes, but then the next morning, instead of waiting 48 hours, the next morning, I walked in with him to, and gave him my list. Here are the 20 organisms, and here's what they are. And he looked at the list, and he looked at me and he says, many of these tests that you ran take 48 hours. I said, I said, yes, but many of the tests that I ran are unnecessary to identify the organisms. I said, at Swift and Company, we can't wait 48 hours to find out whether or not we've salmonella contaminates or not because we're paying $1,500 a day for storage, cold storage. So we must move on. So then he looked at the list, and he pulled out his own list. And he checked, he says, they're all correct. I said, yes. And then he turned to his assistant who had the list in his desk drawer of the organisms that he'd given. And he said, where is your list? (Laughter) I said, now, I'm being accused of having cheated. And Dr. Catserus (ph.) who was not called doctor. They didn't call anybody doctor at the Louis Pasteur Institute because Louis was not a doctor. He received his Doctorate as an honorary, near his death. He was a chemist, a consulting chemist. And so Dr. Catserus says, I have it here. And he pulled out his key on the ring. See, I have my keys. He unlocked his drawer, pulled it out. And here's the list right here. Says, here it is. He says, it's never been out of that drawer, and the keys have never been out of your possession? No. So when Dr. Bacheul turned to me and he says, Dr. Taylor, you will show us how you got these answers in only 24 hours. So I showed him. And I said, I incidentally had a medium that combines four of these characters in one medium. And I said, that's all we use for salmonella. I take the colony off the plate and put it in this medium. And the next day I know that I have a salmonella or I don't have a salmonella. And I know which jets I'm working in if it's not a salmonella. So I had to make that up for him. And then I had to go in and lecture to his students from all over the world and show them how to use it. And then I had to go and present the paper on it, which the Pasteur Institute published on my medium and my methodology for salmonella. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So that was the high spot there. And then I went on to England and did approximately the same thing in the Central Public Health Laboratory in Colindale, England with Dr. Betty Hobbs as my chief. And she and I got along just as well as Dr. Bacheul and I got along. And I just made a lot of good friends everywhere I went. Story_ID: 14025 Speaker 1: My family was delighted [with their six month stay in France]. My kids went to school there in France, a good Catholic school nearby. And the little one [Shelley Patrice Taylor] was starting school, first grade, everybody would say, ah, pas d'accent. She has no accent. And the older girl [Karyn Jayne Taylor] was given her training, and they would make the teachers who spoke only Parisian French accents to teach her French. But they learned French so well because they had to get their assignments in French, translate them in English, do it in English, translate them back in French and hand them in. And so they learned French beautifully. And even to this day, Karyn has used her French, and when she was living in Martinique and we visited there, and people were arguing on the tra--on the bus, the Frenchmen on the bus--France owns Martinique. Martinique is a department--it's like Cook County is to Illinois. And they were arguing whether or not she was actually a Parisian or whether she was American because her English was perfect and the French was perfect. And so the Frenchmen argued and I was sitting at the back of the bus with my wife [Jayne Kemp]. And she says, well, we'll settle that argument, says, my father and mother are at the back of the bus. So we wave our hands. She said, Mom, where was I born? She said, Mount Sinai Hospital in Chicago. She says, what does that make me? You're an American. You didn't go to France until 1961 and '62 [1962]. Story_ID: 14026 Speaker 1: Now, did you find, you know, the racial attitude different in Europe than in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, in France. When we went to London and we were looking for a house, we were living in a small family hotel in Golder's Green, which is largely Jewish in London. And we stayed there with the Tanners, a young couple who had this bed and breakfast sort of thing. And we were looking for semi-detached, as they call a duplex there, that we could rent. And we went to one in the north end, and the woman came to the door and opened the door and berated me. Can't you see, we're having tea? (English brogue). And I said, oh, I'm very sorry, but you have, you have an apartment for rent, and we were interested in it. I'm sorry I interrupted your tea. Her husband came to the door, and she left in a huff, which is I think is a small German car. And he said, you'll have to excuse my wife, he said because our daughter has just moved out to be on her own. And my wife has not recovered emotionally from that loss. It's the daughter's apartment that we have to rent. And he says, I think we shall have to take it off the market because she has not accepted the idea that her daughter is not coming back. So he says, accept my apology. But it's not for rent. Well, that may or may not have been true, but with my suntan in the summertime, and the fact that nearby was Cricklewood, which was in the process of having riots because of the number of Jamaicans and other Caribbean blacks that had moved in. And they were having riots with the native whites, working-class people in that area. And so I've always thought that it was a racial thing, in spite of the very plausible explanation I got. But we went on, and we went through a real estate agent, and we got a very nice place in Stanmore Common, just two blocks from the park where the Queen Mother [Queen Elizabeth] used to go and sit in the day, and a very pleasant place, and a short ride to the, subway ride to my work every day. And we loved England too. The kids went to school with the American soldiers' families, a relatively short drive away, a half an hour's drive away. And that was an American school. So it was no problem with the credits. And they didn't have the language handicap. What they did find was that at 8:00 o'clock at night, we'd always send them to bed because the television would come on with everything from full frontal nudity at 8:00 o'clock in the evening. And, of course, it didn't get dark in the summertime until 9:30 or a quarter to 10:00 because England is so much farther north that it's, you know, almost the land of the midnight sun. The sun goes down at 10:00 o'clock or 10:30 at night, and up again at 5:00 o'clock in the morning or 4:30 in the morning. So all the American's kids were, why do our families make us go to bed when it's still light. It's 8 o'clock and they always say, "Go to bed!" Because of the television show. Story_ID: 14027 Speaker 1: I think that race relations are always in a state of flux. I think it's so ingrained because it's passed on from one generation to another. You have the kids coming along, become skinheads. These are essentially the same kids whose fathers and grandfathers were Ku Klux Klan or America First [Party] or neo-Nazis, the Brown Shirts of Wisconsin, were just as virulent as the White Hoods of Georgia. My father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] used to tell me when I was flying my little model airplanes and I wanted to be a pilot for the Army, he said, I have to tell you this. The only black man that ever flew for the Army had to go to Canada and join the Royal Canadian Air Force to get his wings and fly for the Canadians until almost the end of the war when he was transferred into the Lafayette Escadrille as their first and only black pilot. Said, because the Army didn't want black soldiers and the Air Force didn't want black aviators. And the first black soldiers that went to France in World War I were sent to the Allied Expeditionary forces under the French. That's why the 93rd Division had the French (unclear) blue helmet on it. And it wasn't until [John Joseph] "Black Jack" Pershing who had been a commanding officer of the 9th and 10th Cavalry saw them, he said, what the hell are we doing? Speaker 2: We've (unclear) (simultaneous) Black Jack too from what I understand. Speaker 1: Did you know what his original name was? Speaker 2: No, sir. Speaker 1: His original name was Nigger Jack Pershing, but the newspapers couldn't print that. So they changed it, sanitized to Black Jack Pershing, okay. Now, you know, the real story. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened was that the men that came back from overseas, went right back to what they had been through first. In fact, the returning heroes from Chateau Thierry and the Somme were taken off the ships where they came ashore in, I think Norfolk, and put into segregated barracks, where the white soldiers that came off, received a heroes' welcome. Black soldiers were taken off and put in segregated barracks, and then shipped back to the Southern camps in the South. And they said, nothing has changed here. You can forget about what the Frenchmen said for you and did for you. And they were back to square one. And a lot of the lynchings that went on after World War I were done to black soldiers who didn't want to return to the status quo. And so the examples were made of them. After World War II, when we went South during World War II, we found exactly the same situation, that the rules of the South subverted any rules of democracy where blacks were concerned, and that segregated units were kept segregated in every step of the way. And, yes, I rode in the back of the bus, and, and at least once, I went up to the theater with one of the most beautiful girls that I have ever known in Augusta, Georgia, college student there, I went up to buy tickets for the theater. And the colored sign went around the corner. I went around to a little booth on the side of the theater and bought my tickets. And then the sign for colored went up the steps, the back steps of the theater, outside to another ticket taker, who would take the tickets, and the last four rows of the theater, balcony were roped off for colored. And when they were filled, no more colored would be entered. And I went up there, and I looked at that--I was a First Lieutenant in the Army, and I had suddenly reached the nadir of my experience with the Army in the South. And I told this beautiful girl, I said, I'm sorry--as an officer and a gentleman in the Army, I will not, I will not give up my rights for this. I said, if you want to stay, here are the tickets. But I'm leaving. So she said, well, I'm leaving with you. And on the way down, I said, if you want to go to what passes as the Officer's Club for Negro officers here in Georgia, I'll be glad to take you there. We can have dinner or if you know black restaurants in town, that are nice, that you would like to have dinner at, fine. I said, but I will not go anywhere segregated in the city of Augusta. And I don't remember--as I said in my book, I don't remember what, exactly what we did. But when I took her to the dormitory that afternoon or that evening, and told her goodbye, I never saw her again because two weeks after this incident, my orders came through to fly. And they shipped me off to Pittsburg, Kansas to fly, take flying lessons. Now, I never went to Tuskegee, never because I couldn't pass the physical. And like I used to say, when people said about--anything about flying blind, I said, that's the only way I've ever flown (laughter) because I've never had 20/20 vision, except with glasses. Story_ID: 14028 Speaker 1: What concerns you about today's black community? Speaker 2: Well, as things go, we made big gains with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And under the Republicans, both [Richard Milhous] Nixon and afterwards with, our friend who has Alzheimer's-- Speaker 1: [Ronald] Reagan. Speaker 2: Reagan, back-sliding was the name of the game. And many of the gains that we made have been lost. Now, they are trying to turn around the system that gave preference to blacks because of trying to get a level playing field-- Speaker 1: The affirmative action. Speaker 2: And that has--that has already repealed in California and the University of Michigan has been given the word that they can't do it on that basis. They will have to find some other basis to try to get diversity in the schools. And it's in a state of flux again. I have very little confidence in the present Congress and president that race relations are going to improve any. And everything I see on television, including the situation was on last night, with the Civil War and the assassination of [Abraham] Lincoln. And we know that after Lincoln, we got a president who tried his best to bring things back to status quo before Lincoln. And they tried to impeach him, and they couldn't even get that through, but he did do everything he could to bring Tennessee rules back to the country as a whole. Speaker 1: So you see things as a couple of steps forward and then a step back and-- Speaker 2: Always, always. The pendulum swings both ways. The generation that follows me and the generation that follow them and the generation that follows them will still have these ups and downs, these little peaks and valleys in race relations. And my view of the whole thing is the only time race relations will go to zero tolerance is when an extraterrestrial threat comes, like one that's supposed to come in a few years where they're going to bring 90 million aliens here to reclaim this planet. And to do so, they intend to wipe out 100 percent of the inhabitants now because we're such cyphers, such zips, such nada, such nothings that we don't know how to take care of this world. And they're sorry to see the state that it's in because of our excesses with Mother Nature. Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: At that time, all human beings will be created equal for the first time because we will be all living exactly the same chance of extermination. Speaker 1: In relationship to an extraterrestrial-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we will all be equal, equally dead as long as they have their way. Now, I think that the most democratic situation that we have been was Vietnam. I think more common people of all races had to get along together for survival and to do the same missions. But a patrol goes out on a mission, you're all at risk, and nobody's got any chances to pick friends and enemies on that patrol because you're protecting their butts and they're protecting yours. And that's the strongest bond that you have, self-preservation. And when it takes a team to preserve it, they work as a team and they think as a team. And that's democracy in action. Speaker 1: In an unfortunate kind of situation, I would say. Speaker 2: A hell of a situation. But when your life is on the line, the color of the man next to you or his religion is of no damned value. His ability to use that rifle or submachine gun to protect you and you to protect him, is paramount. Everything else is worthless. Story_ID: 14029 Speaker 1: What would you see at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: The only legacy that I'm leaving is one for the genealogists as far as I'm concerned. My life is of interest perhaps to other microbiologists, maybe to other civil rights workers, but to the genealogist that wants to follow the saga of a black man who has been there and done that; this I where I was; this is what I did, and this is who I am. And if you're interested in that, then you're interested in me. And that's all. I don't think that any of us make a ripple in the ocean from the standpoint of our existence on earth. And I've just been blessed to be here as long as I have and it's a part of my, my belief in a pact with God. When I was down on the ground with two busted kneecaps, 33 miles from Japanese territory, with one gun that had been wrecked in the crash, three bullets which I assumed were usable, and a broken magazine, which wouldn't push those bullets into place when they were fired. So I figured I was gonna have to--every time I fire it once, I'm gonna have to take a bullet out and push it in, and close the slide to fire the second time and the third time. And I had an observer with me who was not a pilot, who was a, just flew around with me to drop mail that I was, volunteered to drop. And I felt a very strong sense of--I was a pilot. I got us into this mess, and it's my job to get us out. I'm the pilot. I'm the senior officer, and this little guy hasn't done anything to deserve being down in 33 miles in Japanese territory with cracked ribs from my gun that he was wearing, and wrecked the gun and wrecked his ribs at the same time, when we crashed; and that I'm alive is a miracle in itself. And it's time for me to get right with God. And I've been God-fearing all my life. My mother [Cora Lee Brewer] was, sang in the choir and was a church member in good standing. My father [Frederick Enslen Taylor] was a superintendent of the Sunday school, and we've always been church people. And I said, Lord, I know I'm here because you wanted me to be here because it's no way I would have survived that crash. I saw too many people get killed when I was in flight school when they crashed planes exactly like this and there were no survivors. I saw seven of them in seven weeks, 14 dead; seven instructors and seven students. And I fully expected to go exactly the same route. You saw differently. You've saved me so far, and I'm going to have to depend on you to save me time and time again because I'm 33 miles in Japanese territory with a gun that may or may not fire and another person who didn't do anything to deserve this. And I've got the responsibility of getting him out, us out. And I did what I had to do, and I've written a whole book about it because that's all I've written about, just World War II from my beginning to the end of it. And everything worked out exactly the way it had to work out for me to survive. And I said at the time, if I survive it, I will do, hopefully, do whatever I--what, what He wanted me to do as payback. I had never decided and never known what He wanted me to do with my life. Well, He's given me 83 years of it so far, and I'm in good shape for a man whose, that's in as bad a shape as I'm in, put it that way. So whatever it was, I'm still here. Story_ID: 14030 Speaker 1: This is slightly different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, the old story is always you're supposed to say, I would like to be remembered as a child of God, a good husband and father, a patriot of my country and probably, as a black, who has never fully accepted the fact that he's supposed to be inferior. And that has never crossed my mind of my own insight. It only crosses my mind when I'm in a situation where someone else thinks that I'm inferior because of race, color, creed or nation origin. I think that it's good to have been in situations like that, and I think it's good that every American should be a foreigner for a while to find out, like the book said, when they sent me to Europe, remember, you are representing your country in whatever capacity you are here. But you must remember that in this country, whichever one it is, you are a foreigner and you're a guest in their country and in their homes and in their businesses. And you must comport yourself with that in mind, so as not to do damage to the credibility of the American government. And I think that was a good thing, and that was one of the things that I learned. It's wonderful to be a foreigner because it makes you appreciate being an American. And I think if more Americans have that opportunity, they will come back to this country with a different attitude towards everybody in this country. And as one who has traveled extensively in Germany--we went back to Germany and stayed there three weeks, in Germany, living in Germany and doing everything in Germany, and driving the romantic road in Germany from end to the other. And the same with France. We spent seven weeks on tour of Europe, while we were over there, with my mother-in-law and my wife [Jayne Kemp] and two kids [Shelley Patrice Taylor and Karyn Jayne Taylor], and our little English car. And we drove from one end of Europe to the other. And we've been back in 1970, with one kid--the other kid was still in college at Wellesley [College], and we took the other kid, who was at the University of Chicago, took advantage of the fact that they sponsored a tour, which was his transportation at good prices. And so we were on our own after we got there, and while I'd lived there, that was no problem to us. We went everywhere and did everything we wanted to do and saw every place we wanted to go. And then when we came back, we went to--'77 [1977], we went to Africa, supposed to be Kenya and Tanzania. And Tanzania wouldn't let us in on a Kenyan passport, visa. And so we had to spend our whole time in Kenya. And I said, damn it, I'm going back again because I'm going to go Olduvai [Gorge] and go and see where the oldest man was found and go to the Ngorongoro Crater that I planned to do the first time and couldn't do. So in '79 [1979], we went back, and this time we went to Kenya and to Tanzania, but we had to go all the way down through Zambia and come back into Tanzania cause you still couldn't cross the border. So we flew 2,200 miles to get back to a point that was 40 miles away from where we had left in Kenya. To get that 40 miles to Tanzania, we had to go 2,200 miles around by way of Zambia, and had all kinds of problems there, which, maybe if I ever write book two, I'll write about that. But we went there, and then we've been to Hawaii. We've been to the Panama Canal. We've been to Jamaica, and we've been to Martinique and we've been to Bermuda-- Speaker 1: So you think people will remember you as somebody as somebody who took-- Speaker 2: No, I just think that all of those things are a widening of your, of your vision because you're with other people in other places, and you're not being with a supportive group necessarily. And so you're reacting as one unit in their milieu. And I think that--all of this is mind expanding. When we went to Egypt, my mind was completely blown. And Egypt is behind you on the wall there. My mind was completely blown in Egypt because Egypt is not just statues. It's the story of Egypt for 5,000 years. And I think the guides in Egypt that live with you for two weeks and make you know every facet of their history. All of those wonderful, most wonderfully educated people in the world, about that particular part of their history. And they impart it to you. They engrave it on your soul. So now, whenever I see anything on television about Egypt, it's all old hat; been there, done that, know that. It's just revisiting an old friend. And I think that's a part of what education's all about. And I've just been blessed to have had all of these experiences and still been able to make, what I consider to be, major contributions to mankind. Story_ID: 14031 Speaker 1: What do you see for the future at this point for yourself? Speaker 2: For myself? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Oh, slowly becoming a vegetable and dying at some time, hopefully, before the process gets so far down. I have, my cousin who was with my mother [Cora Lee Brewer] when she made the fatal words to the Ku Klux Klan that got me kicked out of Alabama when I was four months old, is 95 years old and is living out here in Belhaven [Health-Care Retirement]. And I go out to see her at least once a week and carry her goodies to munch on. And we're past the point of our being able to talk much about old times, but I have her from a couple of years back on tape, asking about--when she had vivid memories of exactly what happened on the day that (chuckle) my mother, fortunately, who had a big mouth-- Speaker 1: And laughed at the Klansman who fell off of his horse? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. All of these things are just going now, and what I'm doing now is just keeping my family together and watching out for the kids, one of which is a mile and a half over here. The other one is in California and hoping that SBC [Communications] doesn't fire that one, and that the one out in California finally gets somebody to read her script and decide to make a movie. And meanwhile, she's working on my book, all of the scut work, reformatting it, putting in the preface, the footnotes, the index, that kind of stuff, weaving in my color photographs, which I have several dozen that I want to get into the book cause I have a good pictorial history of World War II from where I sat because I got myself made the unit historian so I could carry my camera. Speaker 1: And once again, what's the name of your book? Speaker 2: 'How I Won World War II and Three Race Riots.'..