 Story_ID: 572874 Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers. I will be the interviewer today. And this is Neculai Burghelea who will be the videographer today. And we will have you start by stating your full name and spelling your full name out. Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Gloria E.A. Toote, T-O-O-T-E [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]. Speaker 1: And the E.A. stands for? Speaker 2: I never say. Speaker 1: Ah, you never say. Speaker 2: However, it--the birth certificate--well, my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] gave me my father's mother's name for the E, it's a full name. And my father [Frederick Toote] didn't know that she'd given the hospital that information and when he filled out the birth certificate actual form, he put down the family name. Which, I didn't know until I went to get a driver's license at the age of twenty. And for the first time, I saw that I had another name. Speaker 1: So, your date of birth? Speaker 2: Nah, you're kidding (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Your place of birth? Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York], Harlem. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Twenty-ninth of November, '06 [2006] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the--and the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Harlem. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: Attorney, lecturer, writer, housing developer, real estate developer. There's a difference between the latter two. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we're gonna start with five pop culture type questions. Speaker 2: Oh, I did have a recording studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey], and a BMI [Broadcast Music Inc.] and ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers] music publishing company [Toote Town Publishing, Inc.]. I forgot (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 572875 Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: I'm not particularly fond of food. I like macaroni and cheese. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I love chitterlings, but I can't find them any more. Can't find good ones. Speaker 1: You love--well, I just had a whole batch down south for Thanksgiving (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh. I can't find them anymore. But you can't go wrong with good, good lasagna also. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Autumn. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: I love all colors, but preference would be, maybe, a nice blue, pastel blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or a nice vibrant red. One extreme to the other (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: I hadn't expected these questions. Favorite vacation--well, I have a vacation home in California. So I would have to say that, in the desert. It's so far removed from New York City [New York, New York] where I've lived all my life. And such an entirely different lifestyle. The weather is warm every day of the year, so I would have to say, um-hm, Palm Desert, California. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think I have a favorite. I really don't. Speaker 1: You have a mantra, something you repeat often? Speaker 2: Try not to be repetitious. I can't think of anything that's favorite. Story_ID: 572876 Speaker 1: We'll start by talking about your parents, and we'll keep--try to keep the sides separate so we can see how far back we, we can go on each side. So we will start with your mother's side. If you could give me your mother's full name and your mother's place of birth? Speaker 2: Lillie Tooks, T-O-O-K-S, Toote, T-O-O-T-E [Lillie Tooks Toote]. She got married, all of her handkerchiefs and initialed items, she didn't have to change anything. Born in Virginia, raised a year and a half old in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Heritage, of course, African American and Cherokee. Speaker 1: What about your (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) American Native Indian (laughter). Speaker 1: Native American. And what about her parents [Frances Tooks and Thomas Tooks, Sr.]? Your mother's parents, so your maternal grandparents. Did you have the opportunity to get to know them, to meet them? Speaker 2: Yes, they were both born in the South. The Cherokee side is my mother's father, my grandfather's side. And my mother's family goes back to Georgia, Macon, Georgia. Yeah, Macon Georgia. Speaker 1: So the Cherokee side, her father, was he full Cherokee? Speaker 2: No, he was not the Cherokee. It was his father or grandfather that was the Cherokee Indian, and he was full. Speaker 1: So how far back on that side of the family have you been able to trace? Speaker 2: Haven't. Speaker 1: You haven't. Okay. Speaker 2: I have a tintype of him, which I just gave to my niece [Ginger Ryan Solis] about a couple months ago. But it's a cherished part of our heritage. I can't trace it back, some of my relatives were trying so we could get some of that Indian gambling money, you know, for a casino, but it is something that most blacks today are not aware of how great the intermarriage was between slaves, and ex-slaves, former slaves and Indians. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about slaves in the family that have been passed down to you that you know of? Speaker 2: Not really. Story_ID: 572877 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your moth- that your mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] related to you about legends within the family that have, that have been passed down? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Bishop Tooks [ph.], who died, oh I guess now about twenty, twenty years ago at best. But it was one time one was one of the largest, the largest congregations in America. Not just in the black, but in America. And he was very influential in the South. Speaker 1: Now, Bishop Tooks was her-- Speaker 2: T-O-O-K-S. Speaker 1: Okay, that was her--what was he to your mother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would be, that was her cousin. Speaker 1: Her cousin. Speaker 2: Then we had W.A. Tooks. W.A. Tooks was her uncle who had a casket company in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. When I was a child, and I still suffer as an adult with some problems. As a child, I would go with my mother to his factory, and it was a factory, and they had all electric saws, everything was quite modern. And they would put me in a casket so I would not run around. And so I cannot stand crepe. Don't give me anything that is crepe. My mother spent a lot of money when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and bought me a crepe dress, and was very disappointed because I never put it on. But I have early recollections just glimpses every now and then, of being in one of those coffins. But in those days, blacks did not get insurance. We paid out ten cent a day, or twenty-five cent a week. We tried to have insurance, it was very hard. But we did want to bury our people in caskets. So as a consequence, it was really a credit business. I don't know how the devil he did it. But he was on Washington, Washington Street [sic. Washington Avenue], in Philadelphia, and there the railroad tracks are still there. The sodding came up to the side of his building, to the back of his building. This was a big business. And the caskets were actually unloaded from his factory onto the trains and went all across America. And he serviced black America with caskets. Up until about ten years ago, I would run into an old, old undertaker who would say, "Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], Toote." "Yeah, yes." "Where's the casket maker many years ago." And that would be on my mother's side, yeah. Story_ID: 572878 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many siblings did your mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] have? Speaker 2: Two brothers and no sisters. Speaker 1: So it was just the three of them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, I hesitated because her best friend and her bridesmaid at her wedding was like her sister. And was to me, my aunt, so you notice that--that's the black culture. I love her as much as if her genes were in my very body. And if her genes are not there, certainly her influence in my life is going to always be present. Speaker 1: What were their names? Speaker 2: That's Thomas Tooks [Thomas Tooks, Jr.], and George Edward Tooks [George Tooks]. Speaker 1: What is the origin of the name, Tooks? Speaker 2: You know, someone explained that to me and I don't even remember. Forgive me. I can't recall at all, but over the years, I've had a number of companies write and say, you know, we see the Tooks' family line is part of your heritage, and possibly you'd like a medallion or--and of course I ignore it. I don't know, I don't know. Story_ID: 572879 Speaker 1: Okay, so moving to your father's side of the family. Your father's full name. Speaker 2: Frederick Augustus Toote [Frederick Toote]. Speaker 1: And your father was born in--his birthplace? Speaker 2: Nassau, Bahamas. Speaker 1: So your father was West Indian? Speaker 2: Ah, yes. Speaker 1: So, which is why it was a big--well, one of the reasons he was a Garveyite, or was at least attracted to-- Speaker 2: Oh, I can imagine that that was a part of it, yeah. Speaker 1: So, let's talk about your father's history. He was a bishop. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: What do you remember of him? Speaker 2: Very dedicated human being. This summer when I arrived back in New York [New York], unfortunately I had to go to a funeral of a person that became like a member of our family, went to church with the Masters [ph.], a very giving lady, Carrie Goodwin [ph.], very caring. Community activist, involved, but very low level. Very influential-- Speaker 1: Here in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Here in Harlem. And worked in government, State of New York, no, City of New York, Department of Housing Preservation [New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development]. Very important for blacks, rent control. Not political, not political in any degree. But this woman saved more people than I can ever think of. I know of one instance where she had staff go into the archives and pull out records. And in those years, photographing, or mimeographing--mimeographing, it was a fiche, fiche something or other process, and it came out wet in those days. And the paper would crack on you, and know that in about five years it started to crack because it was a wet solution that you made your photocopies from. And she'd pull records out from years and years because in Harlem, to trace the lineage; meaning who has lived in the apartment, how long for rent control, is critical. Whether your rent's going to be five dollars a month, or five thousand can depend upon that. Very, very, very great woman. And my father counseled that lady when I was a little kid, sometimes I'd get jealous 'cause I'd see him sitting on the front steps talking to her. And every time she was honored at our church, she'd put down--when they say list family on this program--she'd list the Toote family. And he always said, "She's going to grow up to be a perfect young lady. And you should be like her." And she grew up to be a beautiful human being. And so, yeah, he would go out of his way to reach out to youngsters and to people. Story_ID: 572880 Speaker 1: I was in school and in those days you wore loafers, and you put a dime or--no a penny, a penny in them. And they're stitched around the top. And the stitching came out, and I said, "Daddy [Frederick Toote], I need a new pair of shoes." So he said, "All right. On Friday, your mother [Lillie Tooks Toote], over the weekend, your mother will take you shopping." Well, a little boy came down the street--now my loafers don't have stitching where the leather on the top is not holding tight. This kid came down the street with his foot flopping where the sole was off the shoe, and flopping as the kid walked. So my father told him to go get his mother. I can recall seeing a lady, stranger come by. I remember my father talking to her, I remember now, because it really was devastating to me what the consequences were. My daddy took a big needle and coat thread, black, and my shoes were brown. Black coat thread, and, I guess, he wasn't thinking, bless his heart. Oh, he didn't have any brown thread, and didn't ask my mother, 'cause she certainly had an electronic sewing machine and that was something. 'Cause sewing machines then, where we put your foot on a pedal and the pedal--get it to go up and down, and gave it motion. And he stitched my loafers and I went to school and the kids teased me. Oh, I can still remember that. They teased me and I cried, and I cried. I eventually got another pair of shoes, but it wasn't that week. It wasn't that week at all, but he was a very caring and giving person. Story_ID: 572881 Speaker 1: The church, the African Orthodox Church, was started with the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement. My father [Frederick Toote] was vice president. First, he was president of the chapter in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. That's where he met my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote]. She was secretary in the office. And then he became national vice president and went all around the country recruiting membership, almost lynched a couple of times, chased out of town a number of times. And I have letters, and I want to call them the archives. By now, they're in such condition, because I've not been able to preserve them, and I really wanted to have them archived. But it--I tried to find some students to do it, and the quality of work wasn't good, I abandoned the project. But letters from Truman [President Harry S. Truman] and FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], and whenever they came to New York [New York], or in particular, certainly if they came to Harlem [New York, New York], he would suddenly be notified that the president was coming in. He was president of the Interdenominational Ministers Alliance or association here in Harlem for a number of years. Quite a person. But a very caring, concerned individual and quite active in the community. One of his best friends was Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. who stayed here when he got indicted for income tax evasion to avoid the press who were clamoring all over for him. But he didn't stay here through my daddy, he stayed here through me. Story_ID: 572882 Speaker 1: How so? Speaker 2: Well, to make a long story short, when I went to college, I used to run, you know, went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Anything to get off campus. I was very, very young, sixteen. Nobody to play with, I wanted somebody to play with, I was even younger than sixteen, almost sixteen. I wanted somebody to play with. And they'd look at me like I was crazy, you know, the girls in the dorm, and I'd do all sort of mischievous things, like Vaseline on all the do- turn all the knobs. Lock the bathrooms. Lock them. From the inside, crawl out, take everybody's doorknob, put Vaseline on them, they couldn't get in their rooms. Little pranks, you know, anything. Toni Morrison was one of my classmates; Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was at school in divinity [sic.], Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]; Dave Dinkins wife [Joyce Burrows Dinkins] was in high school with me and a year ahead of me. In college, we'd squeeze in my dorm. But in any event, I had to have something to do with my time. My mind stays--I do three and four things at one time. And as a consequence, I've got to stay busy, so I'd go by his office and he was a great mentor to me. Very, a really, a real mentor. So we went in the--he had no place to go where they would not think to look for him. A member of his staff called the city [New York, New York], "Congressman wants to know whether he can stay with you and your family?" And he knew, you know, we had room. But the request came to me. I was very proud of that. And he owned a liquor store at the time, I was, back then, just starting to practice law. And he came and drank up all my liquor and never returned any of it. He was known for being frugal. Anybody who knows Congressman Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], very frugal man. Never had a broom, and certainly no mop. His staff had to lend the mop and the broom for when his apartments was going to be tidy in Washington [D.C.]. Very interesting man. But I spent a lot of time with him, and I'm indebted for the time that he did spend with me. Story_ID: 572883 Speaker 1: So, in the community, was your father [Frederick Toote] considered--looked upon as a leader? Speaker 2: Yes, very much so. Speaker 1: And as a child, were you able to--are you able to recollect some of the things he was doing within the community. Was he--some of the political things he may have been involved with? Speaker 2: Well, although he was a Democrat, just about then and now, the majority, the vast majority of blacks, African Americans are Democrats. But if there was a movement afoot, he was a part of it. If there was a need to protest, he was a part of it. The ability to be instrumental in getting the president of the United States his speech at the square, block and a half from here, that was his. Very much involved, very well known in the community. Very well known. Speaker 1: Do you remember anything at all about his relationship with Marcus Garvey? Speaker 2: No, no, no. That was many years before I was born. So, what I've heard is from him and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he tell you? Speaker 2: He didn't talk too much about it. Well, it was Colonel Julian [Hubert Fauntleroy Julian], I guess the reason it popped in my mind was Colonel Julian, he called the Black Eagle. Colonel Julian was one of the handsomest men I have ever seen in the world. Happened to be a black man from Jamaica [sic. Trinidad and Tobago] who was ammunitions person, for want of a better word. I don't want to use the word agent because an agent takes on a connotation of espionage and things of that nature. But he actually had a license. You must be licensed to sell ammunitions in America. This black man in the '40s [1940s] had a license to sell ammunitions abroad. And he armed Africa. He armed Africa. Well, in any event, Colonel Julian was part of the militia for the Marcus Garvey movement. The Marcus Garvey movement, anything out in the, I think the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] dedicates a month, sometimes a whole summer, just to photographs. I was trying to get my whole family to go in one year with my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote], and I couldn't get my sister [Frances Toote Robinson] together, I couldn't get my niece [Ginger Ryan Solis], and da-da-da. My mother passed, and we didn't do it. I finally said to my sister, "We're gonna go to the Schomburg." She said, "Okay." And we walked in and the first picture we saw was my father. First picture we saw was my father. But Marcus Garvey had--he, he--they knew how to organize. They really knew how to organize. Which Republicans don't (laughter). But in any event, they had a military arm. First of all, they reminded me to some degree of, I should reverse that. The Muslims, because they are so basically neat. The blacks who--the darks with the bowtie, the white shirt, going back to (unclear), the Fuller Company [Fuller Products Company], which is a black millionaire, that when I wrote for Time magazine, I worked for Time magazine as a writer, and they said, "We want to do a story on S.B. Fuller [Samuel B. Fuller]," I said, "I know him." And their eyes got big, but blacks didn't know the man was a billionaire. Speaker 1: He started off with shirts, didn't he? Speaker 2: Oh, he started off with combs. Shirts were too expensive, and you got to get people to sew them. He started out with combs, and little toiletries, and penny items and his people were very, very neat. The presentation was very professional, very polished, organized, and it put bread on an awful lot of tables, but-- Story_ID: 572884 Speaker 1: But now back to Marcus Garvey. He had this military element. They wore, think of World War I [WWI], when you think of your pilots, the boots that come up to almost the knee calf, the pants that--the pants sort of ballooned from the waist down to the knee. They were just, they were just beautiful to look at if you look at all the photographs. And at one time, I had them all. Had them all. And a friend of mine, when AP [Associate Press], or one of the major companies that did nothing but photos, news photos, was going out of business, a client and I bought them. We bought 'em all. And then I had another client that said, "Well, let me try to be responsible for the marketing," and as a consequence, I never got them back. Oh, that was my mistake, but I just--we had so many that truthfully, it was my way of really not having to warehouse them. That was penny wise and pound foolish. But Colonel Julian [Hubert Fauntleroy Julian] was part of the military brigade. Colonel Julian, the reason I find him so fantastic, was he during World War II [WWII], when blacks were put in the kitchen, went to Europe, and in World War I, and trained Norwegians to fly. They needed flight instructors, and no country had a great abundance of them. This is the beginning of flight. Julian was--Julian tried to fly before Lindbergh [Charles Lindbergh]. His plane crashed in the police station here at 135th Street, between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard] in the '30s [1930s]. And he was trying to fly across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean]. So you had people like that, of that era, that were just unbelievable. So he would tell me about them, and Julian and some of the others would come by and I would have a chance to listen to them and Julian, as handsome as he was, was as glib as he was handsome. And so he would really talk, on and on. And the stories that man would tell. It was just--for a little kid, I know my eyes had to get big, big, big. My eyes--and he lived in the Bronx [New York] when he died, he lived in the Bronx. About 160--I'd say about 165th Street. That little small, little narrow street. People don't even know it's there. You know, you can look right out on the Harlem River. He had a townhouse there. You'd walk into his vestibule and there were murals of his airplanes, his one prop airplane, and his goggles, and helmet, ah. Leather gloves. Those were the people--they had style and class. When you talk about Harlem [New York, New York], the old Harlem that people talk about and I see on television, that's not the Harlem that I grew up with. And you remember, I grew up in Harlem. Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about that. You were born in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]? Speaker 1: I didn't finish my father's [Frederick Toote] heritage (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh okay, okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Now, this is-- Story_ID: 572885 Speaker 1: Continuing to speak about your father [Frederick Toote]. Speaker 2: Well, my father was from Nassau, Bahamas. His father [Thaddeus Toote] was a wealthy businessman. My grandmother [Clarita North Toote] owned two thirds of Main Street in Nassau, Bahamas. Bless her heart. And she had a restaurant. The restaurant. My father's brother wanted to adopt me and did almost up until the death. He was solicitor general of Nassau, and was on his way to be knighted by the queen of England when he had a heart attack and died, and was never knighted. So, my father's side of the family, my mother's [Lillie Tooks Toote] side was quite capitalistic. They were farmers, but they had land. And if they were sharecroppers, they still had a lot of crops. Speaker 1: And this is in Virginia, or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Virginia (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in Virginia. Virginia. Born in Georgia, raised in Virginia, and then Philadelphia. Not really raised in Philadelphia, my mother, but Virginia. And the family moved, migrated from Georgia to Virginia. So if you go now to look for members of my family from her side, you're gonna find any, and we're a very small family. You'd find them, basically, close to Virginia. But my father's side, West Indian, Nassau, very prominent. My uncle's house, a great big house, white house sitting up on top of the hill. My father went to college in Florida. And then from there to various schools. He was brilliant. I still have his report cards, as we called them then, the documents, the grades. He made an A in geometry and Latin and Greek, oh, brilliant man. My daddy was brilliant. Story_ID: 572886 Speaker 1: And he read. Oh, he read all the time. And he had books all around him. Speaker 2: What did he read? Speaker 1: Everything. Everything. Just prolific reader. And he wrote extremely well. Still have people trying to buy his sermons, which I keep saying, "No, I'm going to publish." "Well you (unclear)." My life can't last but so much longer. So, unfortunately, a number of things I wanted to do, I couldn't do. And now I'll leave that up to an archivist, if I can ever find one. But--'cause the places that want to archive, may not have the same ideas that I have in my mind. But he was a very giving, giving person. And I would think that coming up so well--they were wealthy, but they were West Indians. And that's not said in a derogatory manner at all, in fact it's a rather positive manner as far as I'm concerned. But they knew the value of the dollar. They knew how to raise their children with respect and to aspire for responsibility, but certainly not to waste. So when my father went to St. Augustine [Florida], he took his pants, and he would take them and fold them up every night and put them underneath his cot. So that they would be creased. And he was--oh, yes, he was a very neat man. He wore the turned white collar. And when I graduated from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], he had on a morning coat. I couldn't believe it. I could not believe when I--I looked at my father and there he was. His friend [Love B. Woods] who owned a couple of hotels, and small hotels, biggest one we had was the Theresa [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York]. But he had the next--but if you aggregate, equal in size, aggregate his holdings. And he came down, he drove him down. And my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote], of course, we came down with the--we had a couple of cars coming down. I don't know how they got tickets. And, it's hard to, even now it's hard to get tickets to commencement. And he had on his morning coat. And it was his, it was not rented, it was not borrowed. It was his. Everybody looked and they said, "That's got to be Toote's [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote] daddy." (Laughter) Everybody knew Bishop Toote [Frederick Toote]. "That's got to be Toote's daddy." And it was my father. Story_ID: 572887 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was his [Toote's father, Frederick Toote] church? Was it here in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. The--his building burnt after his death (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the location of his building? Speaker 2: Which was, there's Wadleigh High School [Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York] at 114th Street. Two hundred block of 114th Street. Beautiful, beautiful building. We constantly got calls from various companies that wanted the stained glass windows. And even after his death, my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] was quite active with the church. She kept saying, "I know, I think we ought to do this. The kids, we're scared about the kids throwing rocks and da-da-da." I said, "But, you know," I would say, you know, "put some plastic in front of it so it doesn't get broken, but if you do that, you don't get the full aesthetic value. We just can't live in fear." I don't know why when I make these pronouncements that way, sometimes I'll--I have learned to regret them. Because the building burnt down. Kids playing with firecrackers on July 4th. And they threw them from the apartment building next door. Landed on the thatched, it had a thatched roof. Built like a church. This was not a storefront church or a building converted into a church. This was built as a church. Beautiful wooden pews and all. And the whole building burnt down. Beautiful, beautiful church. So, before he acquired that building, or the church acquired that building, they had a church that was frequented by Marcus Garvey, on 130--I let's see, had a building on 131st [Street], I had a building on 34th [134th Street], I had a building behind 3--that's the only way I can tell where my father's church is. In between two streets that I had buildings on. I had a building on 35th [135th Street], I had a, 34th, 32nd Street [132nd Street]. And that was a building that Marcus Garvey--and that one was knocked down. That building was knocked down. But originally in Harlem, all of our ceilings were tin. Especially the first floor. Tin--and that's decorative. That was the style. And so when he--they acquired the new building, he kept his offices there. Story_ID: 572888 Speaker 1: In fact, that's where he died. He had a heart attack. I'd just gotten a job with Greenbaum, Wolff and Ernst [New York, New York], one of the top law firms in the world. And my father [Frederick Toote] said I would never get the job, they weren't gonna hire a black, they certainly weren't going to hire a black woman, and I was too young. And I must admit, by the time you went through the interview stage, I thought I was very old, 'cause it just interview after interview. And I finally got my final interview with Morris Ernst [Morris L. Ernst]. I keep a photograph of him in my den. And what had occurred, was that a professor of mine at Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], they wanted to bring into the firm in property law, and he declined, reconsidered and declined, the position and therefore it was available. And that's what I--I'm going in not as a junior attorney, oh, god, of course I had my master's [degree]. And he said--and we were talking and we just hit it off and he said, "Have you ever ridden in a horse drawn carriage through Central Park [New York, New York]? You're a native New Yorker." And I said, "No." He said, "We're gonna go now, following this. We're gonna go have lunch at The Pierre [New York, New York] or the Ritz-Carlton [Ritz-Carlton Hotel, New York, New York], and we're gonna cap it off with that ride through Central Park." So I said, "Can I pick up the phone and call my father and tell him I have the job?" Now, why on earth would I want to, you know, go on a ride, and, I don't know what made my father be on my mind that much. Although, I did want to please him. And I picked up the phone and called, and my sister [Frances Toote Robinson] said he had just had a heart attack, (unclear) the rest of the office. And when I got there, his body was still warm. He was in one of those black bags, and I went--I grabbed it and I could feel the warmth, you know. So I didn't get to tell him, but I certainly got this, right after I got the job. But then, because we didn't expect my father to die, our family affairs were just in shambles. And the church was destroyed. And the church was a national church. And, uh, the pressure. The pulling here, the pulling there. I had my practice, I was doing a million things. And it took me, and I said, "Well, first thing," and it's always been, family. Family will always be first with me. So by the time I got the family affairs in order, my father must have thought he was going to live to be a million years old. There was no will, there was no nothing. I spent, on his casket, I spent eight thousand dollars. We're talking about in the late '50s [1950s]. Eight thousand dollars for a casket? And my uncle [Toote's maternal great uncle, W.A. Tooks] had a casket company. I know, I should have known better than that. I spent eight thousand on a casket. Water seal, air seal, I still have the key. (Laughter) The church loved him. He let, he let me do anything I wanted to do, and I was so distraught. I was absolutely distraught. At his funeral, it rained that night. We didn't have a church big enough, so we added a church at 116th Street, it's no longer there. It was formerly--it was huge, it was formerly a movie house, you know, so it had two stories, a balcony. And Adam [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was supposed to preach and he didn't, so Licorice, Reverend Licorice [David N. Licorice] who was his second at Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York]. It was a part of the funeral program. And I just could not believe that over two thousand people stood in the rain. Just stood outside the building. I can think of no greater honor for my father. I can think of no greater honor. But he was quite a man. Just literate, very gracious, very brilliant. Absolutely brilliant. Had a problem with me though (laughter), but he, he was brilliant. Story_ID: 572889 Speaker 1: Gave me a watch, my first watch. Speaker 2: How old were you? Speaker 1: About six, maybe seven. I guess I had it for about fifteen minutes. I took it apart to see what made it tick. Couldn't get over that (laughter). Now, how can I remember that? How can I--I can remember it, because he [Toote's father, Frederick Toote] could not get over it. First of all, he was thinking about his money; and secondly, you wear a watch. You don't go inside, you don't open it up and go inside. Speaker 2: So just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was--in those days, watches had a little hair, some of them still do. It's a very, very thin wire, but it was fine as the hair on your head. And it's part of the mechanism. And a little piece of, and I remember this, 'course I'll never forget how he fussed, and a part of it was sort of sticking out of the case. And that's what made, really made me open it. I never really got to explain to him, you know, about the hair, and I saw it sticking out and--but I sure opened that brand new watch (laughter). Oh, dear, let's go back-- Story_ID: 572890 Speaker 1: Well, you talked about being born in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So you knew the community of Harlem [New York, New York] as a very young child. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: So, what was daily life like in Harlem? Speaker 2: Rough. Speaker 1: Your very earliest memories? Speaker 2: Absolutely rough. Example--this is my class ring from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], which I'm proud of because my father [Frederick Toote] was rather frugal, so I had to design--I didn't have to, I designed it, and I got mine free. So I designed it. Now, this finger (gesture), my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] was in night school getting her high school degree. Which, in those days was the equivalent of a college degree many years ago. Boy, the high schools were good. And I was playing with my niece [Ginger Ryan Solis], with my cousin, whom I thought was my sister. I didn't know until I was thirteen years old that my sister, whom I thought was my sister, was not my sister, but was indeed my mother's best friend's child. My mother's best friend married her brother. When they got divorced, she came to her best friend to live. First, she sent her child, then she moved, and she became a part of our family. So, that was my sister. When she went out on a date she had to take me with her, I mean, I remember all that. But in any event, we're playing around, I got my finger caught in a chair. And I fractured it. They put a popsicle stick, you know, a popsicle, and gauze around it. What was Harlem like? What were our hospitals like? Take a look (gesture). I can bend--you know, I still, you may hear it as it caught. Now, now it'll sort of bend better. That's what Harlem was like. I can remember when my grandmother, who before she passed, came to live with us. And she had cancer. And one of the places that she was in, until my mother and father could get her moved. Will always be a desolate memory in my mind, that's just is chilling. On the East Side of New York [New York], really on the other side of the Harlem River [sic. East River], in the '50s [1950s] where we now have these glamorous houses called Roosevelt Island [New York, New York], were these--they weren't even cinderblock. Cinderblock might have been warmer. But cement buildings, no plaster except the original cement walls. No paint. The walls were gray. They weren't white, they weren't dirty, they were all gray to black. And in the room or rooms, 'cause they had several rooms in one great big complex, would be anything, from depending on which room you're in, fifty to a hundred cots. And this is where poor blacks and some poor whites, but not as many were sent to die. And that was many years ago. I wasn't even in high school, and I can remember that. So, oh, yes, I remember New York and I remember Harlem. Story_ID: 572891 Speaker 1: I remember, as I was saying before, how most of the housing was converted from a townhouse, which was one family occupancy, with maids' quarters always on the top floor, to SROs, single room occupancy. And there might be a bathroom every two floors, maybe every three floors. I was amazed to find houses in this block now, selling for, one has sold for 4 mil, $4 million. This block. Thirty-something thousand dollars when my parents [Lillie Tooks Toote and Frederick Toote] bought it. But again the mortgage was on there when my daddy died. And they were just private rooms. You had a room, you had a bed. If you were lucky, you had a sink that you could wash up in. But the toilet and the tub were seldom on your floor, but you certainly had to share it. That is that hay day in Harlem [New York, New York] they talk about in the days of the Renaissance [Harlem Renaissance]. It was a renaissance of the mind, a renaissance of the spirit and the soul. But not of the housing accommodations. Very, very poor. Nothing unusual for a mother, a father, and a child, maybe up to three children in one room. One room. Very, very difficult times. On Sunday, everyone went to church, just about everyone. And well dressed, clean. Oh, Sunday was a great day. It's like Easter to every--you know. We looked good on Sunday and the churches were packed. But because we made so little in income, that was all we could afford. I can remember, I have a friend now that I went to school with that lived down the street. And she has, one, two, three sisters, mother, and a father. Two rooms and a kitchen, and a bathroom. That's a lot. Now, two rooms, that's the living room, everything, you know. They just slept all over. So Harlem was highly congested. So much so that you had the problem in parking then that you have now. Because every--if one person per floor had a car, or if two people in the house had a car, so never any place to park. 'Cause we were always able to get rides, that we were staying out, we were staying outside in the street. Not me, but that was just part of the lifestyle. Tinkering on in the daytime. It's just like, you look at there, they show pictures of the areas in New York [New York]. And what did they do, the men do to occupy themselves. Well, basketball wasn't that big then. But everybody tinkered with the car, you know, and like that. And like I said, when I, in government, in New York, I'd go out to my car and it, fogged. There's somebody had slept in my car at night. No place to sleep. So they would sleep in someone's car, and then go into a friend's house and wash up and go to work. Story_ID: 572892 Speaker 1: Was the city different downtown or other parts of the city, did you feel a difference (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) City downtown, it's always different. If you're talking about for blacks versus whites? Speaker 1: That's what I'm talking about. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of course. It was never that severe. Never is. It is never as severe for white people as it is for blacks. They would not tolerate certain housing conditions for whites that they would allow, not a just were tolerated, but would allow for blacks. Oh, yes, yes. But it's a very proud community. And we have our highlights throughout the entire period. I don't remember the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], but I've certainly seen the products of the WPA, and I can remember as a child that my grandfather, my mother's father [Thomas Tooks, Sr.], believed in Father Divine [Reverend Major Jealous Divine]. Now, that's another millionaire. Entrepreneurship. It's not a--we like entrepreneurship. One of the finest resort, resort hotels, in America was in Brigantine [Brigantine Hotel, Brigantine, New Jersey]. Most people aren't aware of Brigantine. It's still not a name that rolls off the lips. Brigantine is in Atlantic City [New Jersey], really. It's just, it has its own little municipality. You have to go across the bridge to get there. And for people who know Atlantic City now, think in terms of high rise and, they just built that new one that begins with a B, that new casino. I'm going in the direction of Trump's castle [Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino, Atlantic City, New Jersey], but it's a very small, very affluent community in America. That's where he had one of his motels. And I can remember a psychology professor of mine at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], because when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], let me say. As a child, I had a--I had to--I had--I've got a mind that gets bored easily. And I don't like to do trivial things. I just can't help it. I love checkers. I love checkers, I play bid whist, but I don't like bid whist, I like whist. 'Cause as a child, my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] would visit her friends and put me in a drawer. They didn't have cribs and all these little portable strollers, put me in a drawer and they'd play cards. Yes, because there's a discipline to it. But there's no discipline, no. And with the computer age, I cannot lock myself to a chair. This is hard right now. Sitting in this chair, this long is, is, is tedious. As a lawyer, I'm accustomed because I have to do it in court, but, boy, when that day is over, I'm just about whipped if I've got to, really just sit there and I just look forward to those--when a juror asks to get up and go, yeah know. But, the place in, the professor I had at NYU would always say, "Peace," you know, if somebody said something profound. Psychology course. He'd say, "Peace." White guy. And something or other, he said something else in class. At the end, this is summer school. Every summer, I'd go to school. It was hard for me to get a job, 'cause I looked so young and I was so young. Then, if I did get a job, I got the job after school. He said, "I belong to Fath- ." I said, "Wait a minute. You say, peace. Where'd you get that from? Why you use peace?" He said, "I'm a member of the Father Divines." New York University, Greenwich Village [New York, New York], psychology professor. And getting back to--I digress with that darn thing on Father Divine. But my grandfather used to feed us at the Father Divine restaurants. There were a lot of them. Not one, not two, a lot of them. They sold some of the tastiest food you could ever eat. Real southern cooking. Not West Indian, to my knowledge. Everything I remember was southern cooking. Clean as a whistle and cheap. I mean, it was cheap enough to take the family for dinner and not be out, didn't dent your pocket. And that was--those were my fondest memories of my grandfather, taking us to dinner at Father Divine's. Story_ID: 572893 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? First grade? Speaker 2: Public education, New York City [New York, New York]. P.S. 119 [P.S. 92, Mary McLeod Bethune School, New York, New York], hundred-- Speaker 1: Which was located? Speaker 2: A hundred--130--that building on, okay--134th Street, see where my property is at, cause I bought in Harlem [New York, New York]. When I bought my buildings, I says, "I'm gonna buy them in Harlem, and Harlem was decrepit, and I'm gonna have some of the finest buildings in New York. And if anybody who moves into my building, they gonna have me as a neighbor. I will not rent to anybody unless I want them as a neighbor." It was rough, but I enjoyed every moment of it. But it was demanding at best. But back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) P.S. 119. Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 119 on 133rd Street, 134th Street, between 7th [Avenue] and 8th Avenue. Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School], which is now called, as much time as I spent with this man, Thurgood Marshall [Thurgood Marshall Academy for Learning and Social Change, New York, New York]. It's now called Thurgood Marshall. And that's on St. Nicholas Avenue between 136th [Street] and 135th [sic.], and then we lied. My father [Frederick Toote] didn't like the idea, but we lied, my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] loved the idea. And I went to George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] in the Bronx [sic.]. Now, George Washington High School, a few years ahead of me, is the Henry Kissingers. I will never understand why the Henry Kissinger's English cannot be understood when the darn man went to my high school. [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, a few years ahead of me, but he went to my high school. Excellent high school. It was a hard school to get into. So my mother--what they did with blacks, they gerrymandered us. To keep us out of their schools. People tend to live where they're comfortable, and you're most comfortable amongst your own. Now, your own might mean an economic strata, da-da-da, but a cultural strata, and cultural certainly can include color. So if you lived between da-da-da and da-da-da, you had to go to Wadleigh [Wadleigh High School for Girls; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York]. Now, Wadleigh was known for nobody ever graduating. Now, not that we didn't have, now we did have the school [J.H.S. 139, Frederick Douglass School, New York, New York] on 141st Street, Countee Cullen taught there. We have, I can't remember the name, but at one point it was, I believe all boys, it was out of my zoning anyhow. Because that's past 7th Avenue, now called Powell Boulevard [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. Eighth Avenue, now we call Douglass [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. It's not spelled like, for the Douglass, 'cause I was on the community board, only Republican, only lawyer, many a nights that I spent, sixteen, well, not nights, but sixteen hours a day on community work and for the community board. And the Douglass family would not let the city name it Douglass because 8th Avenue looked so bad. 'Cause we had all those abandoned buildings, so the family said no. Well if you know the Douglass family, the ones that I knew, because I knew a great-grandson, or a grandson, and he was quite a, quite an individual. Fred [ph.] lived over at the Lenox Terrace [New York, New York]. And, I mean, he took on Adam [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], he took on Tammany Hall. I mean, they are just--at the drop of a hat, they'd fight. It was like, they were born to be rebels. That's the only way I can explain it. They, I mean, no, we don't want that--, "Once you fix it up, yes." So what the mayor did was add an extra S. Family consent was not necessary. Frederick Douglass Boulevard. That's how it was done. Story_ID: 572894 Speaker 1: We were going to try to figure out-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Finish. Speaker 1: --yeah, you can finish. We were gonna try to figure out who the mayor was at the time that made the decision just to put another S on the end of Douglass [8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That would be during, I think, it was Beame; Abraham Beame [Abraham D. Beame]. Speaker 1: And what was your relationship with him? Speaker 2: Well, he was a Democrat, so I had none. Speaker 1: Okay. You had none. All right. So then, going back to--we were talking about you getting your school, early school years. In elementary school at P.S. 119 [P.S. 92, Mary McLeod Bethune School, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh, I was saying that they lied, my parents [Lillie Tooks Toote and Frederick Toote] had to lie to get me into George Washington [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York]. So--and I was talking about the housing condition of blacks. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: So my mother's best friend, well one of her best friend's, husband was a superintendent of a building that had white tenants. Superintendent lives in the basement, white tenants' address. So I used that address at 152nd [Street] or--street goes this way, 52nd Street, between Amsterdam [Amsterdam Avenue], and I think it's kind of--or whatever it was. (Unclear) between Amsterdam and Convent [Avenue], and that became my address for high school. We had to lie to get me into George Washington High School. Had I gone anywhere else, I would not be sitting here with you now. Story_ID: 572895 Speaker 1: When I was in junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York], I was--I don't want to say a science genius, but I was good in science. And I was slated for The Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York]. I was gonna be a doctor, and thank you God, thank you God. But it was an experience that children should not have to encounter. I'm making all--not all A's in all courses. I'm making A's in courses I like and courses I don't like, I slough. So I don't want any further in math, I'm good. I'm bad, but science, crackerjack. I had a history teacher who sits there every day writing love letters to her boyfriend. No, she's a substitute for the science teacher who became ill who was scheduled to teach. For one year, I had a history teacher who knew nothing about science. For one year, the board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education] made no effort to replace her, and she sat there every day and gave us twenty pages to read. Well, heck, I'm a speed reader. I was a speed reader before people were talking about speed reading. So I read my twenty pages and mischief, you know. I was--she almost got into trouble 'cause she wanted to hit me with a ruler. And the students had to stop her because my seat was right in front of her desk. 'Cause it was science. So I wanted to be right up front, I wanted to see everything. And I'd sit there and hum. Her boyfriend's name was Johnny [ph.]. (Sings) "Oh, Johnny, Oh, Johnny, how you can love." Very soft, softer than that, much softer than that. Only folks, kids close to me could hear. "Oh, Johnny, Oh, Johnny." Give me that exam, I read my twenty pages, so I wanted to make my grade. And one day she just, I don't know what was wrong with her. But she got up with her ruler. She was going to hit me. And the other students stopped her. So that ended my career in science, because I needed that last year of junior high to prepare me to pass the test. Very difficult test for The Bronx High School of Science. Later in life, I found out I can't stand blood. That's number one; and number two, I most certainly wouldn't have been a surgeon; and number three, most of your finest doctors don't live long. They save their patients, but with each patient that they save, they give a part of themselves and they die considerably younger than anyone else. So the Lord, I hope he knew what he was doing when he sent me in another direction. Story_ID: 572896 Speaker 1: My father [Frederick Toote] always thought in terms of law. But he thought in terms of international law. And when the UN [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] opened, he was always running back and forth to the UN, and he begged me to go into international law, and I find it dull. Absolut--to sit there and hear people yipper-yapper, yipper-yapper all day long. To accomplish so little, petty politics, grass, corruption, little achievement, teas, luncheons; everything I abhor. So to placate him, I went and got a graduate degree [from Columbia Law School, New York, New York]. Once I got my law degree [from Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and I was going to court, I'd walk into the courtroom and be so happy, I'd look on the calendar and I'd see my cases, number one, number two, number three, oh, to my clients, "We'll be out in no time." It's nine o'clock in the morning, at 3:30 your case is getting called. Get up before the judge, in the regular calendar call, they call me. Judge says, "We don't take secretaries." I say, "I'm not a secretary, your honor." "We don't take secretaries." "I am not a secretary, your honor." Now, they didn't have many women lawyers, women, and I'm black. By the time they'd check with the judicial department, and they didn't have computers then where you could go look on the computer screen. You gotta make a phone call, they gotta go look at books, then they gotta put it back on the calendar. My cases were always the last cases to be called, so that's why I went to grad school. It placated my father. He never knew why I did it, but I said if it make him happy, it'll give me something to do with my time, because I'll be disbarred soon. I am not--I can't take this any longer. I cannot have my clients standing around here all day; it is not their fault. And I can't be patient any longer. By now, these people ought to know that there's a young black lady in the building coming in frequently. And I--at my--and some of them were doing it intentionally and I--I'm not--I can't take it, I, I, no. God has been good to me because I will not allow you to discriminate against me, to abuse me, or to abuse even a stranger. I'm stupid enough (laughter). If I'm not careful, I will jump to the defense of a total stranger I do not know. So I could not be in that kind of a situation. It, it, no. Back to school for me. Back to school with a full thesis. Full thesis to occupy my time. Story_ID: 572897 Speaker 1: So when you were at George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York], were there teachers there that mentored you, were there any people there that you looked up to? Speaker 2: No. Best teacher I can recall, and I know that my friends all tell me about, and I know the teachers they're referring to that we had in Harlem [New York, New York], that were so good to them, and that taught so well, and we didn't have that many black teachers, so you all know who they are. None of them reached out to me. And I guess it's because maybe I was a little precocious. I would not, you know, I mean, I was just not--I was a, I was well mannered, quite clean, properly dressed. In those days in the beginning, you had to wear the mini blouse, white blouse, blue tie, and blue skirt, which I have no problem with. I certainly prefer that than to having some kids come well dressed and other kids looking like in tatters. High school, you wear--junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York], you wear whatever you wanted to. But I had no one teacher that really reached out for me. I had a white teacher called Hass, H-A-S-S, world. Hass who pulled me from the school play, that I had the lead role because she didn't--she really didn't like me. She wanted--she didn't want to give me the role as I can recall, now that you're talking about elementary school [P.S. 119; P.S. 92, Mary McLeod Bethune School, New York, New York]. She didn't want to give me the role to begin with. But I had one of those memories that was impeccable. Even now, I reminded somebody the other day that said I had the memory of an elephant. As I get older and older, Alzheimer's starts, maybe rear its ugly head in a few years. I'm still gonna have a great memory. It's gonna be at best ahead of everybody else. And so she, she pulled me from the school play, and that, that let me know that if people didn't like you, they could hurt you for no reason. Now, that's the reason--that's why I will always remember. I did really nothing wrong. I did have a, sort of a--she might have thought a haughty attitude for a black female child. But I was my father's [Frederick Toote] child. We had a black Jesus on the wall in my family, all of my life. His hair was like sheep's wool, his skin the color of clay, so I know who I am. And I think this sort of bothered--now, that's elementary school. Story_ID: 572898 Speaker 1: Junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York], and I think her name was Simmons [ph.], another white teacher, but she liked me. She really, really liked me. And she was also a guidance counselor, but her greatest advice to me as my guidance counselor was to become a dietician. And I said, "No, I'm gonna be a doctor." 'Cause I'm in junior high, so I'm thinking in terms of Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York]. Then I'm starting, you know, I'm seeing how my future, all of a sudden is getting shattered in front of me. I can see that test for The Bronx High School of Science is hard at best for a minority, as are most generalized tests. 'Cause it's cultural. It's a cultural bias. It's a bias. It may not be fully intended, but it's built in. And I, even then as a child, could see if I didn't stay on my toes, I wasn't gonna pass, pass that. And she told me I should be a dietician. So I remember her, but she was very good to me, and she was very understanding. She was extremely understanding. And then there was one teacher that the kids were throwing snowballs at, and I told them to stop, so they beat, they beat me up. Story_ID: 572899 Speaker 1: And I got my best friend in junior high school [Junior High School 136, Harriet Beecher Stowe Junior High School, New York, New York], she passed a couple of years ago. But that was my--and we went to high school [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] together, and I took some of her Regents Exams [Regents Examinations]. (Laughter) My Margaret [ph.], Kiki [ph.], I won't give the last name. Oh, boy, that was--that was--she had the shape of a Coca-Cola bottle, you know, when Coca-Cola comes in a little bottle. And she always wore Capezio shoes. They were not Capezios on shoes, they were ballet slippers in the dead of winter. That's what she wore as a student, and the boys loved her. Well, of course, in those days, elementary school and junior high school were boys and girls, separate. But she was popular. And then in high school she was popular, and for some reason, Kiki was--just liked me. And I couldn't understand why. My father [Frederick Toote] sort of had his eyebrow raised, and, of course, Kiki's mother was the Daughter Elk [Daughters of the Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World]. The Daughter Elk was a big elk, and then she was the daughter of a Mason, and you know. And so she was involved in the community, an organizational woman. But Kiki, is not like her sister, was a lot, she's got a sister older than her just as meek, and mild, and sweet, and just huggable. And Kiki was vibrant, and loud, and full of life. And I--boy that was, that was a good person to have for a friend. She got me a boyfriend. The guy was shorter than me, but he belonged to a gang. So you want to know what Harlem [New York, New York] was like. You couldn't walk up and down the street, certain streets you could not walk up and down even as kids because of gang affiliations. So my friend, Kiki, had to get me a boyfriend 'cause she wanted me to--I don't know. She didn't live in that area 'cause in the 30s between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th [8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard], that gang was--but she thought I needed, and she and I, we used to play with all our friends there. And I needed a boyfriend, and she brought me this little, little guy shorter than me, and I was always short. But that was my friend, Kiki. Story_ID: 572900 Speaker 1: Harlem [New York, New York] was a very dangerous, difficult place to live in from people sleeping in your car, from people breaking into your car, with the syndrome of the haves and the have nots. Of the drugs, there going from marijuana to (gesture)--of the destruction of our system and we had a system. The number bankers and their people, their aides, their soldiers were like--folks looked out for the people in the community. The little people. Christmastime, Thanksgiving. I remember bankers run up and down the street with chickens, turkeys, and the yams, the whole meal. You know, what did they do? The government took it over. Now, you got bingo, whatever these little cards are. They won't even buy one. 'Cause all they did was just knock out the black entrepreneur. I can remember when I wanted to learn golf, and the only reason I learned golf was because a friend of mine from college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was on the cover of Time magazine--no, Life magazine, the year I graduated, 1954, from college, from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And Wilson [Wilson Sporting Goods Company], a big golf company then, gave her a full set of clubs. And she said, "Oh, Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]." Any college, anybody from college called me Toote. "Toote, you gotta get a set of clubs." Well, not only was she my friend, she was one of my first clients. And for a while, my contracts were taught at NYU School of Law [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] for the music industry. And my contracts were sold at Pasintino, P-A-S-I-N-T-I-N-O, I believe is how you spell it--drugstore in Tin Pan Alley. In those days, we didn't have form books, so you would get a contract, and retype it taking out the name of the parties and, therefore, little small companies, or individuals, would go down to Tin Pan Alley and buy a quote (air quotes), form. I'd like to say (air quotes), Toote contract. So how I really learned how to play golf was from my friend. When she got the clubs, said I should learn, and so I got the clubs. And she, she was my, my running buddy. I got the clubs, but there was one man, oh, he was dapper. You know, how a man knows how to buy the right clothes that fit his build and he's just dapper, and he played golf. All the guys, the big number--the higher, echelon number guys--not the big ones, not the, not the ones with the cigars now, but the, their lieutenants. All like, when Malcolm X, when he was fooling around with those folks, and he was fooling around with the drugs mostly, not the number folks. They, they all had their young lieutenants that they picked the brightest. They really did, they picked the brightest. This guy made his living by being at a phone, it didn't matter which phone, every day to get the results from the racetrack to call it in to the number bank. And then we go on with our golf. And he is the one that would take me out and play golf with me, 'cause you didn't have that many people who could afford golf. And who, and who could play golf in the daytime. The lawyer even scheduled your cases da-da-da. So it's hard, it's hard. Story_ID: 572901 Speaker 1: Whose decision was it for you to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Now, that's a long story. I wanted to go to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because my boyfriend lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (laughter). In Philadelphia, my grandmother--let me tell you about my grandmother. My grandmother had a bakery. Tooks bakery on Grays Ferry Avenue. Speaker 1: And this is your mother's mother? Speaker 2: My mother's mother. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name again? Speaker 2: Tooks, Frances Tooks. Tooks bakery. Tasty bread [Tasty Baking Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] tried to buy her recipe for rolls and cinnamon buns for years, she wouldn't sell it. Big, took up a whole city block. She was big. When the bread came out the oven, the men had the great big wooden, you know, and put it on this machine, and it was wrapped in paper with her name in it that you could see through the paper. Hello. I'm a little kid. I'm running around, sleeping in caskets. I got my mother's uncle [W.A. Tooks], casket company. My grandmother, big bakery. Ain't no, nothing around unless you compare it to, like a small Wonder Bread bakery, you know. Big, she made rolls, cinnamon rolls, bread, cake, pies--and you could smell it for blocks away. And people from Philadelphia would say, "I remember my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] grabbing us on Thanksgiving or Christmas morning. "We gonna, we going to Miss Tooks, gonna get some hot rolls." It was big stuff, very big stuff. Now, how did I digress into that? Story_ID: 572902 Speaker 1: Well you--she [Toote's maternal grandmother, Frances Tooks] was involved in getting you to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, okay. Speaker 1: You wanted to go to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you had a boyfriend there. Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah. I wanted to go to Temple 'cause my boyfriend, my five years of age first kiss, lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My father [Frederick Toote] did not like the idea. My communications with my father were rather unique because I had my father and I had my uncle. My Uncle Hexton [ph.] was really was not my uncle, but in my family, older people even if they were first and second cousins were called aunt and uncle. (Points off camera) So I just saw my niece [Ginger Ryan Solis] peek her head in here (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll just tell you that hasn't changed today, because when I'm in Mississippi, I'm Uncle Shawn [Shawn Wilson] to everybody (laughter). Speaker 2: I think it's lovely, and I don't know why we don't do it anymore. Speaker 1: I don't mind it either. Speaker 2: I don't know why we don't do it anymore. But, getting back to why Howard. My father did not like the idea. Now, I could talk to my Uncle Hexton, who was a labor man. I mean, he was an officer of organized labor. He had a new car, a Packard [Packard Motor Car Company], every two to four years, he had a new car. He lived in Brooklyn [New York] in a townhouse. Yes, I could talk to him, and he loved to talk. He talked for hours. And he'd like, "I'm going down to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and I'm going to stay," and blacks weren't allowed to stay at the hotels, "but I'm going to stay at the boardwalk. I'm gonna, you know." And he stayed at the white hotels 'cause he was union. And I saw (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he dark-skinned or light-skinned? Speaker 2: Ahhhh-- Speaker 1: Or it didn't even matter because-- Speaker 2: A little bit darker than me. A little bit darker than me. Speaker 1: But it didn't matter because he was union. Speaker 2: Oh, he was union. That, that was the only exception. That's like I had, digressing again, a cousin whose husband was almost deported because they thought that he was an African--and not an African--African Muslim prince. And so the state department [U.S. Department of State] had him, my cousin, and the whole total was eighteen people in Florida about to be deported back, when finally her father got the government to understand that this man was not a prince, but was from the United States of America. And that my cousin lived in Philadelphia. But he read Hebrew, and his children do, they're my age. He read Hebrew as well as anybody born in Israel. He was a practicing Jew, a real Hebrew. He raised his children in a Hebrew family, and we're talking now about in the '40s [1940s]. Late '40s [1940s], after World War II [WWII], or shortly thereafter. He thought he had enough of Jim Crow, and he was going to take his wife-to-be to where he knew was the promise land. And he didn't have any money to do it with, he was a brilliant talker and talked his way--they had him in this white hotel, they threatened to burn down the hotel. The white people were so angry. Oh, my family tells this story. They were so angry, they almost burnt down the hotel. They came with, you know, they came with the lights with fires on them, and all. They had to protect them. Speaker 1: What hotel? Where was this? Speaker 2: This is in Florida. Speaker 1: In Florida, okay. Speaker 2: It was in Florida. And this was a hotel where you put dignitaries before you deport them, because he was non-American and didn't have credentials to be here. They had all of his harem, they were all women. What a remarkable family I have, remarkable family (laughter). Oh, I love that story. But anyhow, how did I get--okay, Temple. Story_ID: 572903 Speaker 1: So I was going to go to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I did more talking to my Uncle Hexton [ph.] than to other folks. On long stretches, Uncle Hexton would come over and we would--he would talk. But it was interesting. I knew everything about the unions. I almost went into labor law. And he would talk for hours at a stint. Whereas, with my father [Frederick Toote], it was--everybody pulled at him. Everybody pulled at him. He gave me as much time as he could, but was never enough for me, and I still would have liked to have more, and I think he could have coughed out a little more, but he just spread himself as thin as he could for everybody. Everybody had a piece of him. So my conversations with my father were to the point and succinct. We didn't do a whole lot of talking at the dinner table. It was not a place where you talk. And if you do, you talk about world events, things of that nature, not personal matters. So he and my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] on the front steps of this house and it, before Labor Day, just before Labor Day. And so--now, I'd applied to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] and a few other places, and Temple. And he says, "When are you gonna come up with the money for Temple?" Well, I had to have the money if I was going to go to Temple. They weren't giving blacks scholarships in those days. And like I said, my grades, be A here, and a B there, and a C there, you know. All depends on who the professor was and what the subject was. They're talking and my mother--I hear my mother say something, I don't know what it was. I didn't go outside. I heard my father call me, he called me, I moved. First of all, there's--he had beautiful speech. He wrote--well, he and my mother wrote very well, their penmanship was just absolutely beautiful. But he had that Oxford accent, and he came from a well to do family. So he spoke nothing like Colonel Julian [Hubert Fauntleroy Julian], they spoke excellent English, you know, (pronunciation) schedules, I can't even say it, not (pronunciation) schedule, you know. And he said, "Where are you going to school?" And I said, "Well, I'm going to go to City College." Well, it's right across the street, right up the hill through the park. "And what are you majoring in?" "Advertisment." Well, the same way your eyebrows went up, his eyebrows went up. This was in the '40s [1940s]. He says, he said, "Do you get a degree in advertising?" I said, "No, Daddy, you get a certificate." He didn't say anything, got up, came inside, went to his office, and then later on, Mama and I heard him down in the basement. We didn't know what he was doing. He came and got my mother, he said, "I've emptied all my stuff out of the steamer chest. Clean it." Married to a West Indian. She understands that West Indians are very disciplined, especially, there must have been a tone. Boy, next thing I know she's got a bucket, and she's down in the basement cleaning this steamer chest. And long story short, this is the weekend of Labor Day. Between my father-- Story_ID: 572904 Speaker 1: And to digress a bit, I did not know Congressman Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] on, like a, peer. Never peers. However, as a child, I would go to Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] for church, because the folks at my father's church were always looking at me and they expecting--and I was a precocious child. You never knew, I was disciplined, but I also said what I wanted to say in a very ni- never rude. But I was free thinking, and so my daddy [Frederick Toote] knew, let her go to Adam. Let Adam look out on her. And I know that ministers do this. They'll let their kids go to a friend's church. Don't put them under the peer pressure of their church. So I went to Abyssinian for Sunday school and Adam had a youth forum. It was marvelous, learn--now, you asked me about my teachers. They weren't in public ed, no. That youth forum was marvelous. It was unbelievable. He had some of the most renowned people from New York [New York], or who came to New York and travelled to speak before a scheduled event. In other words, we met every just about four Saturdays out of the week, and he wasn't there every Saturday. But it was well structured, sanctioned by the church, everything printed, everything was neat. It was-- organizationally well run. And there were certain lieutenants and I was one of them. So I would imagine that between that school play that the lady pulled me out of, she gave me another role in it, in the elementary school play [at P.S. 119; P.S. 92, Mary McLeod Bethune School, New York, New York]. She didn't take me totally out of the play. But she gave--but I had the lead role and she gave me another role. And then I was thinking about Miss Hass, tell you one other thing about public school and how children can be hurt. When they said--when graduation was going to take event from public school and the war [World War II, WWII] was on, they wouldn't tell the parents exactly when for fear. Bombings, and we never had a bomb in New York. But in any event, so my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] would do my hair every day, and that white school teacher had the nerve to comment to a little kid in the fifth grade, "Hm. Your mother's trying to give you Shirley Temple curls." I remember that from elementary school. Now, back to Adam-- Story_ID: 572905 Speaker 1: Now, where was I (laughter)? Speaker 2: We-your, your father [Frederick Toote] told your mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] to clean out the steamer and she-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) went to clean it out. Speaker 1: So my father called--I was thinking Congressman Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] then was Congressman Powell, yeah, and he was a very close friend of my father's. Very close. My father called him, Adam. I never called Congressman Powell, Adam. Now, in my senior years, I can do so. I keep a picture, signed picture of him, up on the wall. He called the congressman, and between the congressman calling the president [Mordecai Johnson] of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and the dean of admission, and a few other folks, my daddy had my mother and I, within twenty-four hours, this is Labor Day weekend, on a train from New York [New York] to Washington, D.C. No new clothes, no new nothing. Clothes washed and ironed and packed. And, I think it was for punishment. The train pulled over to a siding for four hours. It took us something like eight hours to finally get there. I won't ever forget that. Oh, because the trains made a lot of stops in between New York and Washington. But this train pulled over on a siding for a couple of hours. Story_ID: 572906 Speaker 1: I want to ask you two things. Did Washington [D.C.], when you arrived, feel like the South? Different than New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. I made the mistake of--two ways. Made the mistake of going into Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company]. We had a Woolworths on 125th Street. We had marches with Congressman Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], and my father [Frederick Toote] to tell them, you have a Woolworths here, and yet, it's segregated. The lunch counter was segregated. Even in Harlem [New York, New York], the white folks come in, came in, they tell you, "Move down." They tell you in a minute, "Move down so that some white store owner or somebody could sit down." Oh, and we got inferior goods at the Woolworths, and the other Woolworths wouldn't let us in at all. So I went into a Woolworths--by this time, we had marched in Harlem. We can sit in Woolworths. And I went up with some classmates [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], because in those days, you had to travel in packs, like dogs-- Speaker 1: And you had to travel in packs because? Speaker 2: Girls. Girls, you know, you had to live in the girls' dorm, no boys in the dorm, you had to be in the dorm by five o'clock, and it was just horrible. But if you went in a pack, or with a group and a mentor, which is a senior classmate assigned to younger students, freshman and that--you got a little stipend for college that way, you could go in town. And this Woolworths was with (unclear), I will never forget it. I went and ordered a hotdog, and, you know, New Yorkers, we walk up and we stand a lot. We naturally stand a lot. Doesn't mean we don't want to sit when we want to sit. We reserve our rights. I ordered a hot dog, woman brought it. By this time now, I'm sitting on a stool. Not a chair, a stool. Woman said, "Well, you have to stand up to eat the hot dog." Now, this is 1949. The fall of 1949. Story_ID: 572907 Speaker 1: When I went to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], or when I was in undergrad school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], when you go to get a cab, and you're at a train station, this depot, you had long lines of people. I can't stand lines, first of all, I'm short. I'm delighted to have gone to George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York], rather than the school downtown, because small as I was, every time I got on that train to go down to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] over the summers, the trains would be packed, and I was never on my feet. I was always being held up in the air by the people around me. Also from childhood, we were talking about hospitals before in Harlem [New York, New York], I have always had a nasal, sinus condition. And went through umpteen experiments, being black, part of an experiment up at New York-Presbyterian Hospital, Columbia [Columbia University Herbert and Florence Irving Medical Center, New York, New York], the one on St. Nicolas [Avenue]. Half of the people died, the other half of the people have thyroid conditions, those that didn't die, I'm one of the few that had no negative effects. They gave me two radium treatments too many, and left the rods up my nose. Two rods that looked like knitting needles up my nose. They gave me two treatments too many. When you, when you talk about being black and what you have to experience, and that was at a tender age. I was a teenager then when that darn radium treatment took place. But when going down to NYU in the summer, I could smell the food. Well, they burnt every hair out of my nose. So, if I'm around a germ, it will permeate me. I have nothing to filter dust, or germs. I have to be extremely careful. But I can't be careful. I've tried wearing the gauze on a plane, and I'm too self conscious for that. I can, I cannot do that. Story_ID: 572908 Speaker 1: This thing of, of standing in line, no. Get a seat, find out where the, the stairs are, where the front of the terminal is, plan it so you're the first one out at the cab. I do that all the time at the airport. Never do I have to wait for a cab. People say, "Oh, what about the line at the airport, something when you arrive, da-da-da." Oh, no, no. Even if I don't know where I'm going, even if I'm going to be picked up, or I'm certainly going to find out where should I go, how should I get there, to make certain that I get a cab quickly. I'm not gonna fly someplace and then stand around twenty minutes for a cab. That's contrary to my way of thinking. So--where was I? Speaker 2: Well, you were at a long line. You'd gotten in a line. They had long lines at the bus stop. Speaker 1: Oh, oh, I would always be at the front of the line at the Union Station [Washington, D.C.] for my cab. Always. I was got a two, three, four, five; certainly, not more than six. Until finally, it made no sense because I would have to wait until all the white people got cabs. Even if they came up long after I was on the line. Let's say I'm on the line for ten minutes, and you're white and you walk up for a cab, I've been standing here for ten minutes. Now, all the white folks that got off the train in a timely fashion, that's one thing. But somebody who lagged around to make a phone call from a pay phone or stopped to get their luggage, they walk up, they got a cab before me. Want to talk about discrimination in Washington [D.C.]. Oh, I could write a book on that. Oh, I can write a book on that. No matter where you went, you had black cab companies, you could get a cab. Well, it helped black entrepreneurship, but that wasn't the reason why. 'Cause white cabs wouldn't come where you were. They would not come where you were. You took public transportation, or you walked, or you called Reed [Reed's Cab Service] or one of the black companies. And discrimination, all over the place. The norm was discrimination. Story_ID: 572909 Speaker 1: So at, on campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], how was it dealt with? Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have it on campus. Speaker 1: I know you didn't have it on campus, but how did they prepare you to deal with-- Speaker 2: They didn't. Speaker 1: --life off campus? Speaker 2: They didn't. (Laughter) Sadly enough, that's a good question. And it seems to me in the indoctrination program for the freshmen, sometime should have been spent on that. I'm sure that they told, told us not to start a riot. But no, no, no sensitivity training on that whatsoever. And, of course, the other students were much older than I. I think Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was about one of the few people, because Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was much older than I. Andy Young is maybe four years older than I [sic.], because he was in school in divinity [sic.]. But, but, basically when blacks, and even now to some degree go to college, we either go later than white students because we're trying to get enough money to get our wardrobe together, or housing allowance, or books, or our parents don't know the system to know what to do with that child whose birth date is on the cutting edge. That they will have to wait one solid year of their life, running around, playing with little toys in the living room when they should be in elementary school because their birthday starts on a arbitrary date in December. School starts in September. You gonna hold a kid up from December until the next September to go to school? White folks don't tolerate that. And so if there's a two or three month short form, they get in. Not black folk. Not even now. Speaker 1: Well, my mom, quick story, changed my birth certificate for that very reason. Speaker 2: See? Speaker 1: I was born in '66 [1966] in January, she had to change it to make it look like 12/18/65 in December [December 18, 1965]. Balled the certificate up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God bless your mama. Speaker 1: --made it look all wrinkled, so I went to school at five as opposed to having to wait until I was seven. Speaker 2: Smart lady. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You saved one whole year of your life. Story_ID: 572910 Speaker 1: So when you get to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] had--did you have any other discussions about your father [Frederick Toote] about what your major was going to be? Because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah. Well, law, you know. Speaker 1: So by then, advertising was out-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because by then he was talking law. My [paternal] uncle's a lawyer, well solicitor general, so you know, had a big staff and everything. My father had also entertained going into law school when he went into divinity [Philadelphia Divinity School; Episcopal Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But he had considered going into law school. But, of course, he's thinking in terms of international law. So I major in government, which is pre-law, slash drama, but he didn't know about the drama. And the grades were great in both because I liked them both, and I did very well in the pre-law. Very, very well. I'm walking across campus one day, and the dean--okay, I was very active in the drama department. Roxie Roker who used to play in 'The Jeffersons,' that was--okay. Roxie Roker was with--was at Howard ahead of me. They had gone to Europe. They'd toured the Howard Players [Howard University Players]--we had a head of drama department, we had Anne Cook, we had Owen Dodson, we had James Butcher [James W. Butcher], we had renowned people recognized by drama critics in the theater world, and we had outstanding graduates from that department. So the Howard Players would be touring Europe for the first time with some plays. And when they came back, lo and behold this little girl in her sophomore year, became president of the Howard Players. And starring in a Greek tragedy called, 'Alcestis' [Euripides] that I die on stage (laughter). Now, I'm in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] by now when I die onstage. But in any event, I'm going to go back to the dean. I'm walking across campus, and the dean of the Howard University law school stops me and says, "How are you doing Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]?" "Oh fine, dean. How are you doing?" Because I'm--I was very good in government. I loved the head of the department. He was--I had such great, brilliant teachers. Story_ID: 572911 Speaker 1: And my godmother, whose--that's a painting of Eudora Webster [Eudora Williams Webster], I called her my godmother. She took me under her wing and she had a house on 4th Street. She was the wife of Ben Webster, the jazz musician. She had a degree in education, a degree in math, graduate degree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had she gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 1: She went to different schools. She went for education was Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], her degree and master's in math, and a law degree. She then went into the federal government as a grade four, and stayed there as a grade four until she retired. And you want to know about discrimination, she left the federal government as a grade four. She reached the--in government, you have tiers, you know, that you get increases in your pay. It was very hard to jump the grades, very hard. In any event, at her house, the scholars of Washington [D.C.] hung out. Her floors, I never will forget. On the first floor, the floors were checkerboard, black and white, black and white, black and white. And I would--and she'd say, "Now, let me tell you Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], you will sit here and you will listen. You will not open your mouth. Now, if that suits your fancy, young lady." She wasn't that much older than me. Maybe twenty, thirty years, you know. "That suits your fancy, you're welcome. But I don't have children around me to begin with. I don't have any children. I don't have any nieces and nephews. Now, if you can do that, fine." I said, "Okay, I can do that, any idiot can do that." And I would sit there, and oh--I don't have that now. I don't see that kind of brilliance now. Speaker 2: Who were some of the people? Speaker 1: Locke [Alain Locke], you name 'em. Who wasn't there? It was, you know. There was always food. I mean, just go in, and if you wanted a sandwich, you got a sandwich. If you wanted a meal, you got a meal. A gracious hostess, and artists. The, the, the dean of the music school, Lawson [Warner Lawson], he's sitting at one end of the room. Get the head of the government department sitting at another end of the room, or in another room. You got Owen Dodson, the poet, sitting upstairs with a group. It was just--I never found that in New York [New York]. I could not, you know, for blacks. I know we had it in the Renaissance [Harlem Renaissance], and I had a friend who was an artist, Earl Hill, a painter. He's now deceased. And I used to go to a couple of things with him. But it was more sectionalized, see how New York is. That was sectionized to some degree, but that was a great big house I was talking about. We weren't going from Manhattan [New York] to the Bronx [New York], or from 100th Street down to Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. This was all one house and everyone was free to roam from room to room. Everybody in there had high credentials. Now, the only one without credentials was me (laughter). But oh, I learned so much-- Story_ID: 572912 Speaker 1: Anyhow, the dean said, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], what are you doing?" I'm walking across campus. I said, "Oh I'm--." Oh, I wrote on the school newspaper [The Hilltop], I had my own column. Then I became, as a freshman, I had, and I was an autobiographer, I had my own column called, Toote's Alley [ph.]. So when I was a syndicated columnist for the NNPA, National Newspaper Black Publishers Association [sic. National Newspaper Publishers Association], I used Toote as part of, of, of my byline then. And he said, "What are you doing?" I said, "Well, I don't know, dean. I'm trying to see what I'm gonna get into next." "Why don't you come to law school?" I said, "Well, I don't know. I'm having fun. And as long as I get my letter to my father [Frederick Toote] on time, my allowance comes in like clockwork. When it doesn't, then and only then do I have a problem. And that's my problem." And he laughed. He said, "Well, I think you should consider coming to law school. I want you come by my office." And the man was sort of--he did not really give me an option the way it sounded, you know, because I was taught to respect people. And, you know, he was like come--the dean says come to my office, even if I didn't like you, I wasn't certainly gonna be at your office, and on time. And the next thing I know, next year I was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. (Snaps fingers) Just like that. Story_ID: 572913 Speaker 1: But again, showing how people can reach out, and especially if you think you may see, or as Anne Cook (background noise), the head of the drama department said, and she reached out for me--well, she was talking to Melvyn Douglas, the movie star. And I was so proud, I had just directed a play, and I'm making good grades, 'cause if grades are bad, I'm not gonna get that little allowance. It's only five dollars, plus I got my room and board and da-da-da. And--but I'm president of Howard Players [Howard University Players], so I get to--president and everything. And she introduced me and she said--and I just understood what this woman said today. I've been angry with her for years. One time, missed a week out of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] 'cause I tried to outdrink her with a, she drank martinis, and I can't stand martinis. And sitting on a piano bench at a party, and I said, every time she got one I got one. She had had lunch, and I was in class, and by the time I got there the food was gone. But I mean, I've just always been a competitiveness that I did not understand with her, because she called me quote (air quotes), a diamond in the rough. And nobody ever explained it to me, and I had nobody to discuss it with, and to me it was a demeaning remark. So I'm not going to tell anybody that Anne Cook called me, in front of Melvyn Douglas, a diamond in the rough. And it was something I was reading, well, about a couple months ago, and I saw the reference to the diamond in the rough, and I finally realized what the wo- it was a great compliment. But I didn't understand. And you talk about hurt. Did she have her hands full with me? She was tall, she was thin, very attractive, all her clothes came from Lord and Taylor, she looked like something out of fashion magazine. And all the movie stars would be calling her up on the phone. She had--she really had to watch me, 'cause when I turn--when she turned around, I was doing this over here, I had--I tell her I had found a way to squeeze in another play on the schedule, that shouldn't have been squeezed. Oh, yeah, she had her--she had her hands full. Story_ID: 572914 Speaker 1: But, my speech was improved, because coming from New York [New York], I said, get, G-E-T, get. We say, get. And I work on my nephew [Christopher C. Robinson] on his speech all the time. With my niece [Ginger Ryan Solis], because she was a girl, I spent more nurturing with her so she was--when I say she was private school, she was private school. And so her speech is excellent. But when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I spoke like a New Yorker. I had to take phonetics, and I studied under Frederick Wilkerson who was a voice coach for Broadway musicals. He was a black man, voice coach. Paid union money and above. I mean, he was well sought after. He could not take students. Every now and then, Howard would beg him to come down and teach. A semester, please, please. And they said, "You have got to take phonetics." It's the kind of course I don't wanna take. It's a petty discipline. I wanna speak well, and I do, and I certainly learned. But it was like legal bibliography where you had to learn citations. I couldn't even stay awake. Needless to say, it's the only course I think I had to take twice. He said, "No, no. I'm not happy. You can do even better." He started me to hum, and if you want your voice to be melodious, hum. You walking around the house, you walking up and down the street, you reading a book, hum. You'll have resonance, but you'll have a flow to the tone. So, when you talk about how people can touch you, and I think that, that, that my vocabulary is me, 'cause I've always loved words. Love, love, love words. Keep three, four, five dictionaries around me. But, to be able to communicate well, has also to do with the delivery of what you say to--so particularly if you're trying to teach something that's, like a law subject, it's very dull. If, if, if there's a flow, you can reach your students better. So I gotta attribute that--I, I sometimes, and I know Howard law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] is angry, and it should be angry because when they did the taping of me, I gave an awful lot of credit to Howard, undergrad also. Because they really had a kid. I'd have never gotten to Howard law, but for that nurturing as a kid, as an undergrad student who--there was a black actor by the name of James Edwards. And in his day, he was--who is he? Denzel Washington. In fact, Denzel Washington's original acting teacher, was my classmate at Howard University, Parthenia Milner. Just died, lived up in Mount Vernon [New York]. Which is where Denzel is from. And her voice was very close, not as resonant as mine, not as deep as mine, but sort of close. So when I was at school to make extra money, which my daddy [Frederick Toote] didn't know, I got a job on the switchboard. But when on the switchboard, handling the switchboard for the university, you get to know all the operators. So when you want to make a phone call from your dorm, you don't have to pay for it wherever you are. So I'm at the Howard Players [Howard University Players], that's why I was able to manipulate the way I did, I could call New York and get somebody's office. 'Cause I'd just go through whoever's on the switchboard. "Come on, hook me up with da-da-da." (Laughter) So I'm digressing again. But in any event, my enunciation was a consequence of their insisting that I be able to speak well. And I work on my little children that I come in contact with, and I tell them that it is very important, that impression that you make, is not simply whether your nails are clean, your teeth are brushed, and you have on a clean shirt, but how you speak. And so I had a dual vocabulary. I had a vocabulary for this community, and I had another vocabulary, it was quite hard. This is the first time I ever acknowledged it. And when I was with my friends I grew up with, I spoke as they did. Except, I couldn't, I couldn't digress as it went to pronunciation, or enunciation of words. That was too hard. But, you know, the slang, the yah-yah-mmm, yes. But definitely, the, the community vocabulary, and it served me well. Because for a while, I had a problem with my friends, you know. Story_ID: 572915 Speaker 1: What year, or when did you meet Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: I met Thurgood Marshall when I was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. I was first year in law school, starring role in 'Alcestis' [Euripides]. Faculty met, normal faculty meeting, they discussed the students, and normally in law school, it's not like, it's not like med school. In law school, you'll let in a large class, knowing that in three years time, only a third will march. Here we're now, my second year, my grades are again, A's, maybe, maybe even a A plus, I think, I got on something. Well, then there'd be a C, going up and down, up and down. I had a professor called Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], and he insisted--I took criminal law from him, and he insisted you take notes. And I said, "I don't take notes. I don't need to take notes. I hear, I record." "Anybody, to pass my class, they take notes." In those days, they didn't play. There was a man who was married to Doris Duke, he was in the law school ahead of me. Lovely man--I've had some handsome men that I know--handsome guy, Brandy. The biggest deejay in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], up until about fifteen years ago. There was one course--he wore his--he liked to wear French cuffs with the cuff links, but he wore his cuffs down over his hand. He wouldn't fold 'em up. Professor Quick [Charles W. Quick] said, "You don't look like a lawyer. You don't look like what we want our lawyers to look like." Oh, he was, he was dapper. I mean, oh, he looked like a movie star. Hair always cut, just--and beautiful personality. Everybody loved him. Everybody loved him. And to make a long story short, that guy did not finish law school. Now, what he did was he passed all his courses except evidence. You go to law school, there are some courses, core courses, you gotta take, you gotta pass. Otherwise, no degree. So he would take it from other law schools, and pass. But the professor, who heads the department for that course has to approve your taking it at another school, and he never accepted the grades. And so John Brandy [ph.] never became a practicing attorney because he never got a law degree. Story_ID: 572916 Speaker 1: Well, what happened to you in that class [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] with taking notes? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Did you take notes (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) he brought it up at the faculty meeting, and the fact that--then somebody else said that I was starring in a play ['Alcestis,' Euripides] and dying on stage. Still had the column in The Hilltop, interviewing James Edwards, that was a big movie star, but when I did the James Edwards interview, we were still talking about it. Because nobody--everybody said I couldn't get it. I took six girls in the dorm with me. I got permission to do it from the English department, from The Hilltop, the school newspaper, it was cleared everywhere. The head of the dorm, yes. We get down to the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], and I'm thinking as a journalist. Now, I've always written well. Always--I write well. I write well, God was good to me. And I'm thinking about my article, and boy, this is really--this man, you can't get an interview with him. The press always complains they can't get an interview. We walk into the back of the Howard Theatre, and there's a--my dorm mistress sitting there. Now, I got six girls with me, there's seven of us, we're going in this little, small room backstage, and there she's sitting. Asked me about, "What makes you what you are?" You know, and I said, "Oh, there's got to be a better way to help people grow up. And, and give them accountability without strangling them." But back to--not James Edwards, but that, that, that, seeing my dorm mistress sitting there and waiting. Oh, she just--but she wanted to see him. Because then we had Stepin Fetchit. Did--you want to know about blacks. We had the movie house here at the corner, the Renaissance [Renaissance Casino and Ballroom, New York, New York], and we had a theater called the Lafayette [Lafayette Theatre, New York, New York]. The Lafayette was black theater. Story_ID: 572917 Speaker 1: Back to the meeting with the actor [James Edwards]. Speaker 2: The faculty meeting, they're going over their agenda. Speaker 1: Or the actor. You were going to tell me about writing the story [for The Hilltop]. You were there, the headmistress shows up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. I'm just saying. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They're doing this and they're saying, "This girl. I remember reading this story about, what was that movie star she was hanging out with?" I didn't hang out with the gentleman. Only met him once and he was a gentleman, and he understood. He saw my frustration as a student. He could see I was, I was embarrassed that you would think that little black young women, six of them, that you need the headmistress. In any event, on the agenda, and they're talking about students that they're not gonna keep. Because again, you have that cutoff list. They said, "Well, she refuses, [HistoryMaker] Gloria Toote, refuses to take notes in my class. Absolutely refuses, and I can't have a student, who just, says 'I will not take notes.'" "Well, Professor Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.]," I'm getting this my hearsay, "how's she doing in your course?" "She's an A student in my course. But she's, she could learn a lot more if she took some notes." So I heard about the faculty discussion and the fact that only one vote kept me in law school. One vote. One of my faculty professors, or a couple of them gladly let me know, and I said, "Okay. I'll fix him." And that was at the beginning of the first semester in the year. I, I don't know how I ended up getting a scholarship for the first year, 'cause I didn't apply--not for the first year, but the beginning of the second year. I should have been a scholarship student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a year and a half. I was scholarship student at Howard law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] for two years, 'cause they made it retroactive for the second year. But I truthfully did reduce some of my outside activities. But I worked, I had a restaurant, I was cooking. I needed extra money. So I was--wanted sign up on Georgia Avenue, want a cook. You're black, you're a woman. Obviously, you know how to cook. I had never cooked a day in my life. My mother [Lillie Tooks Toote] cooked. Got a Betty Crocker cookbook, still have it, twenty-five cent, it's all free. I keep it as a memento, twenty-five cent cookbook. I had that job. Story_ID: 572918 Speaker 1: So, in any event, in constitutional law, which is a very tedious, dull difficult course. I liked it (laughter). I don't mind something that's difficult. I liked it. Constitutional law is, it's fun to me. The ramifications, what your mind can do. And they were working on Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], in Bolling versus Sharpe [Bolling v. Sharpe, 1954]. Lots of [U.S.] Supreme Court cases, and one is the state court, and the other is against the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. The federal case because the school's in the District of Columbia, board of ed is funded by [U.S.] Congress. And Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] was brilliant. George E.C. Hayes, that's why I have two initials. At the beginning of the interview, when you asked me my name and I smiled when I got to the initials, it was because I remembered that I was Gloria E. Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], and even my license to practice, 'cause I just had to fill it out again last week, reads, "Gloria E. Toote." That's the birth certificate says. Law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I loved George E.C. Hayes, oh, he was dull. Now, I didn't like his course, unh-uh procedural law. And he'd stand up there, and, of course, he had the same book for about the last then years, but that doesn't matter, you still read. And he'd say, "Footnote number 157, page 237, third sentence states," and you'd say, well, that's a textbook. He's had it for years. He knows it. But you know me. I've gotta go to the source. If I admire you, I'm gonna make certain I'm not admiring a shell. And I would go to court to watch him. 'Cause he was the most magnificent thing I had ever seen in life, even today. And we still have many lawyers, quite old, who remember George E.C. Hayes on procedural law. The white law firms called him around the clock. You had a matter, it was very--it's a procedural matter, you're not talking about substantive law, did he take that cake. You're arguing statutes, and whether that statute applies, and how many other statutes are intertwined in the interpretation that you want. That's de novo. That was your man, George E.C. Hayes. Story_ID: 572919 Speaker 1: How did I meet Thurgood Marshall? I gotta sch--I was a scholarship student [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I was assigned to work on Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], Bolling versus Sharpe [Bolling v. Sharpe, 1954], I had my briefs, my [U.S.] Supreme Court brief signed, and the, the law school, my class had, was assigned--particularly, the better students--assigned the responsibility of the research. And I was fortunate enough to have a bulk of work, and, therefore, when, the two faculty members, George E.C. Hayes and Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], who was then my law professor, became professor of law school, he was secretary of the university when he was a law professor, then became president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. When they came, he and, and, and George Hayes came to New York [New York]. I had to travel with them. I got a--listen, I don't read all these little pieces of paper, you know. You gotta have your flunkee. They didn't think of me as that, but that's really what my job was. I'm not trying to impress anybody. But again, it was that exposure. And we'd come up, they stayed at the Algonquin Hotel [New York, New York] in the '40s [1940s]. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office was the opposite Bryant Park [New York, New York] down there in the four--they were in the lower 40s, on the other side of Bryant Park, the Algonquin was about, coming uptown, let's say like about 46th [Street] and they were about 41st [Street], NAACP office. And we'd work until, they'd come in on a train, we'd come in on a train, and work all night almost. They'd go get some sleep, I'd come home, and set the time, be back there again. And that was work. I mean, I earned my--know whatever I did, I sure did well. I enjoyed every moment of it. And, what at Constance Baker Motley, Judge Motley who died a couple years ago, brilliant woman, good attorney, sweetheart of a person. Husband [Joel Wilson Motley, Jr.] had an office. While she was sitting on the federal bench, her husband's office was on 8th Avenue on what you call Frederick Douglass Boulevard and 130--I had a building on 134th Street--133rd [Street], 8th Avenue on the east corner, east, north corner. And he sold-- they sold insurance. He predominantly handled insurance, but the whole office was his. And I met her, and, and it was just a marvelous experience. So when I finished law school, I was so impressed with George E.C. Hayes, that I got use Glor- and I found out I had another middle name. I had a name from my mother's mother [Frances Tooks] and my father's mother [Clarita North Toote]. I knew about my father's mother, and I just added the initial from the other one and I became Gloria E.A. Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]. And I made everybody say E.A. And I will always remember George E.C. Hayes had the dullest class, one of the worst classes that I've ever had to take in life. And it was at eight o'clock in the morning. Story_ID: 572920 Speaker 1: Let me just quiz you. So they hired you as a student [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] to help them do the, all the research (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was my scholarship. Speaker 1: A scholarship. Speaker 2: I didn't get paid. My scholarship (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but scholarship was dependent-- Speaker 2: --was dependent upon my doing what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. And you worked on the researching-- Speaker 2: All the, yes. Whatever, whenever they needed cases researched (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And what cases did you-- Speaker 2: --between the office in New York [New York]-- Speaker 1: --research? Okay. How does it work? Speaker 2: No, no, see? When you're doing an opinion, this is, we're at the appeal level. We are before--we--they were. I say we, as blacks, were before the [U.S.] Supreme Court. So you've got to check your citations. Got to check your case law. You, you know, that's what my job was. To look, for example, I still believe--my thesis is written on the bill of attainder, which is a part of the [U.S.] Constitution that has never been used. Nobody knows how to apply it, and I believe the Constitution should be a growing history. We'll leave that that alone. But in any event, you've got to have good research technicians in any firm and before any brief that's worth its salt. And we don't recognize that. As youngsters, we all want to be--now we have, everything is departmentalized. Litigators, da-da-da, da-da-da. But it's that person who can sit down at the desk, and in those days, go into the--I used to go to Columbia library [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], because it was my school that I graduated from. I knew the library so well, but I'd go through books and where the--when I'd come home, I got bites all up and down my arms 'cause the books were so old. You're going back to cases a hundred years old. You know, you're looking at, you, you, you're grabbing for a straw to hang your hat on. We needed a straw for Brown versus Board of Education [Board v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], due diligence. And nobody still knows what due diligence is. But that was well fashioned, it was well--but that was my job. Story_ID: 572921 Speaker 1: So, that's how I got to know, I got to know him [Thurgood Marshall] very well. And Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley] and everybody there. The people on the staff-- Speaker 2: What was the atmosphere like? Speaker 1: Fun. Not only did George E.C. Hayes and Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] come up, but half the faculty came up. Speaker 2: Did you-- Speaker 1: That was the Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--there's only one institution that can take pride in what was accomplished in--I wish I would have put this in the Howard U tape. But you're at Howard and they think they know everything about their history, so you don't want to preach to the choir. But the research for those cases, aside from the legal defense arm [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], was Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Its lawyers and lawyers--and I met lawyers from around the country. Some of whom became federal judges and state judges after that. Civil rights leaders who were lawyers who became even more prominent after that. Your, your lawyers from around America, your black lawyers, predominantly black. Every now and then we had a white brother, came from--at their own expense, from around the country, and worked on those briefs. That was not luck. We deserved it. You will not find anything more masterful. I'm so proud to be a part of it. It's masterful. And we knew when to push the button, then we'd back back. How far did you go on that case? Well who knows? The decision is--no, don't tell me what the decision is. How did they reach that decision? How did they get to those nuances? How'd you get those nuances? Well, luckily, when I was in law school, and I like constitutional law. I--and a, but the faculty members knew them better than me, 'cause I had a different relationship. I had one of the best relationships ever with, with the clerks of the court. Now, a black clerk of the [U.S.] Supreme Court in those days, and they were all black, just about. All they did was--but it was honorable, they put the robe on the justice every morning. When they walked in, they helped the justice take off his coat, his jacket, you know, coat, jacket, and they put the black robe on him. And then they walked with him to the main supreme courtroom. But they didn't--they were not lawyers, although they were sort of educated. They were men of--in their community of sound repute, they were all deacons and da-da-da because they were, listen, they worked at the Supreme Court. In fact, when the cases were argued, I got in because of them. I have pictures from Time magazine, when they showing you long lines of people standing, and I'd get down there at one o'clock at night, but you get down there at one o'clock at night, you don't have but twenty seats in the court. What does that mean? When you got fifty people ahead of you, but they would take me around the side. I'd try to do it on my own, I would try to get there, you know, on my own. But if I couldn't, there, it would get (unclear), 'cause, you know, I was young and a girl. Story_ID: 572922 Speaker 1: Like in my law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], there weren't girls in law school. Speaker 2: Were you the only girl and, or woman, female, working on the team doing the research? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Because I, I saw that there were only three women in your class in '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Oh, one there is in government, at executive level when she retired, Ethel. Ethel Ellison [Ethel C. Ellison], Washington, D.C., executive level, which means eighteen, grade eighteen, you know. After that you get to subcabinet, all those, those are political appointments. Very top of the executive level, and the other was a judge. But it was hard. It was hard for us in law school, because we had many professors who didn't believe that woman belonged there. You know, first of all our class was big. We never had a class the size of my class. They thought, they didn't--we in the basement, by the way. We didn't have a school. The law school was in the basement of the library, of Founders Library. Speaker 2: Well, let me-- Story_ID: 572923 Speaker 1: Not that it's a burning question, but I'm just interested to hear what you're gonna say. Who were you fighting for when you, I mean, what was, I mean, you're like the core of what you were doing. Who did you think, I mean that Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and when you were doing all that research, you, like within, you said I'm doing this for--I mean, was there some burning desire (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I just understood the value of education and I still do. When I see a black mind that could achieve so much, that either fails or achieves so little. As a consequence of their inability to even express themselves, or because they have not been exposed, it breaks my heart, and it breaks my heart today. I mean, it's, just, just factual. I look at talent, and I say, "Oh God, look at that kid. Oh, they're gonna go far." But then, I listen to the colloquial speech, "Yah, yah, yeah, well." And then bad verbs, a non-expansive vocabulary, they have limited themselves. As it relates to corporate growth, they can't go but so far. I don't care how handsome you are or who you sleep with, you can't go but so far, unless the mind--unless you're white. I'm talking about, now, minorities. I'm not even including women. I'm talking about minorities, and I'm particularly talking about blacks. Latinos, have an edge. Some of them have the skin color. I'm one of these idiots that fought like the devil, so that in this country, where the census is taken--and I've done some things in government I still question--I fought for every document coming from the government to be bilingual; Spanish and English. I didn't think that they weren't going to be like my daddy [Frederick Toote], or the immigrants that came to this country and learn English. I didn't know I'd have to pick up the phone and be so--before we proceed any further, push button number one if you're going to speak English, but push button number two if you're gonna speak Spanish. I never thought our society would allow this kind of division. And it is a division. You'd be sitting back and say, huh? What is she talking--we are allowing a division between Latinos and African Americans that is uncalled for. But in any event, I'm one of the fools who said yes for the census. If they don't want to say that they're black. I went out and did a survey myself (laughter). I actually went out and if they don't want to say they were black. And they want to say that I'm da-da-da-da-da, they can. We'll have a few boxes, and then we'll have others. And I was amazed. I went to Whittaker [ph.], California and there was this lady who was blonde, blue eyed, and I told her, I said, "Well, I'm really not a census taker, these are your census takers. I am an official, and I'm concerned about preserving." See I'm one of these nuts. You give me a title, I don't just take the title. I gotta know what I'm doing and I really gotta believe in what I'm doing. And I got booted off of that, by the way (laughter). The boys said that I was too pedantic, I think was the word. Speaker 1: You got booted off of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The census, a advisory council. Speaker 1: The census council. Okay, okay. Speaker 2: The commission. Well, my term was up. It was supposed be automatically renewed, and it wasn't. And I saw that the brothers were not happy, which they had not said to me, and I said, "Well, have we had an argument?" "No." But I knew that a whole lot of other folks were unhappy with me because I'd stopped a few things from occurring that I'm delighted did not occur for the betterment of my country. But the, the, the, my, my dumbness was just not understanding, especially after interviewing these people, that some of them took pride in their racial mixture. This lady with the blonde hair and blue eyes said, "Oh, I've got a, a, a third cousin, or my mother's third cousin is Indian [Native American]." And, I mean, with white areas, I mean, I'm gonna find out what white folks have to say. I wasn't even thinking about Latinos and light skinned blacks who don't want to say that they're blacks you know. And I found, I did, I found a number of white people who, California, (air quotes) 'cause in California then, was more avante garde. They didn't run from black blood. And, and they proudly would talk to me about, you know, their heritage. And so, that's why, you, you, we've got all of those little boxes. In the beginning I said, no. I said, and they said, "Well, why don't you go--," and this was unheard of going out on a field trip like that. "Well, why don't you go out and find out." Story_ID: 572924 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, just to jump back for a, to 1954. When--did you have any idea what the decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] would be from the [U.S.] Supreme Court (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had no doubt. Speaker 1: You had no doubt? Speaker 2: I knew. Speaker 1: You had no doubt because? Speaker 2: It had to be the opening of a new day. Education always is. Learning something new always is a new day. It's a new moment. I, I, I felt that the climate was right, and I felt that those troops would be sent in, if necessary. It's like Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], people said, "How could you support him?" And we're sitting down, casually talking and a man said, and I said, "Well," and I'd flown in from California, with Dr. Ophelia DeVore Mitchell [HistoryMaker Ophelia DeVore], and a number of others, prominent blacks. And he's got his whole staff around, somebody asked him, "What would you do for civil rights?" And a small group, and he said, "Well, I would enforce civil rights, if necessary, to the point of bayonet." Well, I learned after that, to know him as a human being, as one of the few presidents, I have two that could look at my back. I'm walking away from them and call me. He and George Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush] could do that, because I've had President Reagan call me while I'm walking out the White House [Washington, D.C.], and he's yelling, "Hey stranger!" He likes to call me stranger, just like a John Wayne, what was that John Wayne would call him partner or something. "Hey stranger," and I knew when I heard that hey stranger who it was. But in any event, I, I, I knew that would be significant. But with Ronald Reagan, at a press conference, they had put someone in the back of the room to embarrass him. Speaker 1: A black person? Speaker 2: And a question was asked, and he repeated it. "If necessary, to enforce civil rights, I would go to the extreme, and the most extreme I can think of, is at the point of a bayonet." He said, "I think Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] did it, I shouldn't be having any qualms about it." From then on, the reception of white Americans--see, you gotta understand, if I could just get politicians to comprehend that when you're doing good, don't think you only impact upon the people you're doing the good for. It sets the tone for the nation. It sets the tone for corporations. And then all of a sudden, everybody saw him in an entirely different light. Some thought back to that comment, others didn't. But we all knew that it could have killed him or made him. It helped make him. Story_ID: 572925 Speaker 1: So when the decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down, you were elated? Speaker 2: I was--oh, yes. I was there. Speaker 1: Where were you? Speaker 2: There. Yes, indeed I was there. We knew, got the notice when it was gonna come down-- Speaker 1: How does the notice come to you? Did they tell you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the clerk. Speaker 1: --the day, they've gone to the court-- Speaker 2: Oh, I'll tell you who did--listen-- Speaker 1: You had the inside track with the-- Speaker 2: Oh, indeed we did. Indeed, we did. Although, those gentlemen-- Speaker 1: How did the clerks feel themselves? I mean, they were all black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Basically, and they were doing not a okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They do little things that need to be done in the office, like a--some people call them an assistant, but you're not an assistant-- Speaker 1: But you had a-- Speaker 2: --unless you handling paperwork. Speaker 1: --relationship with them. How do you think they felt about whether the decision-- Speaker 2: Oh, those guys were so proud. They were proud with the arguments, because our attorneys were superb. Speaker 1: You were there during the arguments? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Every day (laughter). It was like one of the most joyous occasions in my life. I could do that everyday, everyday of my life and be satisfied, because they were so brilliant. They were proud. They were not arrogant, but they knew who they were. They knew the cause was just. They knew the time was right, and they respected the temperament of the court to that which needed to be done for the best of the nation. Now, when you talk like that--this would just educate your children to know how to say things. You don't have as many enemies. You're gonna have some anyhow because of the color of your skin. Speaker 1: But it gives me chills to think about them putting those robes on them the day the decision came down when they probably had some idea of which way--I mean, it has to be-- Speaker 2: I'm sure it was probably being whispered about. They were never sure until it, it was, it's printed, it's really held as, as, as close a state secret as you can keep are those opinions, they really are. 'Cause I had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So then tell me, you said you were there the day the decision came down. So you're there, they give you the date that it's gonna come down, and you show up-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't give us a date. Speaker 1: How was it-- Speaker 2: Uh, they called--we knew that it was probably gonna be on the docket as the date for them to hand down an opinion. We knew it was probably gonna be on the docket that day, you can never be sure, they may squeeze something else in that they want to get out as a rush item. That would postpone it, and then the clerks would call and tell the attorneys, this is just a perfunctory call because most of the attorneys are not in Washington [D.C.], although, a lot of them are. But your appellate attorneys, like I specialized in appellate law for a number of years, and I would bounce where the case was, because I like federal courts. And so, you know, all your lawyers are not gonna be there. They're not as lucky as I was. See, I was just--I was very fortunate. I was very fortunate. Speaker 1: And what was-- Speaker 2: That's how I was able to get my brief signed. Speaker 1: What was the-- Speaker 2: Because they were all out. We were out of briefs. Speaker 1: In the end, what was the--how did the court come down on the ruling? What was the--how did they vote? Speaker 2: They voted that-- Speaker 1: How many people, I mean, the numbers? Speaker 2: You know, I can't recall an exact count. I wish I could. Speaker 1: I'm sure I could look it up, but it just dawned on me at this time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't, because it doesn't matter to me. As a lawyer, I always look to see--and when I went to law school, I went to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], one law school, and there we learned the weight of authority minority. Meaning, the prevailing law for most of the states, and I'm a very pragmatic attorney. When I get a case, I want to win it. I want my client to be successful. And after I've won it, I've won it. If it was a nine court judge tribunal, and I need five votes, I got five votes, I won it. I'm not even concerned about the dissenting, I'm gonna read everything. But I'm not even concerned about who dissented when, where, what, why, because I know that judges write dissenting opinions, and the public should be aware of this. Judges will write a dissenting opinion today, may not think that same way a year, two years, three years from now. An open mind, you will grow. An honest mind, you will change, if needed. So I'm not worried where the--I know that I want to know which judges, which judges I have in my pocket, if you can have some in your pocket, meaning what they're going to be inclined to support. And the weaknesses, and how I might be able to get around others, but I'm never even concerned about who's against. Same thing with the jury. Get the majority of that jury and then work on the others. Story_ID: 572926 Speaker 1: So the same year that decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down, you graduated? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Marvelous. Really was good. Good, perfect timing. Speaker 1: Did you leave Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] then, and come back to-- Speaker 2: Came from Howard to New York [New York]. Started studying for the bar immediately. Closed the door and said, I'm going to eat and study. No movies, no dates, no nothing, because I did not learn New York law. The problem with students--when my nephew [Christopher C. Robinson] and my nephew-in-law, my nephew's in law school, my nephew-in-law's a practicing attorney, has a full staff and so successful. I'm so proud of him. And I tried to tell them, when you go to law school, go to a school--unless you're really going to be an astute student, that's gonna teach the law, that's gonna get you to pass the bar. You're not going to law school to say you went to law school, unless you're just doing it to pass time. You want to pass that bar and pass it as quickly as you can. Well, at Howard, we taught the majority of you, you come to New York and take the bar exam, and they're talking only New York statute, only New York cases. They don't care what New Jersey said, not in those days or anywhere else. And you did not have the kind of--now there are review courses that they have that can, can, can after you study from the school like Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] or Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You wonder why the ratio of students who pass the bar is less from a Harvard, a Yale, and a Howard, is because they're dealing with minds, basically. They want the cream of the crop for their minds. You want to pass the bar, then you're going to find a way to pass the bar. But right now, we want that mind. We want that, that, that leadership role. We see that diamond in the rough. We--so I just came and locked the door and studied, and I never will forget the New York Tribune [New York Herald Tribune] was the only paper we had that printed at night. They had a night edition, and it came out at ten o'clock. Between ten, and it hit the newsstand at 135th Street and 7th Ave- Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], 10:00 or 10:15 at night. We knew roughly, you knew roughly, when it's gonna be in the newspapers. Never sure of the date, and I walked around there to get it, and I opened the newspaper, I saw my name, I screamed at the top of my voice from 135th Street to the South. It's a wonder somebody didn't pick me up, put me in jail, throw me in a nuthouse. I cannot believe that no one stopped me to see whether I was being chased. I screamed all the way from there to here. Story_ID: 572927 Speaker 1: That's a photograph of me taken outside the building near my high school, George Washington High School [George Washington Educational Campus], in upper Manhattan [New York] in 19--oh, about 1949. During that time, I was commandant of cadets with the Civil Air Patrol. And, believe it or not, was taking flying lessons and responsible for a group of integrated youngsters who were interested in possibly serving the United States government in the [U.S.] military. It's a very interesting time. Speaker 2: That's my baby picture. Really don't know how old I was, but--it's, I guess I was about one year old, maybe. Maybe less. Speaker 1: That's the day I was admitted to practice law in the State of New York. To the left is my very, very proud father [Frederick Toote], my mother [Lillie Tooks Toote], my district Republican leader, Harold C. Burton, an outstanding person within the Republican Party, nationally respected. My neighbor is standing to my right, or left, really. That's Mrs. Lieb [ph.]. Behind her is my co-leader of my local Republican club. And that's my sister [Frances Toote Robinson] next to my neighbor in the front, and the attorney standing behind her, the man standing behind my sister, is the attorney who moved my admission as a member of the New York State Bar Association. Speaker 2: That's a photograph taken at a meeting, a national meeting, of the National Political Congress of Black Women [National Congress of Black Women]. It was founded by Shirley Chisholm oh, about twenty years ago, and it was an effort to organize black women throughout the country in politics in every locale conceivable. So that we could learn the intricacies and network with one another. So you have, of course, Coretta Scott King to the right, deceased now; C. Delores Tucker, former secretary of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, who after Shirley Chisholm resigned became first chair of the organization, but many years after Shirley resigned, and myself. At our original meeting, I was the person who wrote the bylaws and the constitution. We had an--a national assembly in Atlanta [Georgia]. It, it was--the press, the national press, wondered whether we as women could be successful in organizing women from all walks of life to work collectively together for a common political purpose without political party identity. What was so significant is that the original concept of the organization, the chairs were to alternate between the two political parties. I was not fully aware of that when I drafted the bylaws, I did not include that as a requirement. Nonetheless, at our first national meeting, Shirley Chisholm was, of course, selected as the national chair, C. Delores Tucker of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the first chair, the first vice chair, and myself, the second vice chair. It was a beautiful political balance. And with people like Coretta Scott King, Dr. Willie Barrow [HistoryMaker Reverend Willie T. Barrow] of Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height, [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman. I could go on and on and on of those who participated early on. All of your elected officials in [U.S.] Congress, particularly those from California--together we were able to carve a niche in what was before that, a solid political enclave of black Americans, male, not female. So Shirley Chisholm, a trailblazer, first woman to run for president of the United States, and a woman who could galvanize all Americans for a positive course. Marvelous human being, Shirley Chisholm. Speaker 1: That's a political meeting at--that photograph is from Elizabeth Taylor, the movie star, to my right. That's Tobin Armstrong, from Armstrong, Texas, an entrepreneur. And, of course, to his right or our left, is Nancy Reagan. Behind Nancy Reagan is the adopted son [Michael Reagan] of Nancy, and, or really, Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. And Ronald Reagan's natural daughter [Maureen Reagan] from his first wife, Jane Wyman, directly behind Nancy Reagan. My relationship with Ronald Reagan and Nancy Reagan, but particularly Ronald Reagan, as a senior advisor, was that I travelled, frequently travelled, with him and attended political rallies and events that had political connotations. Speaker 2: That was a photograph was taken following a meeting in California, in Los Angeles. I had been asked early on in the Reagan effort to secure the Republican nomination if I would become a part of his political advisory team, and I was rather astonished with the request. I did meet with him. I found him to be char- not only charming and handsome, but very knowledgeable, which was surprising. He turned out to be, I think, one of the finest presidents the nation will ever have. And a man who truly was committed to equal opportunity for all. And those years that I spent a considerable amount of time with him, will always be memorable. Speaker 1: That was a very long article in The New York Times on the new black conservatives. The person to, what would be my--your left is Dr. Nathan Wright [Nathan Wright, Jr.], an educator, an outstanding religious leader in America, a minister and a educator. A remarkable human being. The other person, the other male, is the designer of the Philadelphia Plan. That's how equal opportunity plan that few Americans know whom to identify it with, or what political party to give credit to. But equal opportunity and employment really secured a focus, a pin point, a definition, under the aegis of [HistoryMaker] Arthur Fletcher. A government appointee, political appointee, high ranking. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 1: President Nixon. And he and his staff designed the Philadelphia Plan for quote, affirmative action. Arthur Fletcher will always have made an impact on the life, and not just African Americans, but Americans in general, because it opened the doors for so many. So many followed behind us who will not realize that even the rights of women in general, now have, are the results of his pioneering efforts. In those days, there were not many people who could chronicle and convince the public, let alone government, that affirmative action was legal and could work. He and his staff did precisely that. That's quite an accomplishment. Also for us to get on the front page of the Sunday New York Times. The New York Times has not had that many blacks on its front page in its Sunday magazine section. So I'm very, very proud of that photograph. Speaker 2: That picture was taken in--when Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] was vice president of the United States, and that's a meeting of advisors with Gerald Ford in Washington, D.C. At that stage in my career, I was assistant director of--no, no I was not assistant director of action. I was assistant secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD], and he had just become vice president and our responsibility, those of us who were with him that day, are briefing him as it relates to matters that should be of concern to him and of which he should be knowledgeable. Now, Gerald Ford, who of course is no longer pres-, president, and he's retired, is my neighbor where my home is in California, and I see him frequently. Story_ID: 572928 Speaker 1: That's a government photo. It doesn't (background noise) look like it's an official photo, but it is. I was assistant director of ACTION when that was taken. That's an appointment I received from President Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. I've served under three presidents. What was remarkable, is that it took almost two years to secure my security clearance to receive that appointment. It was [U.S.] Foreign Service, subcabinet level, and required extreme measures to make certain that I was not a security risk. But they also went a step further than they would for the normal candidate for a position like that. In those years, for a black to receive a major appointment in government, political appointment, they had to have the approval or acceptance of both the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League [National Urban League]. And if you did not have both, your name was not proffered for the post. Speaker 2: That was my first salaried job as a writer, as a journalist. I had written for the African American Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] as a student. Oh, yeah, and the New York Age. I don't want to read that newspaper. And my articles were being carried around the country by the black press, but this was my first job as a writer. The Urban League for years had been attempting since World War II [WWII] to have a black hired at Time Inc. [New York, New York]. Now, Time Inc. then was Fortune magazine, Time magazine, Life; several publications. And they had Earl Brown at Life and was a labor official, and he was black and he did captions. Those are the titles that are underneath pictures. And you had [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, renowned photographer, who, of course, was a photographer for all of the publications. But the Urban League was determined to get a black on the staff at Time magazine. Well, they tried and they tried and they tried, and none of the candidates were accepted. And I was asked if they could submit my name. They said, "Well, they'll probably reject you also. But we need a person who is willing to be a test case in a court action, because we're going to sue. Are you willing to do so?" And I said, "Oh, all right." "So what if they offer you a job? They'd offer it to you for Life or for doing captions. So, you know, well, but we don't expect them to offer you a post, but you're certainly well qualified. They should, and you're going to make a good, a good test case for us." So I went down, and I was shocked. The head of personnel and this was in 19--gee whiz, I can't even remember the year, I'd have to look at that press pass to see the date. It was in the late '60s [1960s]. The head of personnel was a woman. I was shocked. Head of personnel for Time Inc. was a woman. I believe her name was McConnell. And I had my interview with her, I had my interview with the various editors, and the, and the--I had an interview with the publisher of Fortune magazine. That was a woman. I was flabbergasted to see the respect that women had at Time Inc., and she advised me, geez she'd love to have me and my two law degrees and my youthful but complete experience in other aspects of journalism and government involvement. And--but, unfortunately, they have a hierarchy system at Time Inc., that before you get to Fortune magazine, where you're really writing lengthy, lengthy articles, you have to go through the various other publications. You have to be there for about three to four years and work through seniority. Well, I didn't stay that long. But it was a remarkable experience. I had received a telegram one day after applying, and, oh, a couple of months later, received a telegram one day, after applying a couple months later, that said I'd been accepted for a position at Time Inc. I read further, and lo and behold, it was not captions for Life magazine, but as a writer for Time, for Time magazine. Speaker 1: I was on 6th Avenue, very close to Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York], and on my first day I was writing, of course, and I left quite early, didn't want to be late, got on the subway, didn't want to be late. When I got off, I got lost. When I got off the subway at 6th Avenue, I looked at the faces and I couldn't see any black faces, and I kept searching and searching for identity, for commonality and there weren't, there weren't any black faces around. There weren't any minorities. And then finally, after I turned off of 6th Avenue, toward the side of the building going towards 5th Avenue, 'cause Time is really on the corner of 5th Avenue, it was then. There was one man in a lovely uniform with brass buttons and a beautiful brass sweeper and broom, and he was sweeping in front of the building. And that was the first black person that I saw. Obviously, which really was the case once I got inside the building. We didn't have too many positions, clerical or otherwise. So once you got into that little enclave, that sort of hidden part of New York [New York], there was a divide. A real divide between New York City and black America. Speaker 2: That's a photograph of me at my desk. Amazingly enough, the person whose desk was across from mine was from Georgia, and they had a Confederate flag on their desk when I arrived. That was bothersome. But we turned out to be very, very good friends, and I have marvelous memories of that experience. I only left Time magazine, not because I was unhappy, but we had to work on Saturday and Sunday. I was quite young, not out of grad law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] too long, still in my twenties, mid-twenties at best, and all my friends were going out on Friday night and Saturday night and having fun on Sunday. And there I was, putting Time magazine to bed Sunday afternoon. It was devastating. I had a friend that had a yacht, an actual yacht, and everyone was going out on that yacht, and I never set foot on the compounded thing. And it just, you know, as a youngster, what I, not a, I wasn't a youngster, but as a young person, it disturbed me that I did not have the ability to sort of enjoy life as everyone else did. And, unfortunately, the assignments were given by seniority, and although I worked on a number of the articles on the [U.S.] Supreme Court and civil rights, normally it was not my final article assignment--it was not really the article assigned to me. But, for writing, it was assigned to someone else and I was asked to, to help participate with its drafting. So it was a little frustrating that I couldn't get the kind of assignments that I knew I was qualified for, which they knew I was qualified for. But by the seniority rules, I just could not get. Wasn't their fault, but that's just the way the cookie crumbled. So I stayed as long as I could. I'd promised the Urban League that I would stay for two years, and I stayed for almost two years, and I then returned to the practice (background noise) of law. Story_ID: 572929 Speaker 1: Continuing on the completion interview with Dr. Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]. So if you will just state your name again for me, spell it out and then today's date. Speaker 2: I'm leaving on the 5th, therefore the date is the 3rd of December, 2006 [sic. December 4, 2006]. Gloria E.A. Toote, T-O-O-T-E. Speaker 1: And we're still not going to get the E.A. Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: We're still not going to get what E.A. stands for. Speaker 2: No. A number of people have had nothing better to do than to, sort of, scour around and they've been able to discover it, but I try to keep it as my little secret. Now, women are entitled--people are entitled to some privacy. Or as the British say, (pronunciation) privacy. Story_ID: 572930 Speaker 1: The big chunk that we're finishing on is you working with Thurgood Marshall in 1954, Brown versus Board [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]-- Speaker 2: Ah, school segregation cases. Speaker 1: School segregation. At what point did you decide to go to law school? Speaker 2: Well, as I was saying, I was walking across campus, saw the dean of the law school, he suggested it. Farthest thing from my mind, wasn't the program. And I thought about it. That's--and one ability that I have is that I will listen to people. I listen to everything that is said and I will evaluate and it seemed to be logical to me as the next progressive step to take. So that's how I came about it. Speaker 1: What schools did you apply to? Speaker 2: I didn't. I just went--just only applied to one (laughter). Speaker 1: So when you were accepted, you were accepted into Columbia. You from there, you-- Speaker 2: Well no, that was for Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was for Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. After I finished in 1954, I graduated from Howard and passed the bar in '55 [1955]. Story_ID: 572931 Speaker 1: It became rather apparent to me, that it was going to be a little difficult-and, and really pursuing the practice of law as I had envisioned, because there were so few female attorneys, and really no black attorneys, not even a handful. You know, only about four or five (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were they, can you remember? Speaker 1: We had Cora Walker [Cora T. Walker]. Cora was practicing for maybe about five years ahead of me, maybe ten. And--oh, you had a good, oh I can't remember, civil rights leader--well, really women's activist from Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] grad, but there weren't many. There weren't many. I'd say about maybe five if you count all the boroughs. It was an old boys network. It was a very interesting time, because then Harlem [New York, New York] was a mecca. That's really what a mecca is, to my knowledge because we had so many talented people from so many different areas of life. I knew A. Philip Randolph because all of the offices were on 125th Street. No matter what avenue of, of, of business you were involved in. The main line, the main street, was 125th Street. A. Philip Randolph, the Fox [J. Raymond Jones] who is the leader of Tammany Hall, everyone, you had a chance to really get to meet them. And imagine if you demonstrated some ability, they sort of--they would reach instinctively in those days. And I hope that we continue to do so. Would reach out and try to mentor, and I was also fortunate enough to know Berkeley Burrell [Berkeley G. Burrell] who was chairman of the National Business League. And that was almost predominant, dynamic, black national organization for black businesspeople across the country. And, of course, entrepreneurship has always been a quest of black Americans. And this organization was so meaningful, and it encompassed your educators, your academicians, your practitioners of industry, and it was a marvelous learning ground. And Berkeley Burrell, believe it or not, happened to be a Republican, which made it even better, since I was a young Republican then, and he took me under his wing, so I got to meet all of the influential blacks in the nation. And I can't think of one, like I said, John Raymond Jones, chairman of Tammany Hall. Everyone--and not one used politics or sex as a demeaning factor. The fact that I was a young Republican, they all tried to persuade me if they were Democrats that I should be a Democrat, and yet, I realized that my interests were different. Uniquely different because of my quest for entrepreneurship, and then spreading that desire across our community throughout the nation. And I think that's, that's part of what I learned from National Business League. Story_ID: 572932 Speaker 1: Oh, Harlem [New York, New York] is just brimming with all of the talented people. And you, you'd walk down the street, and you'd bump into them. And they'd stop and they'd talk, and you had the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York] right around the corner. And you'd see all your people from Broadway, Ethel Waters was always there, and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] ate his chitterlings there at least two, three times a month. I mean, you'd walk in, they're sitting at a table. Next to that was another bar that had your young avante garde professional, so it was, it was a fascinating, fascinating time. But you had a chance to meet people, and people had time then, which I don't think we have now, to stop and talk to those who were younger, and to counsel, and advise. I met Malcolm X. Friend of mine said, "Hey, I, I think you ought to meet, this guy is interesting. I think you ought to meet him." And I said, "Why?" (Laughter) "Well, he's interesting." At that point, I was--when I was touted as being part of the cabinet of Nelson Rockefeller, which I was not. But I was a high--it was a high ranking job in those days. You have to remember, you have to correlate things to the timing. And in those days, that was a high ranking job for a black to have, let alone a black woman. And I had a great big medallion on the front and the back of my car, that--brass medallion, shiny, that said, "State of New York," which sometimes the police would look at and look at me. I remember once I was coming out of Central Park [New York, New York], and I had a white (unclear) convertible with red leather seats. And I had enough sense to know that since I looked so young, I always had to be very judicious. Because I was, I, it's just so suspicious, so young. And that's all right. So go by the book, nobody's gonna bother you. I'm--the park ends at 110th Street. And then it was 7th Avenue, now it's Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard. I'm down almost to 116th Street when this white policeman walks over to the car, I'm at a light, and said pull over when the light changes. 'Cause I couldn't pull over there because I wasn't close enough to the curb. So I crossed the intersection, pulled over, he says, "I'm writing you a ticket." And I said, "For what?" He says, "You went back, you went through a light shortly after you came out of the park." I said, "You've got to be kidding." He said, "No." I said, "Officer, come on now. Please, I didn't." Well, I couldn't persuade him to the contrary. I want you to know, I took that case to trial. I did win, and the judge said to him, "Well, what made you--when did the young lady go through the light?" And he said, "Well, she came out the park at 110th Street, and she went through the light at about 112th Street." And the judge said, "And you were at about 116th Street and you saw all of this?" I mean, that, that's, you know, when you talk about how great it was to, to, to be around during that time. Story_ID: 572933 Speaker 1: What I was going to ask, ask next, is that you talked a lot about Harlem [New York, New York] and the people that were around, and people would easily mentor younger people. Who were your mentors at the time? Speaker 2: I'd say, Harold C. Burton, who was my district, Republican district leader and senior executive with the Republican county committee. Certainly, Berkeley Burrell [Berkeley G. Burrell], a very wise man, very, very wise man. I had a lot friends who were writers, because I liked to write and, therefore, you know, I was writing for Amsterdam [New York Amsterdam News] all the time. So I would associate with a lot of the writers that were at the Amsterdam News. Hicks [James L. Hicks] and, was such an outstanding writers. Couldn't get advertisement, which was still a problem of the, of the, of the black press. And, and also we couldn't prove the circulation, which of course was the criteria for advertisement, and it is a well established fact and pattern of African Americans that we take a newspaper, a weekly, or magazine, and pass it on. So you can't say, well, because you only sold fifty newspapers, only fifty people read your newspaper. To the contrary. By the time we passed it on to ten or fifteen people that is your circulation. So I--that, that was a marvelous era, then again, we had three very strong, dominant newspaper, newspapers in Harlem. Story_ID: 572934 Speaker 1: I was also active with the Coordinating Council of Negro Performers [sic. Coordinating Council for Negro Performers]. That was [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, all your outstanding Broadway actors and actresses. And at that time, we had segregation of the theater, as well as everywhere else. And the only roles that minorities had were as maids and butlers, and we would determine that we would bring about change, so we had the first blackout of TV, national. It was hard for us to coordinate it nationally from New York [New York], and we didn't have that large a budget. It was all our own money. But because of the caliber of the people who were involved in the effort, it was very, very effective. The power structure thought it was stronger that it was. We did an effective job. And after the second attempt, we started to see a change in attitudes, because nobody had really taken the risk of putting their job on the line and saying we won't tolerate it any longer. And you have to think it from the standpoint, not from my participation, from the standpoint of the participation of the Ruby Dees, and the Ossie Davises, et cetera. Speaker 2: What was your role with them? Speaker 1: I was general counsel (laughter). General counsel. And my role was to do all of the, all of the legal requirements to make certain that the organization was viable and that we practice a standards of conduct as an organization that would require Broadway and the motion picture industry to pay attention to the demands constantly being made by black actors. We were tired of only seeing Stepin Fetchit. And that was the only man that, you know, really had a job all the time. He and Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you tell me how the, did the organization have a name and how it was-- Speaker 1: Coordinating Council of Negro Performers. That was the name of it. Speaker 2: That it incorporated in what year? Speaker 1: In New York City. Fred O'Neill became head of the Actors Equity [Actors' Equity Association], now that's your big labor union for the theater. Fred was the president, everyone and anyone was a member. But if you were a, a black actor, actress, then you were a member, and nine out of ten you participated. Because we had a common goal. And over the years, I would sit back and, and, and look at how many of, of the people still, particularly Ossie, Ossie Davis, maintained that, that profile as a voice for black America. You know, we had our Langston Hughes, I'll take my Ossie Davis. From my time, remarkable human being. Ruby Dee, she's great. Brilliant woman, absolutely brilliant woman. And it's a pity that more students can't study with her. Excellent academician, excellent. Speaker 2: So after that count, after the blackout, what changes did you see come about in Broadway? Speaker 1: Started seeing a difference, not only in as far as the hiring of actors and actresses, but also, our concern was across the board. So we didn't stop there. Stagecraft. You name it, whatever was involved in the industry, we wanted a piece of the pie, we certainly wanted to be considered. Story_ID: 572935 Speaker 1: So you said before that there were five, relatively five, African American women who were lawyers during the time you started out. You said, activists. By virtue of being a woman and African American and lawyer, was most of the law that the five of you practiced have something to do with activism? Speaker 2: No, that you--that that cannot be said of that I'm thinking of. But none was pacifists (laughter), except that, for example with Cora Walker [Cora T. Walker], who just recently passed less than a year ago. Cora Walker took on the City of New York [New York]. You know, there was a time in New York City where when the building department came by to inspect your building, they expected at Christmastime one or two bottles of alcohol depending upon the size of the building, if it was any bigger than a small building in Harlem [New York, New York], they wanted mega bucks [dollars], and this was common practice. This was known by city officials. Nobody ran from it, they didn't hide it, it certainly was violative of the law. And there were more impressive on minorities than they were on the small white entrepreneur. They went to Cora Walker's office, and they said they wanted to give her a clearance on her office building, that they wanted a bottle of liquor. She says, "I'm not gonna give you a bottle of liquor." Took her about three or four years, a lot of consternation, an awful expensive trial. By meaning, that as an attorney, you don't have time to take care of your own legal matters. And it took, it took a long time, but she took them to court, challenged the system, you don't hear about a bottle of liquor anymore. Speaker 1: So that was a bribe, you give them a bottle of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, in those days, everything had a bribe. Everything had a price. If you wanted service, you had to pay for it in Harlem. That was a given. And you paid higher than anybody paid downtown. Not--they had more money, but we paid more. Story_ID: 572936 Speaker 1: So going back to your time at Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York]. You come out of Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in '56 [1956], you decide you are going to Columbia. Speaker 2: Came out of Howard in '54 [1954]-- Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 2: Went to Columbia, graduated Columbia graduate school of law in '56 [1956]. Time magazine would be '57 [1957]. Okay, um-hm. Speaker 1: So you said prior to this that you'd already become a young Republican. When did that come about? Speaker 2: Shortly after I finished Howard University School of Law. A number of my faculty professors were Republicans. I admired them. And I'd sit and I'd listen. And I--when I came home to New York [New York], I looked, Republican Party courted me. The Democratic Party wanted me, but I looked and I saw, Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] wasn't not even a New Yorker, but went and married, uh, Danny Burrows' daughter, Joyce [Joyce Burrows Dinkins]. Danny Burrows [Daniel Burrows] was in the state assembly [New York State Assembly] for many years. And Paterson [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson], and I'm just going down a long list of very intelligent, bright, young future leaders, including Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], who I used to play pinochle with all the time. And, I said well now, first of all it's gonna to be an old boys network to begin with, so it's gonna be uphill battle. But look at all the heads I've gotta try to climb over. And it's really, not my, my, my political thoughts are not that akin to being a Democrat. My mother's [Lillie Tooks Toote] a Democrat, my father's [Frederick Toote] a Democrat, all my family. But it's, it's not really where my mindset is. And again, my district leader [Harold C. Burton], courted me. He and my co-leader, Lucille Pickett [Lucille Pickett Williams], made a real effort. They brought me into the party, I could go by in the evening, and we'd sit around and we'd talk. Well, I didn't do so much talking because I wanted to learn. And I would listen, she would feed us, the club always had food. I mean, real meals, real southern meals. And she had a beauty shop, Lucille Pickett, the co-leader, a very attractive woman. And he would tell us about being with this political figure, and that political figure, and this convention, and what he said, and what they did. And you really got it first hand, and it was a learning experience. And I knew that there were some within the Republican Party, as there are now, who wanted the involvement of blacks, and I thought it was a marvelous opportunity. I had no idea how constantly uphill a battle it would be to gain recognition or status within the party. Story_ID: 572937 Speaker 1: What makes it a constant uphill battle and struggle to gain recognition within the party? Speaker 2: Well, in politics, there's always a battle to gain recognition based upon your credentials, that's number one. Political ideology, number two. And principle. I hate to use something in that cliche as the word, principle, but it, it, it's how you view what the role of government in politics actually is. And I've always felt that politics is about doing good for the people. That it wasn't a job, it wasn't a good paying job with good little perks. And, and I took it seriously. Very, very seriously. Then as a Republican, because we could not carry a large vote to demand. And yet, I did demand. It made, whenever they saw me, a problem. When I ran for office, I found--I should have shown it to you. It is--I found a matchbook from when I ran for the assembly [New York State Assembly]. The district has been cut up since then, but when I ran for the assembly, my district ran all the way up to (unclear), almost to where my high school [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York] was. My district was partially white. I mean, solid white. I mean, I had an area with solid, solid white. Charlie Buchanan [Charles Buchanan] owned the ballroom [Savoy Ballroom] on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, New York, New York], and Dave Dinkins' father-in-law [Daniel Burrows] was his best friend. And Buchanan's wife, Bessie Buchanan, who was a Cotton Club girl, you know, a dancer. A dancer, was our assembly woman. Lovely human being, very nice person, not qualified to be an assembly woman. I had four I would like in the qualifications of my assembly person. The ability to read legislation, the ability to draft legislation, now, barring that, fine. But that is to me part of the job description. I walked my entire district, which nobody had ever done (laughter). I walked my district, I knocked on those storefronts. They'd look at me with shock and they said, "Nobody, no candidate for any office has ever asked for the vote." Couple of them gave me a few dollars. Charlie Buchanan, I'm running against his wife, and Dave Dinkins' father-in-law, they would bring me lunch every day. They used to want to take me to lunch. They would ride around in their limousines, they had nice, long chauffeured limousines, and they would want to take me to lunch. And I said, "No, you can't--I don't, I don't have time for lunch. I'm out here campaigning." I said, "I know I'm not supposed to win, but I gotta believe." And so I gotta believe and I gotta look for a miracle. So then, then they started bringing me my box lunch. And I, I, I really walked the district, I talked to the people and I, I, I got an opportunity to explain to them what, what politics and government was about. And simplicity said you cannot have all your eggs in one basket, and when we as a voting segment do that, we weaken ourselves. It's simple. And I got a, I got a very good vote and Nelson Rockefeller was pleased. Not that he expected a good vote out of Harlem [New York, New York], so it didn't matter. But since he had given me that thousand dollars that I referred to in the other interview, which was a lot of money to give to a black candidate. One thousand dollars, big deal (laughter). But, I, I, I really wanted to try to awaken the sleeping giant. Well, I didn't then, and that was nineteen fifty--'57 [1957] or something like that. I didn't awaken it then, I guess, it hasn't been awakened yet. But it was remarkable the responsiveness of knocking on a door would do. And that then let me know that although I, I was not gonna be successful for elected office within the party, I might be able to have impact and influence as related to policy decisions and outreach for inclusiveness of minorities and all people within the political apparatus and structure of the Republican party and politics in general. Story_ID: 572938 Speaker 1: And why did you feel that that was an easier challenge than doing it through the Democrats (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Democrats. Too many Democrats to climb over. Speaker 1: Too many to climb over. Speaker 2: It's the competitiveness of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they're all talented. It wasn't not one that was not talented. The brightest in those days, not necessarily now, I smile when I say this, but in those days, the brightest youngsters in America were black. They came to Harlem [New York, New York], they came to New York City [New York, New York] to achieve success, so the competition was fierce. Absolutely fierce. If ever you wanted a battalion of geniuses, then just come to Harlem and grab you a young, your young academicians. Your young lawyers and doctors. We had Aaron Wells [Aaron O. Wells] as a practicing physician, Castro [Fidel Castro] got ill, the state department [U.S. Department of State] had a heart attack. Call Aaron Wells, black doctor. Oh, yes, we--the credentials were outstanding, quite professional. It was a remarkable period of time. Now, the, the talent of, of black America's spread across America. In a way that's good, in a way it's not. It's good for America, it's not good for Harlem because we don't, we don't, we don't have all of that power. I'm talking about the infusion of, of, of knowledge, the drive, the ambition. The, the--it was just, you could just feel it as you walked down the street. When people talk of that era, you see Jacques [ph.] next door to the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York]. Jacques, oh, that's the man that went to Paris [France], had a restaurant in Paris, which was highly acclaimed, came back and James Baldwin and others would--even now people can still relate to the establishments that we had in Harlem and how meaningful they were. Story_ID: 572939 Speaker 1: So you also said you wrote for the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News]. You were a reporter. What sort of things were you covering? Speaker 2: Whatever they assigned to me. I can't believe that the Amsterdam News printed almost a, you know, Amsterdam News is a big paper, you know. Anything that turns in The New York Times, printed a two page, more than a two page article on--I can't even pronounce it, egalitarianism written by me. I can't believe it. They would let me write on whatever I wanted to write about. I wrote well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how it related to the black community? Speaker 2: No, how it related to people. Speaker 1: How it related to people. Speaker 2: People. Uh-uh. Not--I was not limited to writing articles that, how it related to blacks. Or what would be a particular interest to blacks. It was--they had a abundance of people, by the way, who wanted to write for them, you know. And even now, just getting a, a byline is very significant. But--and, and, and they had a restaurant on, on, on--what was it called? Frank's [Frank's Restaurant, New York, New York]. On 125th Street, between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. Where every night, they'd walk around the corner from 126th Street and 8th Avenue, right around the corner. The Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] is going to, towards 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], they'd go from 8th Avenue up towards St. Nicholas, and this was a white-owned restaurant. All white waiters. We finally got maybe one or two before they closed. Best food in town. Absolutely excellent food, excellent service. But that bar was a place where you could talk about anything and everything and learn so much. And all the people who were writers, or of that, that element, that's where they were. The politicians were the Jacques's [New York, New York], and the Red Rooster [Red Rooster Harlem, New York, New York]. The writers and contemporaries of that nature, the bar at Frank's. Story_ID: 572940 Speaker 1: So what do you consider to have been your first love then? Writing or law? Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). I love to write, and it's amazing, my nephew [Christopher C. Robinson] said to me last night when I was doing some studying, not doing a case, studying law. And he said, "You really gotta love law, don't you?" And I said, "Yes." It pleased me when he said it 'cause his eyes were big and he was smiling. He's a second year law student. But you really have to love law to, to be successful and be satisfied to make it a career. 'Cause it's, it's difficult, and it's even more difficult now as society's become so litigious. You know, everything is a suit for this and a suit for that, and the procedures are so involved. It takes years to get a case before a judge. I was studying, and, and was advised if a client comes in, and has a franchise dispute, like Kentucky Chicken [Kentucky Fried Chicken; KFC Corporation], something of that nature, advise them it'll take a year before it can be resolved. Your best option is federal court (laughter), run from arbitration, but tell them it's gonna take a year. That's ridiculous. When I was at the American Association of Arbitration [American Arbitration Association], I helped to craft what we now call the arbitration system. It wasn't heard of then. And by the way, there weren't many blacks on that board. I think one or two of us. And I really thought that was gonna be the panacea. It has been a marvelous tool. It is a marvelous tool. At times gets a little simplistic, but it still is--I'm delighted that I pioneered in that effort, and it's one I'm very proud of and involved with. But like my nephew said with his eyes very big, you really have to love it. So I don't, I, I don't know, I like doing both. Story_ID: 572941 Speaker 1: What did you do for Time magazine? Speaker 2: National affairs. Now, that's sort of broad, you know, national affairs. But, uh-- Speaker 1: What national affairs can you think of that stands out that you covered? Speaker 2: You name it. All of the [U.S.] Supreme Court cases. You see, you have a tier system there. So I was a writer, you can say that you wrote it, that's fine. I know I wrote it, they know I wrote it. You had a guy, by the name of Cassandra [ph.], a columnist in London [England]. The London Times [The Times], who wrote about me in the London Times because he saw my name on the masthead of a Time magazine. Toote [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], I don't, don't ask me why it struck his fancy. But everybody contributes to anything coming out of Time Inc. [New York, New York]. It's why I remind people red check, and they look at me. And I said, "Nothing went out until the last minute. Before running to the press, we took our red pencil and we put a dot over important words or aspects of a sentence." Oh, yes. Yes. And that's why I had to work on Saturday and Sunday. See, it was a job--I, I, I would have stayed at Time Inc. I probably would have been editor, publisher eventually. A fortune, I mean, some folks in there were predicting that. But I had to work on Saturday and Sunday. Saturday night, not Saturday in the daytime, Saturday night you went in at two o'clock, and god knows, you gotta be lucky if you get out 11:00, 12:00, 1:00. Came in crack of dawn Sunday, at eight o'clock, and you did not leave until the magazine went to bed. Now, they fed you well. You name any place you wanted to eat on Saturday, you could go to--you, if you said you wanted to go to the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] for lunch, fine, just write it up. No problem. And on Sunday, the food was catered and it was the finest food I've ever seen. I've eaten at the White House [Washington, D.C.], I've eaten around the world. I have never had better food than what Time Inc. paid its editorial, fed its editorial staff. Great, great, great food. But it was very frustrating as a youngster, you know, to work on Saturday night and Sundays. Speaker 1: So, on a personal note, what did you--what would you have, what did you do on Saturday nights when you were not working? Where did you go out? Speaker 2: I, I, I didn't. I worked every Saturday night. At Time Inc., you got a week off every thirteen days, every thirteen weeks. You got a week off. But every Saturday night, and I never missed--I don't think I was sick while I was there. Speaker 1: So, but this is, that you're in your early twenties, this is your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. It's frustrating (laughter). Speaker 1: Frustrating. Story_ID: 572942 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you dating? Did you date? Speaker 2: Yes, of course. It wasn't--wasn't the best, but my friends were understanding. Some of my dates were from, from college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. So they understood the career path that I had chosen. But it was very, very, extremely difficult. It's the reason I'm not married. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Did you ever date outside of your race? Was there a time when you did that? Speaker 2: Only a couple of times, and it was not successful. I (laughter), it's, to each it's own. I have no problem with interracial marriages, relationships, and, and, and my friends, I have a lot of white friends. Close friends. But it somehow or other, except for a very tall, handsome German student when I was at Columbia grad law [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], but he uh, I wasn't about to think about going to Germany. And I'm in grad law school, oh, no, no, no. So that did not last long. So, no (laughter). Speaker 1: So the answer for that is no. Story_ID: 572943 Speaker 1: You were just wrapping up, but I want to move back to your own publishing company. How did your publishing company come--did that come out of your work with Time magazine, or Time Inc. [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No, there was at Time Inc. I specialized then in theatrical world. So I mentioned the fact that my contracts, you could buy my contracts and mimeograph copies of my contracts at Pasintino drugstore in Tin Pan Alley, and I had a lot of clients who were in the music industry. I recognized then that different entrepreneurship, it was an avenue, you didn't have to knock too many heads. All my life, I'm knocking heads. Here's a receptive avenue. And so the publishing companies came about because I kept talking--my, I had a client, that was the first African American to be offered an independent producer's deal. Was offered by Capitol Records. Capitol Records and Bing Crosby, the two of them. Because Bing Crosby, Inc. [Bing Crosby Enterprises, Inc.], which was orange juice, coal, oh Bing Crosby was a zillionaire. And they wanted to acquire his catalog, and he was my client and we flew to Los Angeles [California], had a week of meetings at the Capitol buildings and I, I realized that, that this was something that I possibly could not only do well for myself financially, but it should be rewarding for those who are involved with me. And we were always talking about having our own companies. Now, the independent producer's deal was the biggest concept that we had had. First of all, they've got to offer it to you. They've got to say, we're gonna give you a budget of millions of dollars for you to go out and under our auspices. You're--it's like a franchise, you're gonna do your thing. And that's exactly what they gave to Luther Dixon, but Luther Dixon had his Shirelles [The Shirelles], Chuck Jackson, I can just going down the list. Luther Dixon was prolific. A great writer, a great producer, and I would be talking to my clients, my friends. One night, I was sitting down playing poker in New Jersey with Bob Hilliard, who, 'Our Day Will Come,' white writer. 'Our Day Will Come,' excellent writer. And we used to always go over there to play poker and Ed Townsend, who did most of Marvin Gaye's best hits from Motown [Motown Records], worked with Henry Mancini on Hollywood, Hollywood soundtracks, motion pictures, which blacks are not aware of and which, in his day, quite a singer. And we were playing poker and he said, "You know, there's a building in Englewood [New Jersey] that'd be a great studio, great recording studio." And my concept was to almost do what [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy did. I mean, he didn't have a monopoly on it, he was just in Detroit [Michigan]. But we couldn't--I could never conceive of the facility. And it turned out that the town hall of Englewood was a facility. There was a band, and there was a drugstore and businesses on the first floor, but the upper floors were empty. Huge building. Half a city block. And from that poker game came Town Sound Recording Studio and Tru-Glow-Town Records. Story_ID: 572944 Speaker 1: How did it come from that poker game? Speaker 2: Well, the next day, I went and looked at the building and then--and Ed, Ed Townsend was a producer, and Ed Townsend, and I, and then Trude Heller, who was the one who bought into being discotheque in America. Trude Heller, white, had discotheques in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. One was at 9th [Street] and 6th Avenue. Speaker 1: The name? Speaker 2: Trude Heller's. The other, the Eighth Wonder [New York, New York] was next to the--not the Van Goghs [ph.]. What was the name of that club? It's still there, now with different owners, on 8th Street and another on 7th Avenue. Well, in any event, she was highly respected in the industry for her nightclub abilities, and she was the one who started flicking the lights as the band was playing and the singers were singing. She would go over to the toggle switch. This is interesting, she'd go over to the light switch and push the light up, light goes on, you want the light to go off when you go out of a room, you push the light down. She would go over to the toggle switch, and the band is playing, she'd just flick it up and down. Up and down, she'd just flick the lights. That's how it caught on. That's how it caught on. Oh, by the way, Ed Townsend is 'For Your Love.' You know the song? 'For Your Love,' that's Ed Townsend. So, in any event, Trude was a partner, and we collectively thought. I really felt that we--it was gonna be a good and highly successful venture. Became very involved, the building and the studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey] the costs were astronomical. And we're getting bogged down in that and the workmen, we had to renovate the whole building, and of course, my background in construction stems from my mother's [Lillie Tooks Toote] side of my family. My uncle taught in the high schools carpentry, et cetera. So I learned from him, and my daddy [Frederick Toote] did patchwork around the house and anything that needed to be done was a great time for me to spend with him. 'Cause while he was patching, I could, you know, talk. So the men would leave and go to a bar down the street on Englewood [New Jersey], in Englewood, down Palisade Avenue. And there was this lady in there, and she had some teeth missing out of her mouth, and there was an awful--we were always in the newspapers, little blurbs about how we were building a studio, that it really was gonna take place, because a lot of people didn't think it could. But the costs were becoming astronomical and blah, blah, blah. She said, "Well, you tell that lady," and she had been drinking, she had snuff in her mouth, "that she give me the schematics, I'll build it for her. 'Cause anybody can build from schematics." The next morning, I'm there with my work crew. I hired all the dropouts from HARYOU [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited; Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], which was a city program to train youths in carpentry, et cetera. They built my studio, and I said--I sat with the construction workers and I said, "You know, that woman's right." If I could build this mammoth, and I had a recording studio in, the first, the big one was humongous in size. You could put a philharmonic orchestra in there. We did this soundtrack for films in there. Surely, she's right. It's not, what am I thinking, why am I letting these people tell me how mammoth a job it is. Story_ID: 572945 Speaker 1: To make a long story short, we got it built. I was lucky enough to meet the engineer for Frank Sinatra, course a white guy, very, very, very nice man who just liked me, and I'm--I don't know how I got to meet him except I know I was at MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.]. I went to his office, he was in charge of the A and R [artists and repertoire] department, he was not involved in making the records, he was, in fact, an engineer, the recording engineer. And he didn't do that many sessions, he did a number of early sessions with Frank Sinatra. And, and I said, "I need business." Oh, I know, somebody sent me to him. You know, I was running around to all the major companies saying, "I need business, come to my studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey]. It's right across the George Washington Bridge. You got plenty of places to park, you got a bus terminal up on 168th Street that gets you right there to New Jersey. It's ideal, the rate is perfect for you, and the equipment is state of the art." Which it was. So I'm there talking to a man, I ended up with The Animals, and The Mothers of Invention. And those two recording groups, would have been sufficient to maintain any recording studio because their albums were just, just popping off the charts. And they felt comfortable in that studio. There was just something about it. So that's the studio, then James Brown, I used to go to every now and then, you know, when, when certain artists are recording, like Ruth Brown, James Brown. They're recording, and you hear about it. Every now and then, I'd drop by and say hi, and for some reason, we just all got along so well. I didn't drink, certainly didn't use anything that was illicit, illegal and--but, I mean, we just--I just, it was fascinating getting to see that kind of talent. That raw talent coming to play. Because the average person, even today, writes music, including The Beatles, can't write music. They can compose it, they don't write it. And so my goal was, and I did, I set up a department that you could come in and send in a tape, or you come in and hum. When you left, you left with a lead sheet. You left with your music written in notes for you to get it with a copy write. And that's--I wanted to stop, like Dick Clark, one of my first cases, was when Dick Clark put his name on 'Sixteen Candles.' It was written by Edna Lewis [sic. Luther Dixon] and my client [The Crests], and Dick Clark didn't write 'Sixteen Candles.' But his name was on it, Dick Clark. And, you know, this was just common of the music industry. They took advantage, not just of blacks, they took advantage of artists, all artists were taken advantage of. So I thought that, you know, I always have an--I always think that out of whatever professionalism you're involved in, whatever you made money with, you can always do some good also. That's the ice cream on the cake for me. And so my idea was to have a Motown [Motown Records], but a Motown that would really allow the black artists to come to his full realm of talent. Speaker 2: And to own his own music? Speaker 1: Oh, yes. I had a partnership with James Brown. And that was the strangest thing, he called me and said, "Let's sit down and talk business." And I did, you know, James Brown to say that to me, I would see him at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], every now and then, I had a client who was at the Apollo, and I might go by to see them and end up with my car, my convertible top, getting cut on 126th Street where I had it parked. 'Cause you just couldn't park on that block without them breaking into your car. It was unbelievable, you just--the police gave us no protection whatsoever. None, zero. They didn't care. They did not care. I can't tell you. My car was never cut in this block where I, my offices where I lived. Story_ID: 572946 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this. Earlier you spoke about, or the last session you spoke about, you were able to, to converse in two different worlds. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know how to speak uptown, you knew how to speak downtown. When you spoke with James Brown, what language were you speaking? Speaker 2: James Brown is, is, is a brilliant man, and so I was my professional me. I did not have to have that, that--I did not have to be concerned about making him feel uncomfortable. He reached out for me. He wanted to have his own label, and he wanted it to be big, and he didn't want his own label just to be his records. He wanted a real record company. My problem was that I was so involved with--I had two labels [TNT Records and Tru-Glow-Town Records] with, with my, my complex. I had two different labels, one, one time at Christmas, and Christmas was the worst time to have a hit, I got a hit out and the second one on the same artist comes out from the pressing plant, we can't get enough of the first one, now they're playing the second one, they reversed the label. I mean, it just--the music industry is madness. It's absolute madness, and I couldn't, I couldn't cope. It was, I couldn't do it all. Speaker 1: How involved were you with the Republican Party at this time? Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Very little. Speaker 2: Oh, no. When I had that studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey], it was day and night. Story_ID: 572947 Speaker 1: In fact, when the studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey] caught fire, I think it was Dizzy Gillespie, I can't remember. No, it wasn't Dizzy Gillespie, no. I can't remember who it was. One of the well known producers had just used the large studio. And every now and then, somebody would ask me to stay around for good luck, or be in the engineering booth. I did engineer several of The Animals and The Mothers of Invention recordings. I was good at it, you know. I didn't, you know, I didn't, I didn't want to do it. I--too many other responsibilities. But there was no time for, for practice of war, there was no time for--I did have a couple of clients, but they were all in the music industry, and I was trying to get this off the ground. And it was off, and it was flying. We were doing well, we were selling records, we had payroll, never missed a payroll, never late on the rent, every bill was paid. We have--had a producer who would do all of his recordings in Europe with symphony orchestras, then come back to America and then take the four track, and then make it into an eight track. Much cheaper to do, than you know, how unions are here in America. And he had just shipped in about a couple hundred tapes, and I guess a musician got careless with a cigarette, because we didn't have nothing but tape all over the place. You know, you're using tape. We had tape all over the place. But I was very careful in the construction, and I had Homasote floors, and everything conceivable to fireproof. Did everything conceivable. I don't know how that place caught fire. I left, and by the time I got home, I don't think I was home fifteen minutes when I got a phone call. "The building's on fire." About ten o'clock at night. It was in all the newspapers. 'Cause the business was respected, was established. We had top name artists using that studio for their top name companies. No company said, "No, we're not going to go to that little black studio in New Jersey." Speaker 2: Did you ever have the opportunity to work with Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] doing any folk music? Speaker 1: No. Best that I ever did for folk, was a group that came out of Washington, D.C. No, I tried to stay out of the music production aspect of the business. That's what I had the talented people for. And I, and I felt that if the--if it was properly administered, we had a goldmine. Story_ID: 572948 Speaker 1: So once the business [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey] caught fire and burned, what happened? Speaker 2: The water doused my enthusiasm, that simple. I just didn't rebuild. It cost one hundred thousand for one piece of equipment that cuts the mass disk that you send to the pressing plant. The stylus and the needle that cuts it is a ruby stylus. That darn machine was dangling between floors when I got there. And I never will forget, because I stayed there for hours, and some salvage person or somebody, I was stupid. You know, when I get emotionally--that's why I try not to get emotionally involved with what I do--asked me did I want it. And I didn't even think about whether Ed Townsend might want it, Trude Heller might want it. I said, no. Really, the business was me. I said, no. We didn't even get salvage money out of it. Speaker 1: So there was no insurance? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. But I didn't rebuild. I couldn't. It was a, it was a, it was a marvelous experience, and I really enjoyed Marian Anderson coming over and dubbing the soundtrack, which they said we couldn't do, we didn't have the capabilities for it, but some people in the industry thought that we did and they were trying to prove a point, and, you know, we weren't going to fail and we did the soundtrack for this film coming out of Hollywood with Marian Anderson. We did a soundtrack--it was some experiences like that. The Miriam Makeba album, which is still one of the top albums of African music of that genre. That was cut at the studio. Speaker 1: Were there ever any conspiracies about the fire itself? Speaker 2: You know, I close--I've heard everything. Speaker 1: What have you heard? Speaker 2: Competition within the industry, the mob, bigots. I heard so many things that it was shattering. Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: All I knew was that I took an empty building, and it's your thing. It's still being played, you know, The Isley Brothers? That was cut in my studio. And I listen to these commercials, "It's your thing," and I say, "Oh, my god." You know, I know what I did from nothing. And it just--the way it, well, I guess it's, I've learned how to cope with it because I've chosen, my sign is that of the phoenix. You know, you go into the ashes and you come up with the beautiful plumage. I mean, I've been in the ashes so many times, it's un-, unbelievable-- Story_ID: 572949 Speaker 1: So out of the ashes of the studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey], what, what comes? Speaker 2: Then, let's see, after the studio, I think, it's yeah. It was, it was the practice of law-- Speaker 1: And what type of-- Speaker 2: --and I had the big labor case. Big front page labor case, (laughter) Joe Overton [L. Joseph Overton]. Big labor guy. Speaker 1: How did you get the big labor case? Speaker 2: He was my client. And it was a question as to whether or not the unions were muscling grocery store owners into money under the table rather than increase of wages for the union employees. And you had this barrage of highly recognized, high powered, labor attorneys and moi. Because, again, talking about Harlem [New York, New York] and how we all knew each other. When Joe Overton, and he's a Democrat, big time, of course, big time Democrat. He got into trouble, he knew who he wanted. He held up my first support meeting in government. Because in federal court, you cannot leave a client. You can't say, you know, I've got to drop the case because something of more significance in my life is occurring, and if I don't snatch it, I'll lose it. It does not matter. And my theory as a practicing attorney has always been, the last resort is the drama of the jury trial. I'm always successful with juries. But I want to win on paper. I want to win on motions. I don't even want the judge--I don't want to give the judge any discretion. I'm not even trying to find the sensitivities of the jurists. I wanna research, and I wanna win on motions. And I just pecked away at the counts, and pecked away at the counts, and so the counts were being dismissed, and I'm digging, and I'm digging and it was a joy. It was a joy, and to finally--he reluctantly, reluctantly let me take that post. That's right. Speaker 1: And that post was? Speaker 2: Assistant director of ACTION. Speaker 1: ACTION agency of volunteer action liaisons? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And that was roughly, what year? Speaker 2: I don't remember, seven-- Speaker 1: I have '71 [1971], seven-- Speaker 2: I'd say about '70 [1970], '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. Yeah. Story_ID: 572950 Speaker 1: And what were the other big roles you played as the assistant director of that, of that particular agency? Speaker 2: Well, I was very concerned, see my--I, I, I saw what this WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] did under [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt for blacks, particularly in Harlem [New York, New York]. You talk about the Harlem Renaissance, what helped the Harlem renaissance was the WPA and that infusion of that money, that stipend so that you could paint the murals, and write the books, and do the plays. And I, I believe in volunteerism. And I believe that their, that, that many people have skills and talents, they, they don't have college degrees and not, as you'd say, you know, (air quotes) educated. But they can be very influential in the structure of our society, if there is room for them to give. I really believe that, and so being a part of ACTION, it was like a gift from God, you know. Because that's what ACTION is about. We had Peace Corps, which of course was the volunteer program in Africa, and I had a chance to work with our Peace Corps volunteers and, and to see some of them on assignments in, in Africa and elsewhere. We had VISTA [AmeriCorps VISTA], which is Volunteers in Service to America. And we started our other programs, which was the foster grandparent program. Which is a great program for where when people are retired, they can work within the school system. They're making a small stipend, and it's like, it's the foster grandparents that are sitting there helping the kids. It's, it's a win, win situation. And we had SCORE [Service Corps of Retired Executives] and ACE [Active Corps of Executives], which was for businesses. Your retired businesspeople who went out and helped small businesses become successful. So I enjoyed, I enjoyed ACTION and I also enjoyed, really the responsibility of making certain that when our volunteers came out of service, that they were able to land on both feet. Particularly, the Peace Corps volunteer because you're coming back from, from Australia, from Africa, from the Far East, and the lifestyle there, and they're all dedicated. I tell you, I call them--I say they wear bleeding hearts on their sleeves. Oh, they were pains in the neck, but beautiful, beautiful people. And, and I just wanted to make certain that, that, that government fulfilled its responsibility in assuring an easy path into what was their future. That they got the student loan, that they got accepted in the university of their choice, that if they had emotional problems as a consequence of service, that it was dealt with. So I liked that, I liked that post. It was fun. Speaker 1: Within that post, you said that you'd worked with some Democrats, some Republicans. Who were you able to express your political ideology to as a Republican? Who were your confidants? Were there any other African American Republicans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always, and the rank that I had at ACTION, was such that there were so few blacks in government at that time. Very, very few. That, that poster over there is of women for the first time who were in government, of high level positions. It was unbelievable. Just a handful, and of that handful, there were about three of us. But of that whole handful I was, I guess, in rank, and then about, (unclear) but, two, three amongst the women, and then when my (unclear), when I got my next appointment, I was number one for a while, until we got a woman in the cabinet. Story_ID: 572951 Speaker 1: Now, was the next appointment the Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] appointment? Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: But, they both were. Okay. So from the assistant from ACTION, then you go to urban--to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]? And tell me about that transition. How did that appointment come about? Speaker 2: I had a real problem when I went into government and-- Speaker 1: Before you go tell me that, I just want to go back, because just right to '68 [1968], because so many people were being assassinated in--during that time. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy], you know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Well, that's after. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, that's after. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The problems we had then were the Emmett Till and an Emmett Till was not, Emmett Till was ahead, it was behind my going into government. And many years had passed, and I was in government, but we just still had racism. It's still you're getting off at the, the train and not being able to get a cab or get off a plane, and not being able to get a cab. So racism is a real problem, and I encountered it in government. So when I went to ACTION, as assistant director, I found racism among staff. It was unbelievable. And there was a nice gentleman by the name of Tinney, Mr. Tinney [ph.]. I have a picture that his son did of the Berlin Wall, because most people think of the Berlin Wall as a wall of concrete or bricks. The Berlin wall is little stakes of two by fours that are, you know, like Xs. Mr. Tinney, who was about a grade fifteen, fourteen, fifteen in government, said, "Do you know management by objectives?" And I said, "No." He said, "You need to. Management by objectives is a tool, by which you're able to control your input and output, and to identify and focus upon important matters. And if you'd like to learn, and, you know, I'll teach you." And he did. Story_ID: 572952 Speaker 1: We were in Berlin [Germany]. You--he was going to teach you the objectives of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh (laughter). Mr. Tinney [ph.] taught me management by objectives and which turned out to be very important for me not only when I was at ACTION but when I got to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But tell me just--before you tell me what President Nixon said, tell me what he taught you. What were the objectives? Speaker 2: Well, management by objectives is where you--on paper; it's all done on paper--where you spend hours. It's not a quick task. That's why nobody wants to do it. But every major corporation does it. It's like a spreadsheet of ideas and you have timetables and goals, and you prioritize. And that's very important in, in an action forcing life which is what government is. Before you finish A, you're doing B. B gets interrupted. You can't complete B. You cannot complete B. You can't even get back to A and you're doing C. You've got to look at your time schedules to see, is there a deadline? It's like in Georgia, they wanted to put a bus stop recently, of Coretta Scott King and the young lady responsible for carrying, you know, some new person, seeing it through the legislature was a comparatively newer elected official and the old boys network didn't tell her that (laughter) there was a timeframe for which that bill could be submitted. So this year the bus will not be up. So it will go up next year. But it would have been much nicer if the bus had gone up the year of Coretta Scott King's death. Well, management by objectives would allow you to curtail those kind of mistakes. Speaker 1: So, once (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's very difficult to do. Speaker 1: --you got into HUD and then Nixon says, all right. We're going to manage by objectives. Speaker 2: Well, I was managing by objectives when I went to HUD. My office was management by objectives. I went in with all of the newest electronic typewriters and--you name it, I had it. Speaker 1: But you were the only one that had it at the time. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: One of the few. Speaker 2: Yeah. The rest of them, they were getting them in but not the kind, the caliber I had. Mine were like, were like the word processors that we have now and everything had to be state of the art, including the media. I didn't have that dictating machine that everybody had. I had an entirely different one, and I went in with management by objectives and when President Nixon said for the United States government, and he announced it as one of his major policy initiatives which is that government should be like industry. We need goals and timetables and they need to be enunciated beforehand. And they need to be monitored on a basis to see whether we're on schedule or not. Well, anyway, the idea is great, yes and yes, we can do it but they didn't know how. Story_ID: 572953 Speaker 1: I spoke about Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and his contributions and you says, "Oh, we all know those but no one knows much about what Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was doing for the black community," and you said affirmative action was something that he took on. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He allowed it to become what we have today, a part of American government and American life, from the private sector and government. It was called the Philadelphia Plan, was Art Fletcher [HistoryMaker Arthur Fletcher]. The picture on the cover of the Sunday edition of The New York Times is with, is Art Fletcher and myself. And it is his office that, that fashioned the Philadelphia Plan for affirmative action using goals and timetables. Now, he had to watch the word quotas, where quotas is still a sensitive word. So you find another adjective, but he had an objective and he had a timetable to do it and a description of how to accomplish it, and it was mandatory. Speaker 1: So you were in on the early days of affirmative action when they were talking-- Speaker 2: Oh, indeed. I saw what that man went through (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when they were trying to create how inclusive it would. Would it be women? Would it be just blacks? Speaker 2: Oh, the government rebelled, industry rebelled, politicians. They could all see--anybody who could think, saw what the future was going to be like. Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel about them trying to add women to the equation of affirmative action? Speaker 2: I wasn't happy with that. I thought that women should have equal rights, but I didn't want to make it a part of the Civil Rights Movement as such. To me, civil rights are the rights of minorities. White women are a majority of the American population. When you include them with the rights of, of civil rights which allow you to go above and beyond the normal protection of the law, it can become burdensome to men no matter (audio disturbance) and I knew what the consequences and results would be. It was that simple. Speaker 1: And the consequences and results would be? Speaker 2: Backlash; bigotry really rearing its ugly head. Speaker 1: Well, who won in the struggle? Speaker 2: The battle is still going on. We now have some women who head Fortune 500 companies, but not that many. You know, it's like when I was (laughter) entering government, federal government (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let me ask-- Speaker 2: --you had a few that you can point to and say, they're there but there aren't enough to really say that we are across the board. Speaker 1: Well, in hindsight, do you think it was the right decision to try to keep women out of that affirmative action? Speaker 2: Is not afford, not--I did not wish to deny them protection. I did not wish to put them under the banner of civil rights protection. Speaker 1: Do you still feel that way? Speaker 2: To some degree, yes. To some degree, yes. I think that this nation owes black people, in particular, a special obligation, and I'm delighted to say that there are some presidents of the United States who are Republicans who have thought the same way. Story_ID: 572954 Speaker 1: (Background noise) And we will start with the first one you worked with then. Would that have been Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was your relationship with Mr. Nixon, President Nixon? Speaker 2: A ment- he was my mentor and oh, god, if he hadn't gotten into trouble, my life would have been so different. I told you, it's the phoenix up and into their ashes. I would go to cabinet meetings when I was at ACTION. First of all, I couldn't get the job until (audio disturbance) the Urban League [National Urban League] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], both, approved me. No white candidate for a like position in government had to go through that, to have major white organizations. Well, write a veto. It was difficult for a, a, a, a black person, and I encountered discrimination when I first went to ACTION, amongst staff. I didn't use the word doctor in front of my name until I went to ACTION. I didn't use it. I had the degree [from Columbia Law School, New York, New York]. I earned the degree. It's on my wall. I never used that title and then all of a sudden, how many people walking up to other officials, "Director, da-da-da-da-da-da-da." And if it's a secretary, I'm madam secretary. As a director, I'm director. No, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]." They'd walk up to me just easy. If that's not discrimination I don't know what else to call it. You may not recognize it as discrimination. You would not walk up to a white person of my rank and call them by their first name. You would not become familiar with them. You would not argue with them if they made a pronouncement of policy that they're instructing you to follow. I mean, just unbelievable. I had to reach out and get my college professor to be my executive, brought her in as a grade eighteen. That's the top of your civil service. College professor. That's hard to have a college professor to work for the student? Ooh, that's hard (laughter). Yes, I did. I needed all the help I could get. Speaker 1: Who was she? Who did you get? Speaker 2: Dr. Marie Wood. Marie V. Wood. Brilliant woman. Speaker 1: How did you convince her? Speaker 2: And her day was--she worked for Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. She was a Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] scholarship student. In those days, we didn't have student loans and da-da-da. So we didn't have money to go to school. So we didn't go to school, unless we worked and/or you got money from Pepsi- Cola and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and a couple of companies; Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York]. But there weren't many. So you all knew who your Pepsi-Cola and Ford scholarships students were, and she taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she worked in Congressman Powell's office. So I knew her because of my going to Congressman Powell's office and just going to hang around. Then her cousin was a year ahead of me at Howard, and we quote (air quotes), hung out together and we got a little group. And he was from New Jersey and so then we'd go by her house when we left campus, you know, and that was basically to hang out because we all lived in a dorm and--she was a brilliant woman. She was a brilliant woman. Really, really. Became assistant president at (audio disturbance) Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. This is after. Was she assistant president before me or after me? Before me she was assistant president in Hampton, yeah, before she came to my staff. Story_ID: 572955 Speaker 1: So back to Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. You said that he--that your career would be different had he not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. I, I would go to cabinet meetings. And Ron Nessen [Ronald H. Nessen] was his press secretary. And Ron Nessen was terribly young. Nixon would reach out for youngsters. You'd just have to look at his cadre of people, and you would see where every now and then he saw someone that he wanted, he knew had talent and he wanted to put his hands on, as we say in the good old Baptist church. And I'd go to cabinet meetings, and it was like when I was telling you before that in Washington [D.C.] my mentor would have, when I was undergrad school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], would have me--I'd go to her house and just sit on the floor. She'd say, "Don't talk. You know, this is not your show. This is for you to learn." Every now and then, I'd open my mouth but I was very judicious. And it was in the cabinet meetings I didn't, I don't even think I opened my mouth but because I had no role. I had no report to give. But it was my way of learning it. I'd sit there and eat my eggs with the cabinet and if--that's another reason why people weren't too fond of me because you know, they knew I was going to go over to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for at these cabinets--oh, it was marvelous. And he really felt that I had a future, that I could be of service to the American people and to my people in government. So from ACTION, then the campaign was over, his first term, I had picked--I wanted to leave ACTION and go to Consumer Product Safety [U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission], which I found. It had just gotten its budget. It had not had an office and I said, gee, it would be a smart thing to be a part of a brand new agency, Consumer Product Safety, consumer, poor people, minorities, everybody, but particularly you've got to be concerned about minorities. So I looked and I said, that's where I want to go. And that's what I asked the personnel office at the White House for (background noise), and they called me on the phone and asked me to come over and he said, that the president wanted me to consider going to HUD. HUD? [U.S.] Department of Housing and Urban Development, subcabinet, higher than what you asked for which was, madam secretary. HUD? What office at HUD? Now, I know development. Again, my--from my family; my grand, my granduncle [Toote's maternal great uncle, W.A. Tooks] who had the casket company. You know, I know construction, the studio [Town Sound Recording Studio, Englewood, New Jersey]. You know, what department at HUD? Now, that's important; potentials. Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity [Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity]. No, thank you. Turned it down flat and walked out. No, thank you. Speaker 1: No, thank you because (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't want a civil rights job. Speaker 1: And you didn't want a civil rights job because? Speaker 2: I didn't want, no. Story_ID: 572956 Speaker 1: Why did you not want a civil rights job? Speaker 2: Get chewed up and spit out. It's a--there's no career. What career can you have in civil rights unless you, you're going to be an elected official? Speaker 1: But you're--you'd follow the career of, at least in your mind's eye, you'd seen the career of Thurgood Marshall. You'd known he'd been a great civil rights attorney and he'd gone on to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Well, but there's no career you can aspire. You know, like Constance B. Motley [Constance Baker Motley] became federal district judge and appellate judge. They are the exceptions. We've even had--we had one congressman now who lost his seat on the judiciary, federal judiciary, yet was able to be elected to [U.S.] Congress. Civil rights is brutal and if you do your job, you're going to make some enemies. Also, in civil rights sometimes you have to make deals, and if you're not willing to wheel and deal and just going to stick to principle, you're going to make enemies. So, no, I didn't want to hear the words, civil rights. And it really--I mean, President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had to just say, you know--and I know he said it. He said, "Go back and tell that young lady that I want her to take the job. The office [Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity] has not had a head for two years. And no civil servants are running around and then nothing is being done under my administration for which I am getting blamed." Well, if you don't have someone heading--in a department of government we should have little agencies. Like when I was at ACTION, ACTION was an agency. Stands by itself. In a department, you've got various little agencies. So at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] you've got the department that handles mortgages throughout the nation. You've got a department that handles building buildings throughout the nation. You've got a department that handles housing throughout the nation. You know, different aspects, different agencies all under one big umbrella with a secretary, okay. You see, that office is running--is not running, and, "I've got to put somebody in there that I can feel comfortable with." Now, I do believe, he said it. I really do, and I thought about my egg breakfasts and I said, "Well, it's not going to be dead end. I'm not going to be a dead end." If I do my--I can do my job. I can do it right. I can still have a career (laughter). So, that's how I got to HUD. Speaker 1: So you took the job? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Reluctantly? Speaker 2: Very reluctant. Story_ID: 572957 Speaker 1: In doing the job, were you pleasantly surprised about, by what you could actually accomplish in the position? Speaker 2: He was, and the other presidents I served under, I was--but, it was difficult. My average day would be from nine in the office, nothing later than nine, and out nothing earlier than ten [o'clock] at night. I kept bed linen in my office and my couch pulled out. I had to find us some furniture (laughter). My desk and bookcases and everything were built at the Allen Penitentiary [ph.]. You know, we'd take our big corporate executives who steal billions of dollars, and we'd put them in federal penitentiaries where they do carpentry work and they'd do some ex- oh, you've not, you've not seen furniture 'til you see furniture that comes out of that penitentiary. And you have to wait because it's custom made. But my office was beautiful. Custom drapes. It was a lovely office. But in any event, I kept, I kept linen. I had a refrigerator which was a part of my office in the alcove. Speaker 1: Who were the other people you worked with in Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration? Speaker 2: Within HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or outside of HUD? Speaker 1: Outside of HUD. I mean, you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everyone. Story_ID: 572958 Speaker 1: You said Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was your mentor. Who else did he introduce you to? Did he help nurture your career? Speaker 2: Well, one thing he told people, "Make it as easy for her as possible. If you can, try to protect her." Speaker 1: What does-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't see how he could do better than that. Speaker 1: Well, what discussions did you have with him directly about race, race relations? Speaker 2: Well, we--he was the first one that I know of that I sat in with that had regular meetings with, with, with blacks, black Republicans. Even now you hear the Congressional Black Caucus say, our president does meet with--I don't know how many times. You tell me how many times, I'll ask, a Democratic president met with the Congressional Black Caucus; met with them. If he met with them once a year that was fantastic. President Nixon would meet with us on almost a regular basis at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: What do you consider regular? Speaker 2: Ooh, almost once a month. Speaker 1: And during these meetings, what would be discussed? Speaker 2: Matters of concern to us. Speaker 1: What matters were you concerning at the time? Speaker 2: Whatever it was. Whether the job assignment we had. Most of us had that EO [equal opportunity] civil rights (air quotes) matter. It was not effective. Our frustration or something we wanted to accomplish that, that, that government was not allowing us to do, whether it was the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] that would not allow the legislation to go forward, sometimes it was major corporations that were not being cooperative. They were putting problems in our way. Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.] was the fun element of those meetings. You know, he was head of Strategic Air Command. Can you imagine a black general, head of Strategic Air Command? Big guy. Big. He was big, in dark skin. You know, not overly big but I mean, you know, you'd look at him and you said, that's a strong man, and so he was. But anytime, he used to make, he used to make me angry because every time we got President Nixon in an uncomfortable position, Chappie James would come up with a joke, a timely joke, and always a good joke and diffuse the situation. And a couple of times, points that I wanted to see pushed further weren't pushed further. But, yeah, we had those regular meetings. Story_ID: 572959 Speaker 1: What do you consider you personal best during that year, during that, during that position (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I never thought of it. Speaker 1: Well, if you had to think about it, when did you feel best about what you'd accomplished, about something you had accomplished? Speaker 2: I don't know. Just being able to survive that long and have an effective office, highly respected by, by the American people, by industry, by [U.S.] Congress. Even Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] put in the Congressional Record, a full page on my accomplishments in office. I was totally shocked. Unsolicited. But we did a good job. We helped hearings. We--what I did was--I'm, I'm a technician. So I looked at what makes up my office [Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity], and I looked and I had about seven titles, titles legally of laws that create an office. And I had powers that nobody had ever exercised (laughter), and we held hearings around the country on issues that needed to be addressed and because of the requirement of statute, they had to be given prime consideration. And always the American flag was at my back and the governor or the mayor was always at our opening session. And I held them with various organizations, groups, on where we needed to highlight matters you just could not get--the press was scared to bite off on, leadership was too weak and had been--or, had been bought off. It was--that, that, that feeds me to fully, to the best of my ability and with my budget--in those years you had a budget. The government has changed a great deal since then, but I had even a discretionary budget of hundreds of thousands of dollars, you know, so (laughter). Story_ID: 572960 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You left that office [Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity] feeling what (audio disturbance)? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's the first time I've ever said this publically, but just disappointed because I was fired. Not by President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Not by President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.]. Not by President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. But indirectly by President Ford, because the secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], when she came to HUD--by this time I had national prominence. It used to be I'd walk into an airport and people would recognize me. It was very scary. Very, you know, because I never knew when I was going to have a racist attack me. It was frightening. I didn't, I didn't, I--I, I never wanted public recognition. It's not something that one should want, in my estimation. And she didn't want the comparison. She didn't want the comparison. I, at that stage, was asking for my next promotion, and I happen to mention it to the general counsel at HUD. He and I got along very well. A couple of people at HUD I got along with very, very well, because they knew that when every time he went to pull something--I mean, when it comes to civil rights, things are pulled--that we are going to stand up as being representative not only of the people of America but also of the particular community from which we come. We got to say, no. I'm not going to sign off. Well, you can't do anything without my signature. So they would meet late in the morning, late. Everybody else had gone home. Okay. Meeting at nine o'clock, ten o'clock. All the boys, everybody, all these other assistant secretaries know when the meeting is, except me. But then after they agree and go to circulate the document for signature, they got to say they took it to my office, and most of the time, I'd say 90 percent of the time when they knocked on that door, (Unclear) Pennington [ph.], my secretary, or somebody was sitting at their desk and I was asleep. And as you know, can I come upstairs? You want to invite me upstairs? We're going to do it tomorrow in the daytime when we're all rested. There weren't too many of them, but they did occur, they did occur. Speaker 1: So you left that job disappointed. Speaker 2: Quite disappointed because, I hadn't--there was no notice. I made no plans. The woman who was coming into HUD--I was doing a very good job. My rating on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]--and the Hill rates various agencies of government--my particular rating was A, A plus. I was doing my job. I knew where I wanted to go. I was going to go, but it would take time, and it was just a shocker. Speaker 1: What reasons did they give (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did a reception for her, and I chaired the reception. I chaired the reception. I made arrangements for staff to take care of her kids. I was the most gracious person you could meet, but I was disturbed or troubled because the first scheduled appointment on her book was me. I said, that's unusual. I wonder why? I thought maybe she wants to start out with a friend. You know, the only two women here. That makes sense. Speaker 1: Was she black or white? Speaker 2: White. Carla Hills [Carla Anderson Hills]. She said, "Well, I understand you want to leave HUD?" And I said, "Yes. I have mentioned it to a couple of people. I've really not set a deadline. I'm not certain about where I want to go, but, yes." She said, "Well, I'm coming in and I want my own administration, I want my own people." And that was it. Story_ID: 572961 Speaker 1: So you were disappointed. Did you speak with president himself, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. Speaker 1: --about leaving? Speaker 2: No, and did not even deal with the personnel office. I had just had it. I was tired. I was burnt out. I truly was burnt out and I just said, it's time for me to go on with my life. Speaker 1: But before you left the job is when they sent you to Chicago [Illinois] to make the speech? Were you at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] then? Speaker 2: Oh, you're talking about the speech, yeah, in Chicago with Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley]. No, no, no, no. That was, that was before that, yes (laughter). The housing--public housing and our schools, we must be very careful where we build them. You don't want to build them where they remain in the ghetto or where they become the ghetto or the slums. You want your schools to be built where they can be integrated. Therefore, when the Department of Education [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Education] refused to block the building of schools throughout three sites--three states throughout America where those high schools were definitely going to be all white. I went in under Title VI [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VI]. Title VI is not just available to my office [Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity]. Title VI is available to the Department of Education and our offices. Department of Education did not move. I impounded the money, and I stopped those schools; Topeka, Kansas and elsewhere. No, you will not build them there. Well, the housing in Chicago was built on State Street. State Street has the sidings for the railroad. It's like building public housing where you have an elevated highway with the subway running across it. The children can't think when they're trying to study, when you go to watch television you have all of this noise. Why? Story_ID: 572962 Speaker 1: I was talking about State Street in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Children can't study. The noise. It's just not productive. Speaker 1: Oh, no (background noise). It's--the location is not near a public transportation. State Street--at the time when I went to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], I had heard about public housing. In New York [New York], I had seen public housing because the first public housing was built in New York City in Harlem [New York, New York]. The first houses are up at 155th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], just before you get to the bridge that takes you over to the Bronx [New York] and Yankee Stadium. That's the first public housing, under FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]. So I've seen public housing, and they're all big high rises that are sixteen, twenty stories tall. Then I went out to California. Once I got to HUD, I said, I really want to see what public housing is like elsewhere, and I saw grass around a house. Public housing is your own home with grass around it. I couldn't believe it and I said, "Oh, this was the intent of the legislation," now, now that's the lawyer in me because as a lawyer we go to look at the intent of the law (background noise) to find out whether it's constitutional, to find out how to apply it. That's what public housing is supposed to be. It's not supposed to be a, a place where you're told that you're less than someone else; that you're aspirations cannot be as big as someone else; that your schools have to be inferior; that you must be isolated and live only with your own. Ah. So I looked at State Street public housing. The windows, about a tenth of the windows, had pieces of plywood. There were no windows because the glass had been broken by the kids, where the apartments had been abandoned and misused. The city had not refurbished them. So you got plywood at the windows and it goes on, and on, and on. Miles of public housing. This is where you just impact the poor. You put all poor people together and you've got poverty. What else can you have? And I was, I was desolate. And unfortunately (laughter), this door was given to me before I gave a speech (laughter) and the mayor was there (laughter). Speaker 2: Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley]? Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I told him that I felt that any person who was paid by the taxpayers and took an oath in office to provide a protection for all and freedom and enjoyment of the privileges of life, to allow that type of housing to exist, it was unacceptable. He did not take kindly to it, and it was said that hit men were out looking for me. The rushed me out the hotel. Before--I, I got called on the plane on my way into Washington [D.C.]. I won't say by whom, but I got called on the plane on my way into Washington about my remarks. I mean, that's how fast it--well, I was really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how were you traveling? Were you on a government plane? Speaker 1: No, I was on a regular airline. The stewardess brought me the phone. I didn't even know you could get a phone. Speaker 2: Well, what--you don't have to tell me who, but can you tell me what were the comments on the other end? Speaker 1: "What did you say?" That's all (laughter). I said, "What do you mean what did I say?" (Laughter) "I didn't say anything. I just said that I had seen the housing, public housing on State Street." Speaker 2: Well, did this person have any authority over you, the person who made the call? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Yeah. Of course. But really, they were trying to find out whether what they had heard was correct. Speaker 2: And when you said, "Yes, I said it," what was the response? Speaker 1: What can they say? There was no response. You'd have to see State Street. You would have--you just have to see it. It, it, it is as dramatic as is the effects of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] in New Orleans [Louisiana], and, and, and see them living in a dome, a superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana] and walking on this Astroturf that is filled with urine. That's what they slept on. That's what they walked on to go to the bathroom, to walk from one child to another. It's got to be--if you're a person like me, and that's why I be very careful what I get involved in. Story_ID: 572963 Speaker 1: So after that disappointing leave of office at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], you spent a couple of years doing something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Practicing law. Speaker 1: Practicing law, before you were invited back to a government-- Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Well, after that--let's see. My next appointment would be George Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush], and that was a beautiful appointment. George Bush, Sr. was-- Speaker 1: But before George Bush, Sr., didn't you work with Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]? Or that was something else? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, that's right. Let's see, who came first? Reagan. Reagan, okay. Reagan was Private Sector Initiatives [President's Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives]. Yes, I forgot about that. Speaker 1: Or was Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] after Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]? Speaker 2: No. Ford--it was Nixon, Ford, then Reagan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Reagan was Private Sector Initiatives. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was Ford? Speaker 2: And Bush was Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]. Speaker 1: Okay. And then Ford was? Speaker 2: Ford. What did I say? For Ford, I was at HUD. Speaker 1: Okay. Ford you were at HUD. And then Richard Nixon-- Speaker 2: ACTION and HUD. Speaker 1: ACTION and HUD, okay. So Ford was HUD. So it was under Ford's watch that this new woman [Carla Anderson Hills] comes on and says, okay, we're gonna--and you says, okay, then I'm moving on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Day one. Speaker 1: Okay. So then you get a call from the Reagan administration and they want you to vice chair the private sector-- Speaker 2: Well, that's many years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's many years later. That's many years later. Speaker 1: So what happens in between? You were just practicing-- Speaker 2: I was just practicing law. Making money. Speaker 1: Private law here in New York City [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And what type of law are you practicing, mainly? Speaker 2: Corporate. Speaker 1: Corporate. Because the music career is behind you by this time? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: And publishing and writing is behind you. So you're strictly practicing-- Speaker 2: Well, writing has never totally been behind me, and I did do a lot of public speaking at that time. I was still doing a lot of public speaking. Speaker 1: How involved were you with the RNC [Republican National Committee] at the time? Speaker 2: Quite, at the surrogate's level and advisory council level. Story_ID: 572964 Speaker 1: Were you still feel, feeling promising about what the party could do for African Americans? Speaker 2: Yes. Still am, if it wants to do right. We had a marvelous opportunity with Lee Atwater [Harvey LeRoy Atwater] and unfortunately--and he's a southerner. Everybody was shocked. When Lee Atwater became chairman of the Republican body, everybody said, "Oh, my god. He's a cracker." And I knew that his heart was as pure as it could be, but the guy had cancer and died. And as a consequence, the end road we would have made would have been very dramatic, we didn't. When George Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was head of the Republican Party we made great inroads. It takes--it has to come from the top (audio disturbance). People look at you when you say this and they think that, oh, well, you know, this is how you say to other, you give others a way out but some people just are incapable by title to accomplish unless the top puts a hand imprimatur on what the policy is. Then it will fly. If not, it won't because those who want to destroy the concept will be successful. So at that point, I was very involved with the Republican Party. I was sitting at meetings with Alan Greenspan and people of that ilk. I was on the board of the Hoover Institution [Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace] at Stanford University [Stanford, California]; the (air quotes) think tank and-- Speaker 1: Within that think tank, what sorts of things were coming out of the meetings? Speaker 2: We discussed everything of significance in, in, in the world, let alone in America. It was an academic think tank atmosphere with a conservative ideology. Speaker 1: Now, will you explain for me yourself what is considered a conservative ideology? Speaker 2: I don't think I can say it in a succinct period of time. It's--because one, it's, it's an evolving ideology. It evolved positively or negatively. It all depends on the wind; who is your president; who is your senator; the strength of your party at the time. But when I served on the board of Hoover--I got on the board of Hoover because I was the economic consultant for Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], and I have a photograph in the back where I had to fly in one year, I had--they just--they passed--they quickly passed some social security legislation on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.]. The Hill can be so slow. It can have a bill for months, and it just sits there languishing and next thing you know, it is, it's out and the press hears about it, you're going to sign it and they veto it. And I had--I was in New York [New York]. I had to leave New York and go to Urbana, Illinois where President Reagan was speaking and brief him on that legislation. Story_ID: 572965 Speaker 1: What is conservative, in answer to your question, will vary upon the philosophy of the group. I, I, I'm a Republican and I rather say I'm a Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] Republican for want of a better terminology, but fiscal conservatism I understand, and I demand, and that is how I was asked to be on the board of Hoover [Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace], and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] just jumped up and down because Stanford wanted more blacks on the board, more blacks. They wanted blacks on the board. They had Walter Williams [Walter E. Williams] and myself. Condoleezza Rice wasn't even--wasn't pro votes anything in Stanford at this time. It was long before Condoleezza, and I do believe that the, that I don't want a socialistic society. I don't think that at the end of one's lifespan the greatest opportunity has been that you've had a chance to be a postman. That doesn't cut it for me. On the other hand, I cannot allow the executives of Enron [Enron Corporation] to take your pension money, which conservative Republicans will allow you to invest rather than keeping it in social security, and steal it. So it's, it's a very complex--t's, it's something that you can't--you don't want to oversimplify it but certainly the, the, the welfare approach, it does not work. It didn't work. It never will work. It breathes dependence. It negates self respect. It destroys the family structure. I can go on, and on, and on. And we have yet to really find a common ground, that common ground that we can settle into as we are with affirmative action. Every year it's becoming more and more of a--legally we say stare decisis, meaning the law has been around for so long, it's a given. But I would like to see more blacks in the Republican Party. I would like to see more Republicans understanding of the needs and aspirations that African Americans have. And always be mindful of the obligation that this nation has to that one group of people who built the nation. We were the masons. We did do the architecture. The difficulty of getting around the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], was the brilliance of one black man [Benjamin Banneker]. We've played a role that was so significant that had we not played that role America would not be as great as it is. And there is a debt. And I want my forty acres and a mule. And that was not very much to ask for, particularly then. Forty acres and a mule is not much to ask for. There's still too many Americans who don't want us to be treated as equals. Story_ID: 572966 Speaker 1: How were you involved with Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] when the decision, during his decision to make Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday a holiday? Speaker 2: Oh, we discussed it a lot. There was a lot of opposition on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] (makes sound). Between that and the check off rights for black organizations of federal civil servants, were two real battles. You know, when you work for the federal government, you can check off how much of your pay can be taken out automatically to go various charities. This is a way that you encourage your civil servants to give and in government, agencies take pride in, in, in the money that is given by their employees to various causes. We didn't have any blacks. You couldn't check off the Urban League [National Urban League], the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Edelman's child advocacy agency [Children's Defense Fund]. You know, you couldn't do that. Nope. I fought for that. We didn't check off now, founding member of the Black United Fund [National Black United Fund], but the fund, Black United Fund came along after that but we are now, sort of, we are on the printed form. You don't have to write us in. But the King holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], it was like when we lost, from Mississippi, he lost his leadership role, Trent Lott, a couple years back because when, I think it was Strom-- Speaker 1: Strom Thurmond. Speaker 2: Yeah, when he had this dinner. Speaker 1: Dixie party [States' Rights Democratic Party], or whatever it was. Speaker 2: Yeah, birthday party and he was saying, well, if America had listened to him we'd had been better off. Well, I don't think that Trent meant it the way that those who wanted to take it to the nth degree interpreted it. Because they want to put it in, solely in the avenue of civil rights and that's not what Trent was talking about. But also I noticed Strom Thurmond was good to a number of black people and causes. Speaker 1: Well, he had a black daughter (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) More than one (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: More than one. We will not go into the family heritage there. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Trent Lott loses his position. Speaker 2: Yeah. He lost his leadership role as congressman but yes, I did talk--you asked me whether we discussed the King holiday, and we did. Speaker 1: And you were pushing for it to become a holiday-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --because you felt it should be a holiday because? Speaker 2: I thought the man merited it. I thought America needed it. So it was a combination of the two. Speaker 1: And what was Reagan's attitude towards it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He agreed. It wasn't a hard sell. Speaker 1: Why-- Story_ID: 572967 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you know people in general, people feel that Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] did a lot to, to damage the black community. Speaker 2: No, not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I mean, I'll just name a few, like cutting social security for kids whose parents died. So I mean he changed the legal aid [Legal Services Corporation]. Speaker 2: But he did that to America. Speaker 1: He did do that to America but the majority of the people of the people that were affected (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when you do it to America, of course it has its impact, the hardest on the poor. Speaker 1: On the poor, right. Speaker 2: But that was not racially inspired. The man was trying to balance the budget. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You see, that's that fiscal conservatism. Speaker 1: Well, what about-- Speaker 2: You see give the man a line veto and he wouldn't have to do that. I'm in favor of a line veto in the budget. Don't tell me that when you come up with a bill and just before it's time for the bill to be voted upon, you pork barrel it. Speaker 1: Why do you think it took him so long to address AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]? Speaker 2: A difficult subject to address. He came from a school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know then that-- Speaker 2: I mean, a time in life-- Speaker 1: Did you know then that we would get to a point to where it would affect the black community at a ratio far greater than other communities at the time he was holding back on even announcing the word itself? Did you think about any ramifications of AIDS in the black community? Speaker 2: Well, when he was denying announcing the word itself, I really didn't fully understand the ramifications of AIDS, very few did. However, I did see it devastating friends that I had in New York City [New York, New York] in drama, in dance. I mean, just wiping out whole little enclaves; but; again, none of us realized what AIDS was and how you got infected. It was--and we were all almost shuddering from fear. You know, if I talked to someone will I get it? It's an awful time in America, really. A harrowing experience and you've got to always remember how old is this subject that you're referring to? What climate did he come from? There's certain intimacies of personal lifestyles that many senior citizens, as you grow older you will find when you're younger you'll talk about certain things. I don't have a problem about it. As you get older, you know, your eyebrows will raise a little bit and you'll say, you know, can't you have some discretion? And so that--this is not--and I'm not trying to justify whatever you might be referring to that you feel that Reagan didn't do about AIDS, because I didn't think anybody has done enough about AIDS. I don't think we've ever pinpointed how AIDS got to Africa, just like we haven't pinpointed how AIDS got--of how drugs got to Harlem [New York, New York]. AIDS got to Africa. The world has AIDS. Drugs got to Harlem. The world uses drugs. I don't know why, why people don't realize (laughter) that their salvation really rests on the dignity and (unclear) of black people. For some reason, God uses us in a strange and mysterious way. Speaker 1: A cartoonist drew a picture of you marrying Reagan (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that was funny because, you know, it was caricatures that looked like we look. Yeah, that was funny. But we did get along extremely well. Speaker 1: Did you consider him a friend? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: His wife? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Nancy [Nancy Reagan]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You considered her-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I was much closer with him. I have--you know, he'd write, write me little notes, and he'd address the envelopes himself. Story_ID: 572968 Speaker 1: What do you think is the black community's biggest misconception about him [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]? Because I would--and I'm generally speak (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The lack of knowledge is the biggest problem because if anybody did any research they would know that his administration accomplished more in, in, in civil rights than anyone of his time, but by then--you know, sometimes you walk softly and carry a big stick. And we didn't have to beat heads with him. Didn't have to beat heads. You could go around and be diplomats. You want the King bill [Martin Luther King Jr. Day]? I was there when the King bill was signed. Yeah. You want the King bill? Okay. You get the King bill, but it just is--let me, let me do it my way. I will give you the King bill, but before I give you the King bill I can't get embroiled with the King bill when I've got this item that I need for his new bomber, or a new bomb, even. So let me get that, that, that funding taken care of, that bill, and then we'll twist a few arms from the White House and you'll have your King bill; you had a King bill on the, a Republican. That's all I got to say. That speaks for itself. Story_ID: 572969 Speaker 1: Did he [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] ever disappoint you? Speaker 2: No. I know--you asked was he my friend? When Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] got shot, do you know--and Vernon was president of the Urban League [National Urban League]. I said, "Mr. President," I think you--it was dumb. See I do things sometimes later on, I say, you know, you've got the ear of the president, why don't you come up with something profound? Like you always see people, you know, around presidents, people of power. You don't get that many opportunities. But yeah, I really pressured him. I pressured him. I pushed. I had to push some people around him. I said, "I want you to go see Vernon Jordan. He was my classmate [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And he's head of the Urban League. The hospital is not far from Washington, D.C., and I would like you to go and see him." He did. No fanfare. No nothing. You never hear Vernon talk about it. You never hear blacks talk about it. The press didn't do a lot of talking. Well, why don't the press talk? You see, when you do good things, they don't talk about it. Speaker 1: Why did you feel it was important for him to go see Vernon? Speaker 2: I was trying to send a signal to black America that, you know--it's the little things to me that are very important. Unfortunately, I thought that maybe media or black people would be more appreciative of a president of the United States going to see the head of a corporation. Story_ID: 572970 Speaker 1: Maybe it was before all of this that we've talked about has happened, but you do become a part of his administration as the head of-- Speaker 2: No, with Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] it was Private Sector Initiatives [President's Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives]-- Speaker 1: --private-- Speaker 2: --executive order naming me vice chair (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was the head, the head of Merit Services? Oh, that's the same one, head of Merit Services Protection Board [sic. U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board]? Speaker 2: No. Consumer Product Safety [U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission] is where I really wanted to go, I was talking about before but I never, never got a chance to even--my friend, Connie Newman [HistoryMaker Constance Berry Newman], went to Consumer Product Safety and Barbara Franklin [Barbara Hackman Franklin] who was head of White House personnel office went to consumer products. I told you, I found it. I said, oh. I said, you know you can get there. You can call about what your role will be, what your furniture will be like (laughter). And they both went there, and I went to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. My role with Private Sector Initiative was precisely that because I'd been very lucky or fortunate while I was at ACTION to be able to get the leaders of labor and industry to come together at various occasions to foster volunteer efforts, and I've got some great letters in my personal archives from where they cited how rewarding it turned out to be for them personally. And so I knew that all you had to do, if you get a captain of industry involved, it's like Bill Gates being one of the biggest philanthropists of all time. If you get a man with money involved, you can bring about change. Idea and intent is great. The will is great, but if you don't have the money, you can't achieve. And so Private Sector Initiatives was our way of recognizing those in industry who went out of their way and personally saw to it that the needs of people, of the community, were addressed without government being involved, and government cannot do everything. And, secondly, when government does it, it's too confounded costly. Story_ID: 572971 Speaker 1: We're talking about the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years. And, and following the Reagan years you worked with? Speaker 2: Well, I was practicing law, and I, I worked with the Republican Party and various candidates. Speaker 1: But we were talking about your work with senior Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He's a nice guy. Very, very nice man. Fun person to be around. Is comfortable with blacks. I mean, it's, he's just with people. When-- Speaker 1: When does that become--how does that become apparent to you? Or how do you become aware that this guy is comfortable with blacks, this guy isn't? Like, what made Bush comf-- Speaker 2: Well, you can usually tell by their demeanor. There's a persona that one has that emits the silent sounds of comfort, or where a person goes. Like we had a party for Stan Scott [Stanley S. Scott] who was a corporate executive with Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.], assistant to a couple of presidents at the White House [Washington, D.C.], brilliant guy, and worked with George Bush at the RNC [Republican National Committee] and Stan was dying. And so we got together, black Republicans, and give him a dinner. I think in St. Louis [Missouri], something in the Midwest, where Stan Moody [ph.] opened up a Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo], Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] bottling plant and I have a photograph there of George Bush at the dinner. We were there for two and a half days. He stayed. When Lionel Hampton died, a couple of years ago, and I was rushing to get back to New York [New York] because I had known--Lionel Hampton lived around the corner from me. I'd known him since I was a child. He lived at the (unclear) which is at 138th [Street], I live at 137th [Street], right off of 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], between 8th and St. Nicholas [Avenue]. So when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I would come home on a train and get off and go to the Metropole [Metropole Cafe, New York, New York], which is a bar on Broadway, and see Lionel Hampton play. And Lionel Hampton and George Bush got along so well. I would go into--it's funny. I would go into the Executive Office Building [Old Executive Office Building; Eisenhower Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.], which is a building right next to the White House where the senior staff members are housed. There aren't that many rooms in the White House. So you can be as important as can be, there's just not enough room for everybody to have a room in the White House. And I would go there and there's Lionel Hampton sitting waiting to see somebody and his little toupee would be sometimes not flat on his head but his Bible was in his hand. See there's a persona of the musician, and there's a persona of the person. Lionel Hampton sitting there, going to be patient with his little Bible in his hand. That's why you got block upon block, city block upon city block of housing called the Gladys Hampton and the Lionel Hampton [Gladys Hampton Houses and Lionel Hampton Houses, New York, New York]. None of it is, quote (air quotes), public housing, all of which was undergirded with federal funds. Millions of dollars of profit made. Millions, millions, millions of dollars of profit made which is done all throughout the country but you can't, you can't point to where that money is funneled into your community, to people that you know. So George Bush was in New York for Lionel's funeral and he kept saying, "Where's Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote]? Where's Gloria?" Well, again, I'm very reserved so when I got there I was late, and I was not about to ask to get into that VIP room and not be admitted. Because it would have devastated me, and it would have caused me a problem for about two or three days and I can't have my life thrown apart like that. And frequently, the ones that walk in strong and look like they belong, they get in and when you walk in very meekly and say, you know, and give your name, well, you know, he's busy or he can't see you. You know, if it turns out I never got to see him and the man asked for me so many times, George Bush, it wasn't funny, and I was right there but I did get there about three minutes before the circus, you know. But I'll see him out in public and he'll walk, he'll be with people or something, whatever the occasion is, he'll walk over and come and hold a conversation. That's how do you know, when a former president walks away from other people and walks over and says, "Hey, Gloria," and starts a conver--then, then, then you know. Story_ID: 572972 Speaker 1: Well, since you were a trailblazer in the Republican Party, one of the few African Americans who were helping them to blaze a trail (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were a lot. I don't know whether I was a trailblazer but there were a lot of us. Unsung heroes. Speaker 1: Unsung heroes. I will say that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: What do you think about the face of the party today? What do you think about a person like Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice] or Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]? Speaker 2: They're both good professionals. They're not politicians. So, you see, unfortunately yours--your view as you expressed the question, and the question was to evoke an answer from me, is slanted in a way, unintentional though it may be, that infers that they're (air quotes) Republicans. Speaker 1: And that was the--so go ahead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then, you know, the average person is not a (air quotes) Democrat or a Republican. You work. You sleep. You go to church. The average person doesn't even ask what their religion is. They believe in God. They can't even cite their religion. Well, so when you talk about Condoleezza who's brilliant-- Speaker 1: I agree. Speaker 2: --a concert pianist, charming person. Known her for years. When she first came to government it was under Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. She was a translator, or Colin, who worked his up way up through the ranks of government at the White House assignment, which is not supposed to be the kind of post that would have you elevate to what he finally acquired. They were not, they are not Republicans. And it's unfair to them, and it's unfair to those of us who label ourselves as Republicans to try to, to cause a thinking of the mind that we're the same. We're not. They didn't vote Republican and we had friends who were Republicans. And see Republicans, unfortunately, don't have too many black friends and acquaintances. Speaker 1: And why is that? Speaker 2: Because we're not in the same circles. Again, I was on the board of the Hoover Institution for war and peace [Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace, Stanford, California] for ten years. Not once did my picture appear in a publication. I went to California twice a year for board meetings at my own expense. And when the head of Hoover was retiring and he was writing his book, he even sent me, you know, the entire book in draft. He says, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Toote], I'm looking, I'm looking for photographs. I can't find one photograph. I know you were at all the receptions. I know you came out at other occasions. I can't find one, one photograph." I said, "There are a lot of photographs and you'd have to get to the photographer. Not one published photograph is what you're saying." So, they don't--they don't, they don't get to know us. I got to meet Justice O'Connor when I played golf with justice, Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, as a consequence of our Hoover meetings in Washington, D.C. And we'd hold a meeting there once a year and when we do, dignitaries, you know, all attend and year after year we would--you sit around and you talk to people. You're comfortable with it. It's a human being and so, you know, we migrated to each other. And next thing you know, boom, I'm out playing golf with a sitting United States Supreme Court justice. But those occasions are rare. Story_ID: 572973 Speaker 1: Like I talked about Trent Lott. When Trent Lott was coming to New York [New York] to raise money or just coming here, really whether he realized it or not I did, they were fundraising ventures, these yachts were always rented, you know, and yacht parties were given. I was always invited within the black fair. I mean, he's from Biloxi, Mississippi but I knew Trent when he was a young Republican and he'd go to the convention [Republican National Convention] and he and the young Republicans from the South would camp out in my room because one of the young Republicans was on my staff. And I adored him. He adored me. It was one of the best people I ever had that I could work with and our friendship endears until this day. And he is a stone. Well, I don't want to say stone cracker, but he's from Biloxi, Mississippi. So, if you don't get to meet the people, that's number one, you've got to meet them. You've got to know them as human beings. You've got to find a commonality. We don't get those occasions. They just don't exist. It is unbelievable. I cannot explain it. I cannot explain it. It is just unbelievable. But if the networking that is essential in life, if that were made more available to black women, it's being made available now to women in general, but if it was made more available to black women, our success would be more, more secure. And I was just delighted a couple of years ago, I guess, now, a young lady called me on the phone and she had been named global vice president of Time Warner or Time Warner, Inc., whatever Dick Parson's [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] major corporate title is. That's a Republican. You ask about, do you think of Dick Parsons as a Republican? I look at this commission that they have on whether or not we should change our policy, Iraq, Iran. I see Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] on there, but I don't see Dick Parsons. Vernon is a Democrat. Why wasn't Dick Parsons on there? Explain it to me? And they all loved Dick Parsons. He's brilliant. He's affable. Of course, the guy can't wear but so many hats at one time and everybody is pulling on it. But we just--we don't get that kind of exposure. So then they don't have a black to call on. So you set up the commission and what do you do? You put a Democrat on there. It's sad, but it's the way of life. And unfortunately in politics you've got to some degree, walk, lockstep. You do have a platform. Your candidate runs on that platform. You do have an administration and it has a policy and you must adhere to that policy. You can have slight deviations, but it's lockstep and, therefore, your mind either has to be ingenious if you're to achieve that which the leader did not intend for you to achieve until you've achieved it, which I've done on a couple of occasions and had been great when it went well. And a couple of times it went sour. One time they threatened to burn a flag at an event and one of our presidents was--I don't know why, the circumstances were such that he was, oh, no more than five miles away and everybody was having a heart attack over that. No flag was burnt and the meeting went quite well. But I mean, it's, it's a tedious role for a black as a republican. It's very dangerous. You are under constant assault from Democrats because they're afraid of you. I mean, like I said, Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] I loved. When I was younger, we played cards together. I speak before a public gathering and he calls me the hatchet man of the Republican Party. I can't believe him. I'm looking at him. "Yes, the devil." There's the de- I said, "An educated man calling me a devil?" Yeah. But there, not that their dinner, their food is dependent upon their doing idiotic things like that, it's the conditioning that comes about when you're involved in politics, that you keep the other party down, that you don't force to the buildup of another candidate. I wouldn't want to be congressman if it paid ten times what it pays. I wanted to be senator, but not congressman (laughter). Different aspirations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 572974 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Today, what are your hopes for African Americans within the Republican Party? Speaker 2: It would be about the same. I've stopped. I've stopped even in hoping for more than what is going to be--what you see is what you get. Only because I understand that the psyche of black youth is such that party identity really is not that important. Now, when I was growing up you had to be a Democrat if you wanted to achieve anything politically. Now, I'm talking about even in Corporate America. Now, that is not the case. And, therefore--your black vote will more and more, year by year, go to Republican candidates but on the other hand, will a candidate truly be deserving of that black vote? Will that candidate truly be supportive of those principles that we will insist upon. I worked like a dog for Rudolph Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani]. I love him as a person. The man personally asked me to take a responsible role in his first campaign, and I did. And I worked that role from California. I don't want to tell you what my telephone bill was. But I did not take a job in his administration and the head of the transition team, by the way, was Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons]. Speaker 1: Why did you not take a job? Speaker 2: Because I knew that for the City of New York [New York] it would be good, and I knew that as it related to discrimination he would be good, but I knew that for race relations he'd be brutal (laughter). I had to clean up New York, and I had to balance it. I had to balance it. This city was teetering on the brink of chaos, and I had to clean up my city. Speaker 1: Why was it teetering on the brink of chaos? Speaker 2: Crime. Corruption. Speaker 1: Did that have anything to do with David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins]? Speaker 2: With the lack of sound government administration, yes. It wasn't a political--it was a typical Tammamy Hall morality ship. Typical. He might as well have been a white man. You don't hear little children running up and down the street talking about David Dinkins. They still talk about Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. No. Beame [Abraham D. Beame] has been able--not Beame. Well, Beame's a bum. The mayor that we have now-- Speaker 1: Bloomberg [Michael Bloomberg]. Speaker 2: Bloomberg has been able to bridge that gap. And that's because he's comfortable with us. Speaker 1: Or he has so much money there's no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what money--money can give you that comfort. He's not worried about I'm trying to take his job. In the mind of the aspiring white person, a young affluent intelligent black is a real threat. Not only do they have the talent, the willpower, the ability, but are they going to get brownie points for affirmative action? They'll knock you out the box. So you have to understand what the other side is thinking in this equation. So from the standpoint of blacks being Republicans, no, we don't have enough money and enough people to bring it about, but I have tried. I've had two think tanks. One think tank in general with (air quotes) Republican connotations, and another one, a think tank, Repub- bringing blacks into the Republican Party. Neither one of them survived. Story_ID: 572975 Speaker 1: Well, what is it you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I don't know (unclear). Well, first of all, I hope I haven't achieved my highest achievement. Speaker 1: You hope you have not? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know what it is (laughter). But it's got to be something better. Speaker 1: What do you want to do next? Speaker 2: I, I am so tired that I really want to say, just sleep. Three hours sleep last night. I don't get enough sleep. I truly don't. And I know with age you start needing less sleep. I'm getting older and I, I would love to know what eight hours sleep is like. I, I really--I would like to write the book, but I want the book to sell and that's what my problem is. I don't just want to write a book. Any old fool can write a book. Speaker 1: Right, but what do you think will make the book sell? Speaker 2: That's my problem (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what do you think is--I mean, it's-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Well, (laughter) what do you think, though? You have some ideas. I mean-- Speaker 2: Aside from the ability to write well. Speaker 1: What sells? Controversy? Sex? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. See, if I could--I really don't--I'm trying to come up with an outline that will make it informative, challenging, enjoyable. Story_ID: 572976 Speaker 1: Have you ever had lunch with Clarence Thomas? Speaker 2: Oh, Clarence was in government when I was in government. In fact, when he was named to the [U.S.] Supreme Court bench I was at his swearing in at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and he signed my program. And he said, "Thank you, very, very" underscore, "much." I did say I had more time than what most people on the air in behalf of Clarence Thomas because I knew him from the time he entered government. We entered at the same time. Birds of a feather sort of flock together, meaning blacks or no blacks. Clarence was very quiet then, very quiet now. Tried to--he has a black child--tried to date all the pretty black women, and they were dating everybody but him and he finally married a very nice white lady. He did--I don't understand--I still don't know where Clarence stands on affirmative action, but I know that if I had to have the chips in balance as to whether or not I could trust Clarence Thomas and someone who is white that I don't know the credentials of, oh, heck, Clarence indeed gets my vote. And that's what was important to me. That's what was important. Don't castrate this man because he's black. We just had a black on the bench, and I'm trying to get a black on the bench that is identifiable. Little kids going to school looking at a picture of Thurgood Marshall, unless they're told he's black will not know it. That's the problem that we have as blacks. We encompass every color (laughter) and sometimes you've got to put a sign on, B-L-A-C-K. Story_ID: 572977 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for children growing up in the black community today? Speaker 2: That they dream the impossible dream. Speaker 1: What were your parents' [Lillie Tooks Toote and Frederick Toote] hopes for you growing up in an African American community? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess that I'd be successful, and caring, and giving. Success was part of it, but I was trained that you have a responsibility other than being successful in your professional endeavor. Speaker 1: How does it feel not to have disappointed? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I would think in my father's eye, I'm not achieved yet. Because God gave me so many gifts, but that's what the problem is. I've got too many gifts. Too--I have so many talents. Oh, it's frightening. It is really frightening all of the talents that God put in this one body, and I just don't know whether I'm going to go left, am I going to go right. Do I stay a course long enough? Because you don't want to keep--I really, if you look at my career, I've not shifted gear that much but I have embarked upon a number of different endeavors. Speaker 1: But if you look at it, sort of the thread has been-- Speaker 2: There's a commonality. Speaker 1: There's a commonality. Speaker 2: There is a commonality. And the commonality was me, that I had to, in order to enjoy life, use my talents; use all of them, or most of them. I couldn't just push them underneath the bed. I couldn't hide them and I could not ignore them. So that meant, no time for marriage, no time for childrearing, God was good. I've got a sister [Frances Toote Robinson]. She gave me a beautiful niece [Ginger Ryan Solis] and a handsome nephew [Christopher C. Robinson] and, you know, so, God has been good. Story_ID: 572978 Speaker 1: So the very last question today, I want you to give me--you've given me one but I'm asking for one more thing that you are perhaps saving for the book that you haven't shared with anyone else. And the one thing you said was you were fired from HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and you hadn't admitted that publically. What else can you leave me with that perhaps you're saving? Speaker 2: I'm not--you want a gem? Speaker 1: I want a gem. Speaker 2: I don't have a gem. What on earth can I leave you with? I don't have a gem. I really truthfully don't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what are you most proud of, when you look at everything? If it was one thing-- Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what, my god. I'll tell you my frustration. I'm a very honest person. I carved this interview into my schedule only because of the realization that there is so much that I and others have accomplished, and I could not have accomplished it, or the accomplishments would not have been there but for so much hard work. My back is raw. And when I die, it will be raw from all the whippings I've had. And I said, there's just some things now that I'm going to have to make certain that if--since I hadn't written a book and I may not get to do this book at the rate I'm going, I'm getting older and older, that some of the information that I have should indeed be passed along to the young; that they have a better comprehension of what life is about. We live in a society of disposables. You buy it today, you throw it away tomorrow. It doesn't work to buy another one. We're overwhelmed between the television, the CD, the--all the gadgets. There's not enough time now to sit down at the dinner table and talk. Nobody reads anymore, and I am very concerned about youth in general, I don't care what color, about learning and the quest, the real gusty desire to learn because knowledge nobody can take from you. Knowledge is self respect. Knowledge is self esteem. Knowledge is self love. If you love yourself, you will love others. And you can't always hear this from the pulpit or when you get it from the pulpit, they talk too long. Or you hear it from people that you don't believe it. So if you can find somebody that's quasi successful who says, stop and look behind and just pass your hand back and say, can I help you along? That's all. Just, what can I do for you today? And when you see somebody out in the street--I talk to all my neighbors. I don't know them by name. "Good morning. Good afternoon." I teach all youngsters and I do, when I meet someone, "Yes, sir." "No, sir." "No, ma'am." It was taught to me by my father [Frederick Toote]. I lost it for awhile when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and during that period became an agnostic into this, into that and everything. And then I realized that that was only a sign of respect. And I'm not going to call a bum out in the street, sir. But if you're older than I am, and if, we're communicating or having a conversation, then you're entitled to it. There are entitlements to life. Our rappers are just beginning now to say, "Oh, I'm ashamed that we talked about black women as being whores." We have got to stop demeaning our own and see the, the beautiful threads that binds us together. We don't all look alike. We're not the same color. We don't have the same dreams. We don't have the same mental capabilities, but there's a spirit that black people have that I believe is unique. I think God put us on earth for a reason and, again, my father used to say that Jesus' hair was like sheep's wool, his skin the color of clay. And then when I was talking about when I was in California, and what made the people of Capitol Records years ago and Bing Crosby--Bing Crosby offered me that contract to represent his company, offered me a retainer contract. I told a joke, and the tagline of the joke at this lunch that we were having that day--an angel was coming down to answer some questions on earth about God. And dignitaries from around the world had been summoned together to ask questions, and they decided to get a kid also, with a kid amongst the group. Dignitaries asked their profound questions and after that the child was asked his question, "Well, but what is Jesus like?" An angel said, "Well." "No, what is God like?" An angel said, "Well. He's a woman," (laughter)...