 Story_ID: 636488 Speaker 1: All right, we're gonna get started with our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview. My name is Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today. Matthew Hickey is joining us as videographer. I'm gonna have you say your full name, and spell it please. Speaker 2: Great. Hi, I am [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Taborn, president, publisher, CEO of Career Communications Group [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]. T-Y-R-O-N-E, T-A-B-O-R-N. Speaker 1: Is there a middle name? Speaker 2: Deneen, D-E-N-E-E-N. Speaker 1: And when were you born, and where? Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1959 on a kitchen table in Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes], which turns out to be the largest confined housing project of the Chicago Housing Authority; about 2400 people currently live there. What made Altgeld Gardens so unique, not only was it confined, but it had its own grocery stores, religious institutions, and schools, so it truly was an area where--a high density area where low income people were sort of housed away on--near 130th Street. Speaker 1: West or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South, bordering the Illinois--Indiana border. Speaker 1: Okay, so southeast. Speaker 2: It was southeast, yes. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is (laughter)--that--that's the trick question; it's the 28th of July, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we holding this interview today? Speaker 2: This is being held at my residence at 25--2514 Reis- Chestnut Woods [Chestnut Woods Court], Reisterstown Road. Speaker 1: And we're in which town? Speaker 2: Reisterstown. Speaker 1: And which state? Speaker 2: Maryland. Story_ID: 636489 Speaker 1: Few questions--fun questions for you. Tell me your favorite color. Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Sky blue, royal blue? Speaker 2: Actually sky blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: All foods (laughter) are really my favorite, but I actually really love Jamaican jerk chicken; that is one of my favorites. Speaker 1: Have you had it in Jamaica? Speaker 2: Oh, I've had it in Jamaica many times, and I make it very well myself. Speaker 1: (Laughter) What about a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Jamaica. It is an area of richness of its people, of the diversity of the people and the history of the people. It's as close to getting to Africa as you can--outside of Cuba; it's as close as you can get to Africa without going all the way over to Africa. You see many of the same traditions and foods that are there, and the history of the slave trade is absolutely amazing, as we know what happened in the Caribbean and why so many African Latinos are in the Caribbean, both in Cuba and in Jamaica. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying? Speaker 2: Stop applauding the headlines. Speaker 1: Stop applauding-- Speaker 2: The headlines--stop applauding the headlines. Speaker 1: And what does that mean to you? Speaker 2: Well, what that means to me is that so often in our communities, people make headlines and we cheer, but there's a lack of willpower from our political and some of our civil rights leaders to follow through on the systemic things that must happen that will help our generations move into the future and have a relevant place, not only for our community, but for our nation. So I say, "Stop applauding the headlines." Speaker 1: Well, on a lighter note, do you have a favorite season? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, there's a part of the season that I absolutely love when the bugs are not around flying, you know, flying around, where it's warm enough in the evening but not too chilly, and so that's right at the end of summer, and the beginning of the fall. Story_ID: 636490 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family. What are your parents' names? Speaker 2: My father is Carmen Oliver Taborn [Carmen Taborn], my mother was Edith Lucille Wallace [Edith Wallace Taborn]. Speaker 1: And can you spell your mom's name? Speaker 2: Sure, it's E-D-I-T-H, Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E, Wallace, W-A-L-L-A-C-E. Speaker 1: When was she born, and where? Speaker 2: She was born in Chicago, Illinois as well as my father, in Chicago, Illinois; they, they both were. I'm not sure about the year, but they're--my, my father's now deceased and my mother is roughly--she had me when she was eighteen, so she's roughly sixty-nine years old. Speaker 1: So, tell me about your mom; was--did she have siblings? Speaker 2: My mother was born to a woman name Vivian Wallace, who was from Tulsa, Oklahoma, and she came to Chicago, as many people did during that period. Speaker 1: Which period is that? Speaker 2: That was the period about 1950--actually around 1940, which represented one of the largest migration of blacks from the South going into the industrial areas. My grandmother went there with her sister as well, and her sister was Novella Nicholson; she became Novella Nicholson. Speaker 1: Her maiden name was-- Speaker 2: Stripland [ph.]. What was interesting about that is it's a, it's a story that we often see in many communities. My grandmother married a Wallace, who was a railroad man who actually looked as if he was white. Speaker 1: What was his full name? Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not sure of, of his full name. I can get that for you (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: But the story is, is that he was a railroad man, which is one of the--my fascinations even today. Victor Wallace [Victor Wallace, Sr.] was his name; as I said, extremely light, part Indian [Native American], passed, for the most part, for white, but he married this very beautiful, very black dark-skinned woman, and that was my mother's mother. My mother's very light. But that was her mother; they--she had seven kids, but here's the tale of two--of, of, of the family. Her sister (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Vivian's sister. Speaker 2: Vivian's sister had a teacher's degree from, I think it was Langley [ph.], and so did her husband. When they all came to Chicago--Vivian's sister, my Aunt Novella--they couldn't teach in the Chicago city school systems, so he wound up working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and my Aunt Novella went into the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] where she became a person who hemmed clothes in, in a cleaners, and she did that for the rest of her life. But they had a--they, they generated a lot of wealth, bought their own home and did very, very well; educated their two daughters who came alone later, and all of them are doing quite well. Speaker 1: This is your Aunt Novella and her husband (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My Aunt Novella and her husband. Zeno Nicholson was her husband. Now, on the other side of the family where my mother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On your mother--still on your mother's-- Speaker 2: --on my mother's side, yes. My mother had seven brothers and sisters and she was probably the one who was the third oldest, and she was very sickly all her life. It was very tough for them. My grandfather was always gone, he was always on the railroad; they never had enough money. My grandmother worked all her life cleaning homes in the suburbs of Chicago as, as we know people moved further and further outside of the city. Speaker 1: Do you know which suburbs? Speaker 2: I don't know which suburbs, but I do know that she spent a lot of time on the buses (laughter) going out there. Story_ID: 636491 Speaker 1: And this is in the 1920s, '30s [1930s] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Abs- this, this is during--all the way--during the 1940s, '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] when I was around, you know. I was born in 1959, so I always remembered that's what my [maternal] grandmother [Vivian Wallace] did, but she used to tell an amazing story to me all the time, and it was one about not having much, and it also reflected the richness of our communities. She told a story--my grandmother told me the story of how a cleaning woman used to come to their house when they were young, so it's so interesting that she became a cleaning woman. But she said on Sunday, her mother would cook this food, and it would just be wonderful. But this particular Sunday the cleaning woman brought her daughter, and my grandmother said she sat there being very angry that there wouldn't be enough food to go around. Speaker 1: Who was angry? Speaker 2: She was--my grandmother was angry; she was a young girl, she was very angry that this cleaning woman had brought her daughter along, and her mom had invited both of them to stay for Sunday dinner, and my grandmother said, "There wouldn't be enough," and the lesson of that story was this. She said not only was there enough to feed two extra people, but they had food left over. And she said, "You know, when you do the right thing, there's always enough; you will always be provided for." And that's the spirit that she gave me. I think--if there's anyone outside of my wife [Jean Hamilton Taborn] who loves me more than anything, that was my grandmother. And she gave me those kind of lessons of not being selfish, of giving back. She also cautioned me many times; she said, "The devil can give as well." And it always made me remember that not everything that comes to you is something that you really want. Speaker 1: A woman with many stories and lots of wisdom. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and a heart as, as, as large as the universe. Story_ID: 636492 Speaker 1: Well, you were also talking about your [maternal] grandfather-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Victor [Victor Wallace, Sr.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: What stories did you hear about his family and that mixing of races? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, as I remember, was a very handsome man, and probably much more like a rolling stone (laughter). You know, being on the railroad, moving from area to area, as I described him as being very, very light-skinned. It was a very rocky relationship, and I believe--but my grandmother [Vivian Wallace] stayed with him until she was too sick. My grandfather later, you know, died from alcoholic-related diseases, but that seemed to have been the life then, you know; people didn't know about a lot of the issues of healthcare and how they should take control of it themselves, and that kind of ran--that was widely spread, and it actually spread into the family. Most of my uncles have had very serious health-related issues as a result of growing up in that kind of household where my grandfather clearly either was a problem drinker or an alcoholic, but all of the boys seemed to have lost great careers going into that area and that's, that's always been a bit of a disappointment to me that we don't recognize these issues early on, and how do we help our community with many of the healthcare issues that they face. Speaker 1: Were any of your grandfather's siblings educated people? Speaker 2: My grandfather was an extremely smart person, but neither my grandmother nor my grandfather on my mother's [Edith Wallace Taborn] side pursued education in that, in that way. But as I mentioned, on the other side, they did. Speaker 1: Okay. And sticking with your grandfather for a second; well, he was light enough to pass. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Did he ever pass? Speaker 2: I don't know, but I would suspect that during that time, in those areas, if you could in particular situations, you probably would take advantage of it (laughter) rather than face the, the, the trauma that was associated with that. I recall going back to Tulsa, Oklahoma when I was about seven years old. My father [Carmen Taborn]--my, my father and mother had actually been married and--but they didn't stay together very long, and so I didn't see my father again for many, many years; in fact, not until I was in college [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. But my mother had another--after--my sister [Lucille Taborn (ph.)] was two years younger than me--roughly, two to three years younger than me; she had another child [Milton Baker], and that was a half-brother, and we were in Tulsa. The hospital wouldn't accept him because he was black; they sent him home, and he died in Tulsa, Oklahoma of pneumonia because he wasn't--the hospital would not allow him in; basically, they said, "He's fine, go home," but the race was the underlying piece of that. So, I would suspect that during that time, it was a lot of public accommodation discrimination taking place, and I would think that my grandfather, if he could have passed, he would have. Story_ID: 636493 Speaker 1: Well, two things--did they--did he talk about the roots? You mentioned Native American roots (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and some African, some--probably European roots as well. What about the, the slave community, the slave master? Did they talk about any connection there? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't hear much of that from my [maternal] grandfather [Victor Wallace, Sr.], but I did hear a lot about the--what happened in the South from my grandmother [Vivian Wallace]. Speaker 1: What did she say? Speaker 2: Well, she, she, she spoke of the lynchings; she spoke of that kind of fear, but she also spoke of the pride that the community had--that there was a sense of community. I never got a feeling that there wasn't a sense of community, and when I looked at some of the older pictures, these were not people who were, who were without image or without a--without a--any background; they had a lot of it. It strikes me that what happened was that that was sort of lost by the younger generation (laughter); her kids kind of lost that sense as they moved into an industrial city and were faced with different kinds of issues. Story_ID: 636494 Speaker 1: And you also mentioned the child who was too dark to be embraced by the hospital staff. Speaker 2: Yes, my, my brother [Milton Baker]. Speaker 1: And what year was he born? Speaker 2: I was roughly seven or eight, so he was an infant at that point. If I back that out, it would probably be in the mid-'60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: And--but you were born in Chicago [Illinois], and this happened-- Speaker 2: In Tulsa, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We used to go to Tulsa, as I pointed out. My [maternal] grandmother [Vivian Wallace] was from Oklahoma, so we had relatives there, and we would either take--I would take a train. I remember as a young person they would put me on a train by myself, and I would go down to Tulsa to see my Aunt Faye [ph.]; they had their own home, she was married to my Uncle Burt [ph.]; they, they did a lot of stuff in the landscaping area, and it would just be such a wonderful time. And then when I would leave, they would do these box lunches of fried chicken and all this kind of food, and they would put this eight year old kid back on a train and shoot him back to Chicago, and I just absolutely loved the trains, and I still do. Speaker 1: And, and we're gonna get into that in a few when we talk about your childhood. Were you traumatized with your brother--with the baby being--maybe not even so much you, but your mom [Edith Wallace Taborn]--the, the idea that she lost a child. Speaker 2: You know, these are things that you pick up in later years, and you know how we hear the stories through our community; we, we are a community that passes down a lot of stories. I feel that--of course she had to be traumatized by that, but I don't think we all knew what was happening; I'm not sure she knew what was happening. I'm not sure she knew the actions of the hospital until much later. Then she realized that perhaps had it been a white baby, they would have taken the baby in, not simply said, "Here's some medicine, go away." That's a problem that exists even today in many of our emergency rooms. When those who don't have access to healthcare go in, they're not taken as seriously; now you combine that with race, and with some legal justification to turn a person away, then it was very, very, very easy for that to have happened. She later had another son; named, named him the same name, Milton. Milton Baker is my half-brother who lives in Chicago now. Story_ID: 636495 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your father's side of the family, the Taborn side. Speaker 2: Oh, the Taborns are a fascinating family (laughter). As I said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your father have siblings? Speaker 2: He did--Novella [sic. Norvella Taborn], my aunt. Well, let me tell you the--a bit of the story. We--I left Chicago [Illinois] and we moved to Los Angeles [California] right when I was entering the sixth grade; well, actually the fifth grade--right when I was entering the fifth grade. So, prior to--after that, I really didn't have much contact with the Taborns, but I remember my grandfather, Noval Taborn, N-O-V-A-L [sic. Norval Taborn], and he would come and pick us up; by that time, we had moved to 64th [Street] and College--Cottage Grove [Avenue]. So he would pick both my sister [Lucille Taborn (ph.)] and I up every, every Sunday and take us to his house, and that was somewhere--I, I can't--I can't remember the street (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the suburbs, or in the city? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no; it was in the city, it was in the city, but it was closer to Princeton--Princeton Gardens [sic. Princeton Park, Chicago, Illinois], but I can't remember exactly where. And we drive over to the house and there's a big T that would sit right out, out front. My grandfather was one of the Four Vagabonds; he had made his history--part of his history, actually, as a singing artist--played with Mike Douglas. Back then they were really radio stars versus recording stars, so--but you would sit there and all I, all I can remember of my grandfather is what a great artist. He could draw, but he had lost three of his fingers because in later life he had become a janitor at CVS High School [Chicago Vocational High School; Chicago Vocational Career Academy] in Chicago, and that's what he did until he retired. Speaker 1: What year did he start there? Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not sure when he actually started there, but I do know when he retired there, and he told (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did he retire? Speaker 2: He retired approximately fifteen years ago. I'm searching my memory but he, he's since deceased--diabetic. But I do recall when he said one of the proudest moments he had before he left was that the students--he performed for the students in an auditorium at the school, and he was so proud about his music. But my grandfather could play the piano without the fingers, and he was just a--he was just a very, very good guy. And he would always say to me, "You look just like your father, you look just like your father Carmen [Carmen Taborn]." Again, I had never seen my father, or I didn't remember my father from all that time, as I look at pictures of my dad. Speaker 1: So you stayed in touch with your dad's family even though you weren't seeing him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandfather stayed in touch with me, right. And, and later years what happened, we're in Los Angeles, my grandfather kept working hard to make sure we got the social security when my father wound up with MS [multiple sclerosis], and so he was concerned about that. So, to my mother's [Edith Wallace Taborn] credit, she raised--she was a welfare mom--I'm not sure when she actually divorced my father; I know she remarried, but for years she was a welfare mom, single, raising three kids in, in Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Let me ask (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Without any child support at all. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna get into that 'cause I was--that sounds like really critical information (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Okay. Speaker 1: --to your life story. Story_ID: 636496 Speaker 1: But your [paternal] grandfather [Norval Taborn], I just wanna make sure I, I get all the facts with your grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: He was, he was born in Chicago [Illinois] as, as well? Speaker 2: I'm not sure where my grandfather was born; I believe he was probably born in Carrier Mills [Illinois], or Kansas City [Missouri], where many of the Taborns had settled. The Taborn family was the first African American family to legally own land in the State of Illinois. About ten years ago, in Carrier Mills, the state recognized the contribution and the historical significance of my family by naming a road after the Taborns, which is called the Taborn Road. Now, I have to tell you the fascinating story about this because I didn't, I, I didn't--I had no idea. I re- I had given, I think, fifty thousand dollars to the Morgan State school of engineering [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr. School of Engineering, Baltimore, Maryland], and that's the largest contribution that they had at the time. So, Black Enterprise wrote, wrote this thing up, and my picture was in there and the whole bit. I received this letter from a guy name John Taborn [John G. Taborn] and I said, "Okay, more people looking for money, all right" (laughter). John Taborn turns out to be a psychiatrist--a psychologist from the University of, of--the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri]; not Missouri, of--where do the Vikings [Minnesota Vikings] play? Speaker 1: Minnesota? Speaker 2: Minnesota--University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. He was chairman of the African history department there, and he was the team psychiatrist--psychologist for the Vikings. He said, "Those guys have a lot of problems," all right? (Laughter) So, he wrote me back and he said, "Your father was Carmen [Carmen Taborn] and your aunt was Novella [sic. Norvella Taborn]." He said, "They used to come and play with us in Carrier Mills every summer." Speaker 1: And this is southern Illinois. Speaker 2: This is southern Illinois. Speaker 1: Near--what is that town there? Speaker 2: I, I believe it's near Carbondale [Illinois]; it's in that area. And it was such--and it was so fascinating 'cause now we had details, and I said, "Oh, this guy is for real." And I wrote back and I found out who he was, and he said, "Listen, every year, all of the Taborns and our ancestors meet in Carrier Mills during Memorial Day. Why don't you come?" So, I took my son [Ty Taborn] and my daughter [Courtney Taborn] and my wife [Jean Hamilton Taborn], and we hopped on a plane and we flew there and it was absolutely incredible. We went to the church that the family had donated to the--to, to, to the area, and the funeral--the graveyard, and a memorial was erected there at the church, and just reconnecting. And when I looked at the Taborns, you can tell--I mean they're from Mexico, they're from the Caribbean, they're--they look as if--many of 'em are--look white, many of 'em are, you know, you know--look as if they're right out of Africa, particularly places like Uganda (laughter). The family is so rich; there were judges in the family that--we had a Taborn who was actually--played in the orchestra in Washington, D.C. And I stopped and I thought about it and here, at that age, were two young kids. I said, "Wow," you know, "I, I feel that I've worked hard all my life, but wouldn't it have been wonderful to understand that you had a family of so many achievers, and that was a legacy that I was robbed of from those early days that I just thought I was a poor kid growing up trying to make something," and it, it just occurred to me and, and, and, and made me recommit myself to that if our young people knew their history, they would believe more in themselves and believe they could achieve. And I was proud as my son ran through the graveyard and he saw Taborns there who were buried who had fought in every single war in, in that area. Speaker 1: From the Revolutionary War to the Civil War (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the Revolutionary War, Civil War--every single place we had a Taborn play; well, not the Revolutionary War 'cause we weren't there. But from the Civil War on, there were Taborns that had been--that, that were planted in that, in that graveyard. And I said, "He knows, now; he knows he can be somebody really great. I don't, I don't just have to tell him that, he knows he comes from that kind of bloodline." Speaker 1: And there were institutions as well in that town (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there were institutions in that town. We have the deed, the official deed from the land, so there was--and, and at the University of Carbondale--of Southern Illinois, located at Carbondale [Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Illinois]. There's a historical piece about the Taborns and the impact that the family had in that area. Story_ID: 636497 Speaker 1: So these were free African Americans? Speaker 2: They came here--well, they were African American and Cuban and, and Haitian; Taborn's a French name. So, sometime during--as, as the story goes, during the Spanish American War, many of 'em moved over into this area, or came into North Carolina; they were hunters and they were soldiers. They moved into southern--into the, into the Carrier Mills area [Illinois], they settled there; it's called Settlement Pond [sic. Pond Settlement, Carrier Mills, Illinois], originally; it was really wetlands. So once they were there, escaped slaves made their way into the area, and you know it was legal for slave hunters to go and grab slaves and bring 'em back to their owners. Well, that didn't happen because of the Taborns because, you know, they were hunters and they were soldiers, and they fought back, so slave hunters stopped coming (laughter), and a whole lot of families moved into that area and that became a--that, that's why that became such a historic area. Speaker 1: Was that town mixed originally, or was this a, a black town? Speaker 2: Well, it was a, it was a black town I would, I would suspect, because it was wilderness back then, so it really wasn't a town but it was a settlement and I, I wanna make that distinction there. Probably later, Carrier Mills became a, a city and, or a town and, and it became an area that became much more mixed. I'm not sure where all of the mixture came from; all I know is that there's extremely diverse family, probably on the--probably on the Hispanic side is where a lot of that mixture originally came from. Story_ID: 636498 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the Taborn family of southern Illinois, and some of the racial mixing down there, and I know that area--you were mentioning the migration patterns from the South to southern Illinois, but also there was a, a strong Native American heritage there as well. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Mound City, Illinois, built on top of Indian [Native American] mounds in that area. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What--did your family tell you stories about the Native American mixes as well? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't hear as much about that on the Taborn side, although it's absolutely clear that there had to have been a relationship between these new settlers and the Native Americans who often embraced, you know, those kind of settlers--those people of color. But as I mentioned, on my mother's [Edith Wallace Taborn] side, Victor Wallace [Victor Wallace, Sr.], her father, was part Native American, and she talked about her great-grandfa- his, his father who would come there, and she said he was an Indian chief and, you know, I never really followed through with that, but she said he would come and stay with them and cook stews and that kind of stuff. So, I suspect that those were part of the, the, the challenges that my grandfather, Victor Wallace, had in losing a lot of that kind of history and being forced into this main culture, and that he married a black woman [Taborn's maternal grandmother, Vivian Wallace] was--is, is very fascinating and great. Talks about the mixture of that culture. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know what the Native Americans went through? I would suspect that people like my grandfather, or maybe his, his, his father, they went through a complete eradication of their culture, and they were told that we would move them from being savages to gentlemen; they couldn't practice their culture. Now, that's--the same thing happened with black slaves who were brought here, but with Native Americans, I think it was even more devastating because their relationship to the land, to time, all of those things were so radically different than that of the Europeans, so being forced through that--today I do a program called the Native American Technology Awareness Journey [sic. Native American Family Technology Journey], which is similar to my Black Family Technology program [Black Family Technology Awareness Week] and my La Familia program [La Familia Technology Week], and when we ask in the Native American community why is there a pushback from technology? You know, the justification for what happened to the Native Americans was scientifically-based; that's how the argument was pushed; not politically, at first. It was all a scientific issue. That's why I push back so much when I hear these issues of genetics being brought up because you know that that is the forward to the next action, which becomes political and social. Story_ID: 636499 Speaker 1: So you have this interest in technology, you have an interest in communications, you have an interest in history-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in race relations-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in development, career development. It's all very interesting, and I'm wondering; your childhood in the projects [Altgeld Gardens Homes] in Chicago [Illinois], where did you get this inspiration? Speaker 2: I can go back to when I was in sixth--well, actually, I can go back further than that. I remember playing in Tulsa, Oklahoma on my Aunt Faye's [ph.] floor, and it must have been 'Meet the Press,' or maybe one of those shows, and there was this black guy who was on the television. I was a kid, and I, I recall him talking about how we had to bring people together and about the rioting; it was rioting that was happening someplace. That person was Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]; I didn't know it at the time. I, I guess I did know it, but it didn't make sense to me but I listened to him. I said, "Wow, that--those are some great words. He's up here trying to bring--he's, he's on television talking about how to bring peace." Well, let's fast forward to a few years later; I'm on 64th [Street], Cottage Grove [Avenue], and I remember right, right before this, a guy on a motorcycle riding, and I could hear the music, 'Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud,' and I said, "Wow, that's interesting." I like that song--that was James Brown. Then, I remember the state troopers rolling tanks right down the street in the state--the, the guardsmen--the state troopers with their machine guns marching down our street and taking positions. Dr. King had been assassinated. Speaker 1: So, 1968 you're in Chicago-- Speaker 2: I'm in Chicago. Speaker 1: --and you're watching TV? Speaker 2: No, I'm seeing, I'm seeing that live. When I first heard Dr. Martin Luther King, that was years before when I was in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and there had been other riots apparently, that must have taken place, and they were interviewing him about that. Speaker 1: And what are you seeing in 1968 in Chicago? Speaker 2: I saw the state troopers being brought through the neighborhood to stop the rioting that, that, that, that they feared might have happened after the assassination. Speaker 1: Were there riots in Chicago? Speaker 2: I don't know; I know there were, I know there were a lot of tanks in our neighborhood; I mean tanks come roll, rolling down the street. Speaker 1: Do you remember the reactions of folks around you when Martin Luther King was assassinated--your mother [Edith Wallace Taborn]? Speaker 2: I don't, but I remember my reaction. My reaction was seeing a [U.S.] military presence there, seeing that we were people to be feared, and I knew that something big had actually happened. I mean if you can imagine being that age and actually seeing state troopers in a area that's largely black, never seeing anything like that in your life, seeing tanks; that, that was, that was, that was a pretty serious piece for me and it, and it--but what said--but what it--how it struck me, was that I could be a change agent. Story_ID: 636500 Speaker 1: I mean somehow along that--somehow, I don't know where, but from hearing him to hearing that music ['Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'], I stopped saying the Pledge of Allegiance in Chicago [Illinois], and it-- Speaker 2: So, did you say it? I mean was that part of the ritual every day at school--to say the pledge (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, absolutely. And because of that, they called my mother [Edith Wallace Taborn] and said, "He refuses to say the Pledge of Allegiance." What I said is: "I don't believe that the Pledge of Allegiance lives up to the part 'and justice for all,' and therefore, since it doesn't say that, and since we don't live up to that, I refuse to say it." And my mother stood by me; she said, "He doesn't have to say it." I would stand, but I didn't say it. Speaker 2: What school was this? Speaker 1: That was McCosh, McCosh Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Where is that located? Speaker 1: That is around 64th [Street] and Evans [Avenue], I believe [sic.]. Speaker 2: On the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: On the South Side, yes. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Actually, I took my kids [Ty Taborn and Courtney Taborn] there a couple of years ago, and I took a picture in front of the school. I said, "This is where I went to school." And I took 'em to the row house we lived in off of 64th and Evans, and I took a picture there and I said, "This is where Dad used to live," and they, they sort of got a kick out of it. Speaker 2: Were they surprised? Speaker 1: You know, I--they--you know, you know, I think the kids know how important it is to link the present to the past because if not, you can't go into the future. And, you know, we've been doing--we have a conference call--we have a number of conference--we have the Women of Color in Technology Conference [Women of Color in Technology STEM Conference] which is the--which is the premier multicultural conference in this--in, in the world for women. We also have the Black Engineer of the Year Awards, which is the, the huge awards conference. And my kids were born during those conferences, you know; my son is nineteen, my daughter's seventeen. This year will be the twenty-second year of the Black Engineer of the Year Conference, so they've grown up seeing the most incredible achievers of all colors. They've been there with the astronauts like Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford], they've met the chief of naval operations, they've--I mean they've just been around such major achievers, and I think they understand that, you know, you don't achieve by accident; you have to work hard at it. Speaker 2: So, you're in Chicago at the McCosh Elementary School where you were working hard at it (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd hope so (laughter). Speaker 2: And you were a bit of a revolutionary. How did the other students and the teachers respond to you, other than that one event at school? Speaker 1: I believe that at some points, the teachers put back--pushed back; the administrators push back, you know, a young black rebel, you know (laughter). That, that was kind of a challenge, I think. The students, many of 'em I don't think got it, but I think--I--and what I mean by they didn't get it, these issues were a little bit different. And don't forget, I'd been shaped a little bit differently than some of 'em, you know, because of what happened to my half-brother [Milton Baker], or bec- because I made that connection with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in, in earlier years, and because I wasn't scared to speak out. That was my way of being heard. Story_ID: 636501 Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there's somebody in your life who gave you license to speak out? Speaker 1: Oh, my grandmother [Vivian Wallace]; oh, absolutely. There were many in the comm- there were many in the community--they, they used to love it. They said, "He's a--he can tell great stories." That's what my grandmother used to say, and they would call me Tiny Tim, and they would just love to hear me talk. Speaker 2: Which grandmother was this? Speaker 1: My aunt--my mother's grandmother--my, my mother's mother--the one I told you was the one woman outside of my wife [Jean Hamilton Taborn] who loved me unconditionally and she was just absolutely great. She gave me a lot of my courage; she really did. I mean she told me the stories and, you know, I wanted to make things better. Story_ID: 636502 Speaker 1: Were there other moments in elementary school [McCosh Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] when you were becoming the young Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow, those--that was a pretty powerful one. I do remember, I do remember that we had a substitute teacher and he was a young black man, and it was so interesting 'cause he was on his way to Vietnam; he had actually been--I believe he had been drafted 'cause we had a little party for him, and I just thought, I really like this guy and now he's going to war [Vietnam War], you know--and, and in a child's mind back then, you know, we--you know, you look at the war stories on television--you go to war, you die (laughter), you know what I mean; that's, that's what war was all about--there wasn't much of a survival rate; you just--it's--you just made that kind of connection, so I assumed that this person would probably die. I felt that that war was wrong. Later, I met people who had gone to war and come back. Speaker 1: So, as a young boy-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --growing up on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], you thought the war was wrong. Speaker 2: Yes, I thought the war was wrong. Speaker 1: How did you develop that notion? Speaker 2: Because somebody who I liked, the substitute teacher in our class, was taken away to go fight this war many ways--many miles away, and I assumed that he would die. Speaker 1: Did you see other pictures of the war on the nightly news, or in newspapers, or-- Speaker 2: I don't recall that I, that I saw that, but I know that I felt very strongly about it so I must, I must have; I mean I don't this was, you know, developed in isolation, but it just, it just struck me that we were, we were doing something that we should not have been doing, and I was, I was quite frankly not a supporter of it. Story_ID: 636503 Speaker 1: Were you aware at this time of--like the Democratic National Convention in Chicago [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]? There were several protests on the streets of Chicago [Illinois] in the '60s [1960s] even, you know, obviously before Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] passed away. Speaker 2: Those moments--you know, I've, I've read about 'em later in history, so I don't know if I remember as a child, but I'm certain--I'm certainly aware of 'em from a historical point. No, I don't remember those things, you know; I remember events. You know, as a child, events strike you, and that was one of the events in my life. The other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember an event where the KKK [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] decided to march through certain neighborhoods in the Chicagoland area? Speaker 2: I don't, but I will tell you this. When I was in Los Angeles [California], going to school, I remember the KKK marching near my school. Speaker 1: In high school. Speaker 2: In high school. And that was a--that was amazing that in Los Angeles--of all places, on Wilshire Boulevard, the KKK was marching (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which high school was this? Speaker 2: I, I wound up at University High School that was in, in Los Angeles, and that's near UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], so I had to take a bus from The Jungle [Baldwin Village], which is the housing projects right beneath Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California], off of La Brea [Avenue]. I used to live on La Brea and Hillcrest [Drive], so I had to take a number of buses--one bus all the way down to La Cienega [Boulevard], and then get on a--switch buses at La Cienega, and that bus would swing onto Wilshire, and right as you pass UCLA, there they were, the Ku Klux Klan, you know? And I said, "Wow." You know, the only time--it's interesting, and the only time I was ever called the N word was waiting on a bus on Wilshire Boulevard, and a carload of kids drove by, threw something at me and yelled the N word. You know, outside of people using that word in the same kind of race--I don't use that word. I have--I don't use it; I, I just--I said, "Why use that type of, that type of word?" And I don't allow it to be used in front to me. Speaker 1: How did you react when a student yelled that word at you? Speaker 2: There was a sense of--it was--you know what it was? It was a sense not, not necessarily of hurt, because I wouldn't interpret that as who I am, and I knew it was meant as a bit of hatred; it was one of sorrow, it really was--it was one of sorrow. You know, at University, there's a guy who's a good friend of mine, Mike Divine [ph.], and we were involved in events where we attempted to bring together black students, white students, Catholic, Jews, you know, and racial dialogue and, and, and spiritual dialogue--that's sort of what you did at University High School; it was one of those cool, cool kind of schools, right? And then one day, Mike said to me something that, that was both kind of courageous on his part, but he forever changed. He said that a black guy tried to rape his girlfriend, and now he hates all black people. Well, he wants--he's trying not to hate all black people, okay? And what struck me is that, that's exactly what it strikes me that's what became of him, that he couldn't let that go. You know, many things happen in our communities, but we don't blame all European Americans; we understand the difference-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: --yeah, and, and it was just a very, a very--just a very close friend who then felt this pain, and the only way he could strike out was distancing himself. You know, about two years ago, I went to University High School--the reunion book, and I saw his name and I sent him a message; he never responded, and so only based on that do I assume that he still struggled with that. I could be completely wrong, and so I don't wanna talk about his character but, but it just really was interesting that that kind of friendship kind of disappeared. Story_ID: 636504 Speaker 1: So, let's fill the, fill in the gaps (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --from Chicago [Illinois] to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. So you attended this elementary school [McCosh Elementary School] first, in Chicago, and you were somewhat of a leader, a little bit of a revolutionary. Did you succeed academically as well there? Speaker 2: I felt I succeeded academically. Speaker 1: Any, any star moments that you can recall? Speaker 2: No, you know, I thought I--you know, I, I really--I'll tell you one of the most painful moments I had. I was in a reading class, and I think I'm a great reader, and it was group A. And then one day I came in and it was group--she--the teacher had simply marked off group A and broke group B, and dropped me to a second--to, to a lower group. That was painful. Speaker 1: Which teacher? Speaker 2: I don't remember; I think she was my fourth grade, fifth grade-- Speaker 1: And this was a black school. Speaker 2: This was a black school. And that was painful that there was no discussion, nothing--you know, nothing surrounding that. And, you know, education, I believe, is about help--you know, meeting the child where the child should be. I probably got away with a lot just because it was easy (laughter) for me; didn't mean--doesn't mean that I really had to stretch all that--all, all that much. Speaker 1: And so what was going on in your, in your home? And was your mom [Edith Wallace Taborn], your--at some point, your dad [Carmen Taborn] left? Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad had been gone, so--yeah, my day was leaving, coming home; my mom wouldn't be there, so the three of us--my sister Lucille [Lucille Taborn (ph.)], and my brother Milton [Milton Baker], we were the only ones there. Speaker 1: And they're younger? Speaker 2: They're younger. And we were responsible for doing our own homework; whether it got done or not is a, is a completely different story. Story_ID: 636505 Speaker 1: So tell me about, say, a holiday at your house, Christmas. Speaker 2: Oh, well (laughter), it's hard to think back. Let's see, Christmas. I remember Christmas more from the--from Los Angeles [California] and, and, and, and Christmas generally, you know, you wake up and you're excited and you ran under the tree to see what, you know, really what was there for you and, you know, there would be a couple of gifts. Speaker 1: Do you remember the sights, smells and sounds of your South Side Chicago [Illinois] neighborhood? Speaker 2: I will tell you the Christmas I loved was at my [maternal] grandmother's [Vivian Wallace] house, you know, in, in Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois]; that's where she was. I would love being there. I would love the smell of the cooking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was there? What was the cooking? Speaker 2: Well, she would get up every day, you know; that--it was fun because I, I was a kid who didn't like milk, I didn't like cereal, you know, so all of the other grandkids--and there were tons of grandkids, right? They would eat all of that stuff, but my grandmother would fix bacon and eggs just for me, you know; that, that, that's what made me feel so special, you know; everything was done for, for, for, for me. It was clear that I was one of her favorites. And--so just the smell of all of that--of, of, of the cooking, and there was the grease in there (laughter). But it, it would--she would get up early, she was a--she would get up at like six [o'clock] in the morning or so, so every time we came down, it would be, it would be prepared for you. Story_ID: 636506 Speaker 1: Do you remember the neighborhood? If you took me around the neighborhood, would you see businesses? Speaker 2: No, absolutely not. What Princeton Park [Chicago, Illinois] is probably off of--I think it's off of 95 [sic. Interstate 94]? I wanna say 95, and it's, it's about fifteen blocks from the "L" [elevated train], so when I would go over there, I would get off--well, it's probably further along--not 55 [55th Street], maybe 76 [76th Street] or something like that. And I would get off at the--from the "L" train and walk to my grandmother's house, so there were--you know, you would pass the liquor stores; that was one thing that was, that was, that was pretty clear. Speaker 1: What did you see there? Speaker 2: You know, the liquor stores were a little bit different, I think. You--if you went in there, you could buy candy, you know; you would go down into a ba- almost like a basement. I actually had a dream about this the other night, and I said, "Wow, that's, that's funny." And I remember going down into a basement at, at the liquor store and you could buy your candy, and they had spaghetti and all these other things, but they were still behind, you know, somewhat of a gated wall there. But you--but it would have this strange smell about it, you know? And, and you could tell that's where, you know, people must have dropped beer, and that kind of stuff there. But that liquor store was almost a community hangout for some of the adults, I believe. But you would, you would go there, not really feeling threatened or anything, it was just that's the place you go to pick up things because we--there were no grocery stores nearby; not that I even understood back then the different--you know, why there were no grocery stores. But I remember seeing one thing. It said a--, "A habit is easy to start, but hard to break." And I'm like--well, I, I never understood what that meant, and it was hanging--you're gonna love this--it was pasted on a jar of pickled pig feet (laughter) (unclear), I see, but it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it spoke to you. Speaker 2: It spoke to me. I said, "Wow, okay, what does that--," you know, "that means that it's hard to, to, to stop a habit." It explained a lot to me in later years. Speaker 1: That is so interesting, that you were picking up these little philosophical expressions and memorizing them, or at least digesting them, at a young age, from your grandmother, from a bottle, from the TV screen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Right. Story_ID: 636507 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any other areas where you were picking up these messages as you moved on to, to junior high school, and then to high school? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean I, I--clearly from our social institutions; I mean clearly from reading. I, I, I, I--honestly, I just loved to read. Speaker 1: What did you read? Speaker 2: Oh, I read the newspapers, I read the Black Panther [Black Panther Party] stuff, at one point, I was reading the stuff from the Muslims; I thought that was hilarious. I, I used to look at those, those--the Muslim stuff, which is really important now; don't get me wrong (laughter). But back then, it used to have cartoons and, and--when I was little, and I would open up their newspaper, they would always have this cartoon showing whites as the devil--every single piece; I just thought that was so funny. I mean I didn't believe it, I just thought it was hilarious, you know, that they would do--you know, that that stuff would be there. I think that's where I learned what rhetoric was all about, and I understood somehow, in my mind, that those without knowledge easily become prey to the demagogues; I clearly picked that up. And that's why I was so independent. I think throughout, I think if people will ask you one of the things that--if you ask people one thing about me, many people will tell you that I'm not one quick to follow, you know? That I question a lot. Speaker 1: So, the Black Muslims--at this time, were you aware of Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam in Chicago [Illinois]? Malcolm X (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was aware, I was--I, I was aware of seeing though--you know, seeing them there; I was aware of their presence-- Speaker 1: Where did you see them? Who did you see? Speaker 2: Well, I saw--I, I, I remember seeing 'em standing on a corner, you know, selling newspapers [Muhammad Speaks; Muslim Journal]. Speaker 1: Wearing bow ties? Speaker 2: Wearing bow ties and having the pies and all that other stuff. That's, that's what I remember. I did not understand the significance of the organization until much later but yeah, they were part of the community; you saw them out there. Story_ID: 636508 Speaker 1: And you also read the newspaper. Which newspapers were you reading? Speaker 2: I--as far as their newspaper, whatever their official newspaper was, but I would pick up the Sun-Times, I would pick up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Chicago Sun-Times? Speaker 2: Chicago Sun-Times; I would pick up anything I could get my hands on. Speaker 1: Did your friends, your peer group--did they think that was odd, or did they respect you? Speaker 2: I don't think they were aware of it and I, I'm not sure I was, I just knew I liked newspapers. Let, let me tell you; one, one of the things that I think impacted me--I'm not sure what grade it was, but we took a field trip to the Chicago Sun-Times, and toured the, the entire plant, and when it was over they actually gave us a mock copy, you know, that the class had visited the Chicago Sun-Times, with our name on it, and I said, "This is so cool that you can do this." Well, let me fast forward years later. A couple years ago, a group of young women from St. Paul [St. Paul's School for Girls, Brooklandville, Maryland] wanted to visit my offices, so I remember--I, I loved what happened at the Chicago Sun-Times so much I told our photographer, I said, "Listen, take a group picture of the--of, of the girls before we start the tour," and when it was over, we had a mocked up cover for them, and I remember one of the fathers said to me just a couple of weeks ago--Garland Williamson, who's the former president of The Presidents' RoundTable [The Presidents' RoundTable, Inc.], and I'm a member of that; he said, "You don't know what an impact that had on those young girls, that you were able to give them a, a, a copy." I said, "That's what happened to me when I was a kid when I went to the Chicago Sun-Times." Story_ID: 636509 Speaker 1: So, you were doing all this reading and everything in Chicago [Illinois], absorbing all of this information. Did you take that with you to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? How did you get to L.A.? Speaker 2: As I said, we left when I was about five or six. My mother [Edith Wallace Taborn] just wanted a change, I--you know--her excuse was that she wanted to get us away from the gangs, you know. Speaker 1: Did you see the gangs in Chicago? Were you there? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. I mean Blackstone [Avenue] was not too far away, where the Blackstone Rangers were. That street--they, they were right up the street from, from Evans [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Were the Disciples [Gangster Disciples] active? Speaker 2: The Disciples--absolutely, absolutely. But what I guess she didn't understand is she was moving us from one place to another place where it was the Brims [Harvard Park Brims] and the Crips, so I mean it was absolutely the same thing. And those, those were some, those were some challenging years for me. Story_ID: 636510 Speaker 1: What were your first images of Los Angeles [California]--sights, sounds, smells? Speaker 2: Oh, they were--that was exciting, you know, you--you know, palm trees, look how large it was, I mean it was, it was absolutely--it was, it was almost as--going to Disneyland [Anaheim, California], and it was that excitement of being in--you know, being, being in a, in a new city, a new beginning; it was a--it was almost a new world. And I believe that was the first time I had ever been on an airplane, so we were--my grandfather [Norval Taborn], my father's father, had taken us out--my sister [Lucille Taborn (ph.)] and I out the night before; bought all these comic books and things to keep us entertained on a plane, and so we were, we were just absolutely excited about, about moving into that area. Well, that quickly changed. I mean pretty soon you realize that Los Angeles for, for poor people, is basically the same as Chicago [Illinois] (laughter), you know; that--the area we first moved into, which is called The Jungle [Baldwin Village], a housing--you know, a bunch of a apartment buildings that are right beneath the middle-class area of Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California]. On the rooftops, the police paint the--or someone painted the addresses, so if the helicopters flew over, they could quickly identify the area that they were in, and I've seen that later in places like Africa, and other, and other places. Speaker 1: Were you aware of the Bloods and the Crips in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: I became aware of 'em pretty soon, you know, after a couple of years as I moved into that age group, yeah. I mean they were, they were there, and it was, it was a, it was a challenge, you know? It was a challenge not to be part of, of that group because how do you protect yourself when you get off the bus, you know? And you have all these books with you; you can't bring books, you know. I can't bring books from the school I was at into the neighborhood; that's an easy target, you know. "Look at, look at--you know, look at that." So, you, you can't, you can't bring those things--we couldn't bring those things home with you, so how do you become tough and not give up much? Fortunately, there were a lot of people who saw something in me and saved me. Story_ID: 636511 Speaker 1: So, high school in Los Angeles [California] was what for you? What high school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, high school was painful--part of high school was painful. The first high school I went to was in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California] and, and my, my school was Dorsey [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]; Dorsey was predominantly a all-black school, mixture of Asians in the school, so I wound up going to the suburbs, and the school I--it slips my mind right now, and it's probably because it was such a terrible experience. I was one of fourteen kids--fourteen, maybe twenty-eight African American kids at a school where none of the white students really wanted us, plus I had to take a bus; not a school bus--public transportation bus which, which was the RTD [Southern California Rapid Transit District; Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority], which isn't Rapid Transit at all (laughter). Speaker 1: Why did they have--so this is, this is in fact the period where, where busing is becoming popular, and the thing to do in, in--designated in certain communities, but you were taking public transportation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was taking public transportation. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I believe, I believe I may not have been in the district, and we may have used a different address. Speaker 1: So that you could get a better education? Speaker 2: The theory was so I could get a better education. So that would take--it would take two and a-half, three hours to get there. It's hard to get a good education when you're sleepy, you know, and--but that, that required me leaving the area, going to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], switching in Hollywood, and going over into the Valley; that didn't last long, fortunately, and the reason it didn't last long was because there was this great program back then in the Los Angeles city school system, and this program was called 'Student News'; it was run--I believe the Los Angeles Unified School District, the channel is Channel 58 [KLCS-TV, Los Angeles, California], and somehow I found out about it and I went for an interview, and at that interview--they interviewed kids all over the, all over the Los Angeles city school district and I, I applied to be a writer on the program, a news reporter, and I remember to this day, it was Mr. Quinn [ph.]; he was a veteran journalist, and it was something that just connected with this guy; he was, he was, he was a tall, lanky European American with curly hair, right? And I got up and I did my interview and--with him and, and Jack Shepard, who was actually the producer, and Jack was an NBC guy as well. All professional journalists were actually teaching, you know--running this station, and I--they accepted me and I--there was a connection there, and I remember later, when Mr. Quinn died, how painful it was for me. But I went and said to him, I said, "It seems like we've known each other, and I'm, I just met you," and he said, "Yeah, I felt the same thing when I saw you." Story_ID: 636512 Speaker 1: Now, let me tell you what that Channel 58 [KLCS-TV, Los Angeles, California] experience was like for me, which was so incredible. One, I went to the Academy Awards [Oscars] as a reporter. 'Student News' aired once a week, it was an hour-long show, and it was a legitimate news organization because we were on the airwaves, so the argument really was we were working journalists. So, they sent me to the Academy Awards and it, it was a big hassle because orig- first they wanted to, to deny us, then they said, "No, let 'em go." So, the station paid for a tuxedo, they sent a camera, another student ran the cameras, right? And then we got to have a person with a tape recorder because our cameras did not have sound, okay? And we would come back and splice all of that together. When Vietnam [Vietnam War] failed, when Vietnam failed, I was the one sent to Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California] to cover the Vietnamese who were housed there, and one of the things that burns in my mind to this day is that there was a little boy, and there was a cameraman, and the cameraman was saying to the little boy, "You see that orange? Pick it up off the ground." Little boy wasn't interested in the camera, but the cameraman was telling the kid to pick that orange up off the ground so he could tape it, and that's the image that millions of Americans saw; it fell back to this issue of rhetoric. I, I stood there, I saw that. When the Concorde [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde], which was amazing--when it came to Los Angeles [California], I didn't fly on it but I rode on it--they put me on the Concorde as a, as a, as a, as a person who was covering those stories, so I had some incredible experiences. Well, while I was at 'Student News,' there were some kids at University High School [Los Angeles, California]; I remember one particular young white male, Steven Wynn [ph.], that was his name, and I came in one day upset because they would not let me on the school newspaper, said--they said I couldn't write, at the school that I was attending in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California]; said, "You can't write." And I was upset, and Steve Wynn said, "Come to University; I'm on the school newspaper, you will--we will put you on the school newspaper." And that's, and that's what happened. Speaker 2: So, you went back to University? Speaker 1: Well, that was--no, no, that was my first time at University. I can't remember the name of the school in the Valley that I had attended. Speaker 2: So, what year were you doing this Channel 58, 'Student News'? Speaker 1: Okay, let's back out the age--probably around 1970--let's see, I, I went to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] in '77 [1977], so we're talking about '74 [1974]. I was a freshman in high school, that's where I started--I spent my entire time. Story_ID: 636513 Speaker 1: The Academy Awards [Oscars]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: As a freshman. Speaker 2: Wasn't that cool (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who--it was very cool. Who did you see? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm trying to think who on that year. I was so, I was so caught up in the experience. Speaker 1: Did you get to interview celebrities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, but they came to the back now, and that--but that's the one thing; you, you didn't sit in the audience, okay? You sat in the back with all of the other journalists, right? And after the person won their award, they would come back, and everyone would scream, and you would try to (laughter), you would try to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People like Charlton Heston and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean that was, it was, it was amazing. I, I-- Speaker 1: Dick Van Dyke. Speaker 2: I'm trying to think who won that year; I can't remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sidney Poitier. These people. Speaker 2: I did see those people, absolutely. No, I saw, I saw Sidney Poitier, I saw the stage at the Dorothy Pavilion [Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, Los Angeles, California], I believe it was. Speaker 1: But pretty impactful. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was pretty powerful to, to be in that room, but what I was more caught up with were all of the other journalists and how story--it, it, it showed me how stories were being shaped; it, it really didn't even matter who was coming into the back. Everybody came into the back and it was the big Oscar that they stood next to, right? They gave a quick sound bite, the journalists were yelling back and forth. In fact, I remember one of 'em saying, "These guys aren't even TV, why should they be here?" And that was because our camera did not have sound, so we had to have a guy with a, with a, with a tape recorder, right? That was our sound man; it was a three crew--three students. The--those folks generally would be in radio; you would--you know, if you saw somebody with a, with a cassette, but we were television--later, later, it may come to me. Speaker 1: So it sounds like you were a critic. You were a critic at the Academy Awards. Although you were a journalist there to document, you were, you were critical about how the news was being shaped. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yes. Speaker 1: There, the Vietnam [Vietnam War] piece? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]? Speaker 2: It all come--it all came together about who tells the story, through whose eyes, through the eyes--whose story is being told. And it became very--I mean it, it just became clear to me that the story is who's ever--whoever has the pen (laughter); whoever has the camera, can tell the story. Speaker 1: Was there anything else you noticed that, during the Vietnam taping? Speaker 2: What I noticed about the Vietnamese people while I was at the camp is the sense of community; there was not the sense of hopelessness that I think came across, even though there were so many there at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California]; it, it, it just struck me there that this was a new beginning, and people really appreciated being in America, and that they saw some hope, and that they had just gone through something that was absolutely awful, awful, so why were we doing these things? Why were we making 'em look bad? Why was that cameraman doing that? That's what struck me. Story_ID: 636514 Speaker 1: So, now you go to University High School [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you excel there academically? Speaker 2: I did, I did okay at--I, I did well there. I did--I was not an A student, but I did well at the--I did well enough that I was able to get into Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 1: Well, you must of done pretty well. Speaker 2: Well, I did--I had a lot of support, you know. I think that, I think that the strength that I--I think the people saw more in me than I saw in myself at that point. Speaker 1: Which people at the school? Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me talk about the group of people. My mentor, who actually became my legal guardian so that I could go to University High School, was a person by the name of Dan Hirsch [Daniel Hirsch], and Dan is a great story. Dan ran a program called Bridging the Gap [sic. Committee to Bridge the Gap], and he was also an instructor at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] so, in the summer of my freshman year, I was part of a CETA program [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], and CETA is a program for disadvantaged youth, and the government would pay part of your salary and you could work a certain amount of hours. I, I always worked--all my life; I never, never would take anything from, from the government. Let me tell you just a funny story in Chicago [Illinois]; it was--it's a cold day, and I went home for lunch, and my mother [Edith Wallace Taborn] wasn't there and I didn't have a key to get in, and a welfare woman came by and made a surprise visit, and I'm standing in the hallway and I'm cold and everything. And she tried to give me some money for lunch and I refused to take money from her and I said, "I'd rather go hungry." I wouldn't do it. And my mother came back to me later and said, "You know that lady was so proud that you wouldn't take anything from her." When I got to Los Angeles [California], we qualified for free lunch; I refused a free lunch. I went to the cafeteria. I said, "Let me work on the lunch line," and I worked on that lunch line; they rotated you. I was on the cash register, and then I was passing out milk. But that's what I did, you know? The last person you saw putting the milk on that tray was, was, was me. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you weren't teased at all, you were accepted. Speaker 2: Well, probably most of the school was probably--I'm, I'm sure it was on free lunch. I believe in socialist programs, I believe it is the obligation of society and of government to help, but I also believe there's a lot to be said; if you can do it yourself, do it, and that's what I--that's what I believe. I mean if I, if, if I, if I couldn't pass out the milk, if there, if there wasn't a job as a--for a person to pass out the milk, then yeah, you know, I have to eat; but if I can earn it, I'm gonna earn it. When I--I worked doing--you know, I passed out newspapers, you know. To imagine going through The Jungle [Baldwin Village, Los Angeles, California] as a Los Angeles Times newspaper boy (laughter), that's what I did, though. I got robbed too many times, so I had to stop that one. Story_ID: 636515 Speaker 1: You got robbed; who was robbing you, gang members (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the boys--yeah, you know; trying to take my bike, you know; you had to go through the alleys, you had, you had, you had to plan this stuff. You had to be very careful (laughter) how you did, and pretty soon you got a routine on how to avoid that, but-- Speaker 1: Well, how did you--and you also said it was tough to resist the allure of the gangs because there was a lot of pressure. Speaker 2: Well, I think the protection of the gangs, you know. And I kind of flirted with that in my eighth grade and ninth grade years, you know; I mean we wanted to call ourselves a gang--call us a bunch of wannabes, but because of where we lived, we weren't aligned with the Crips or the Brims [Harvard Park Brims], but we--but it was our way of protecting ourselves. But then pretty soon I saw some of the guys go into an area and do things that I would not be part of, and I said, "Oh, no, these guys from hell; they've now crossed over." I mean they're becoming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With weapons and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah; in fact they went to juvenile and stuff like that, and I said, "We can't--I can't be part of this thing." Speaker 1: So, is this a James Baldwin moment? In 'The Fire Next Time,' he writes about his neighborhood in Harlem [New York, New York] when he no--he was a choirboy, and he, he--he's walking down the avenue and he sees his friends and gang members on one side; the girls are starting to become prostitutes-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that kind of thing, and then there's the church at the end, and he decides, "I want to go to the church." Speaker 2: There you go. Absolutely. And let me tell you where I went. Where I went--as I said, I, I went out of the district, and then I--to, to, to the--to San Fernando Valley [California]--to the Valley, then I went over to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], but then I met Dan Hirsch [Daniel Hirsch] and that really was a--and Dan Hirsch, as I said, ran that program about bridging the gap, and what Bridging the Gap [sic.] was about was dealing with issues like the nuclear issues--very political issues. Why are we putting up nuclear power plants and (unclear) on a fault line, that could destroy the environment. Dan was also the president of Amnesty International for journalists in Los Angeles [California]; he was the, the chapter person, so I met a lot of journalists then. Warren Olney [Warren Olney IV], who now does a, a lot of public radio, but he was the anchor for KNBC [KNBC-TV, Los Angeles, California]; I believe that was the station in Los Angeles at that time. And what we did was try to free journalists in foreign countries; that's what Amnesty International was all about 'cause how do you apply pressure on foreign governments who would lock up journalists? And Dan--when the CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] program ended, Dan kept me on by giving me part of his salary. Dan is sort of like this person that--if you remember Daniel Berrigan and those kind of people; he was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] educated person who absolutely believes in social justice, and material things doesn't matter--just didn't matter to him. And he really took me under his wing, and so did all of this other community, a largely, middle-class, wealthy, white community, or advocates--social advocates, and that had a real strong impact on me, and I think my passion, where to go, because what was said to me was this. The problem exists, but we can't fix it by ourselves. And that the people who should do the most to try to help are some of those who have benefitted from privilege more than others. Speaker 1: Because in L.A., there are some public figures who are African American-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who are starting to achieve around this time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: And Herman Hendricks was the president of a black bank [Bank of Finance, Los Angeles, California], you know. There were some political figures as well; were you aware of these people? Speaker 2: No, I, I really wasn't. And that's what the amazing part about, about all of this is that there was not that kind of outreach. Now, let's keep in mind, you know, now, in some ways, some people may say I'm part of that, and you may speak to another [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Taborn fifty years from now, thirty years from now and say, "Well, I, I didn't know who, who he was." It is so hard, I believe, for us to be able to reach out in a, in an organi- in the kind of way we want, to all of the people who so desperately need us, and that's why we're all responsible, and that's why one person can make a huge difference. Story_ID: 636516 Speaker 1: How did you get to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, at--it's a--it--Cornell was an interesting story for me. Daniel Berrigan's daughter--not Daniel Berrigan's daughter--I'm sorry. From the Pentagon Papers ['Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force']--I'm trying to remember, but it doesn't, it doesn't matter. I was accepted into a program at Cornell called the Telluride Program [Telluride Association Summer Program], which is an honor society, and that's sort of a summer program from your eleventh grade to the twelfth grade; it's right in the summer. The Telluride Program is an interesting program; it, it has thirty-two scholars ultimately who live at Cornell in a place called the Telluride House. But every summer they have a program for promising juniors who are going to be seniors, so I was selected. Now, I, I wanna, I wanna be very clear. I believe very strongly in affirmative action; I believe very, very strongly that I wouldn't be here if there had not been affirmative action, and had folks not said to themselves, "We're going to not look at test scores, we're going to skip the grades but we're gonna talk to this person and we're gonna see if that person has the qualities to succeed." I didn't do horrible, but I think I could have done a whole lot better with the right kind of nurturing. I, I was tested as gifted and my, and my senior year at University High School [Los Angeles, California] I remember the biology teacher came in and said, "I've just gotten some names, and there's two people in this class who are gifted and we have extra money." She was from Eastern Europe, the, the biology teacher. One of the students tested as gifted was a white woman--a white student, and she looked at me and said, "I don't believe you made this list." Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you do with that reaction? Speaker 2: I, I believed that's the way she was; I just said, "Okay, fine." Speaker 1: But you didn't internalize it. Speaker 2: No, because you know, when I got to Los Angeles [California] in the sixth grade, I was in elementary school; I went through two years in gifted programs. Every week, on a Thursday afternoon, we got to go to another school, and we had a gifted program. I learned how to build a crystal radio set, we went to play--it was so great we went the MPAA, which is the Motion Pictures Association [Motion Picture Association of America] where they do the ratings, and we sat in that room, and they told us how ratings were done and all of that, so I, I knew that I was a little bit special, but then the program--nothing happened after that; I got lost, I got lost in that system. Rather than being tracked the right way, I wasn't tracked the right way; nobody cared until, until my senior year. A whole lot of guys had dropped out by then--dropped out of the system, you know; so, so when she said that, all it did was reaffirm that these folks, people like her (laughter), didn't care, and that those were many of the teachers I had seen along the way. Story_ID: 636517 Speaker 1: But you found one or two. Speaker 2: I found one or two. And I can remember one in particular that I absolutely--that I thought was great. This is when I was going through that seventh, eighth grade period of, of--so I went in there and I said, "Listen, I'm, I'm--." He was my English teacher. And I went and I said, "I'm dropping out of school; I need, I need the work." And he said, "Okay." He said, "I don't, I don't think that's right." His name was Mr. Victor [ph.]--white male, a guy I really admired. And what he said to me, he said, "I won't argue with you but I want you to enter this contest, and then let's see if you can win this money, and if you win the money, then maybe you'll think differently about that--," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of contest? Speaker 2: It was 'Lawrence Welk' ['The Lawrence Welk Show'] Los Angeles [California] citywide Thanksgiving contest. So I said, "Okay," and I wrote the essay. And it had something to do about, Thanksgiving isn't all that special for the Native Americans, and look what we're celebrating and what have we done? Well, guess what? Speaker 1: You won. Speaker 2: I got first prize. Al Hale [Alan Hale, Jr.], from 'Gilligan's Island,' gave me my check for five hundred dollars and my award; they had a dinner--it was great (laughter). Can you believe that? And it--and, and I think it appeared in the newspapers. Everybody in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--it was a big deal, you know, that I, that I'd won this thing and, and I said, "Wow," you know. So, Mr. Victor intervened and helped me at that point. I said, "Okay, I got five hundred dollars now (laughter), okay." I was working on an ice cream truck after school, by the way, at that time (laughter). Speaker 1: Wow, and you're in junior high. And again, you're a social critic; you're critical of Thanksgiving, an American holiday, a tradition (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Turns out that way; yeah, absolutely--critical of Thanksgiving, yeah. In fact, even today it's so interesting. Thanksgiving is my favorite holiday only from a sense that I can bring--I, I bring family in, you know. I'll bring in some of--like my brother's son who's the same age as my son [Ty Taborn], you know, kind of isolated; his dad had been gone, I would fly, you know, both he and his mom in; I bring everybody. Thanksgiving, to me, is about celebrating family and doing something, but the way it was being done, from my sense--the commercial side of it and how we celebrate it without thinking about our obligations, that was my, my, my, my criticism, and my criticism was that for Native Americans and what had happened, this isn't Thanksgiving for them, and we shouldn't forget that part of our population and our--that part of our history. Speaker 1: Was Thanksgiving a big deal in your home growing up? Speaker 2: Not that I really remember or since. I think Christmas was, was, was bigger. Christmas is my least favorite holiday. In fact, we're usually out of the country, you know; either we're in Europe or someplace. Speaker 1: Because of the commercialization? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think it's about--you know. First of all, I said, you know, with these, with these kids--let me show you how, how funny things are now. So, what--you know, what is it that you guys really want? You know; we, we do the right things throughout the year, you know. This is a time that I think we should--you know, that we owe back and, and certainly, there's nothing I can put under the trees for these guys; they already have my credit cards, they already have cars (laughter), but I, I use that holiday for us to spend time together, you know, family holidays together. Story_ID: 636518 Speaker 1: So at Cornell, were, now were you aware of Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], this Ivy League institution? Speaker 2: Well, I'd gone, as I said. No, I wasn't at, at first. I went there for the summer and--which is the best time to go to Cornell because it's absolutely beautiful, you know; I mean the trees and everything, I mean it's just a great place, and you're living in this house with other students, and I was one of two blacks in that, in that program [Telluride Association Summer Program], and clearly these other kids were, were, were--you know, they had the academic background that I didn't have, but what I had, which many of them may not have had, and I think I had an ability to write, an ability to communicate; I think that's really important. And I had--I think I had an ability to connect the dots; some people might call it street smarts. It's not that, it's, it's, it's, it's critical thinking that misses in our society all the time, which is connecting the dots. So, the first thing I--you know, so I, I went through that summer program, it was great, I interviewed with admissions, and I was accepted as a freshman in 1977 to go to Cornell. Speaker 1: So what do you remember from your first two years at Cornell University? You mentioned the privilege you noticed during the summer program. Was that blatant to you? Speaker 2: Coming back to Los Angeles [California] after that, and then going back to Cornell after I finished my senior year [at University High School, Los Angeles, California], and then going back to Cornell, the first person I met--not met, but outside of the Telluride House 'cause we lived in a house, so the first real freshman I met outside the Telluride House was this young guy from New York. Both his mom and his dad had gone to Cornell, and he looked at me and he said, "I don't know how I got here, but my mom's a doctor and my dad's a doctor, and they gave the school a whole lot of money." Then it struck me. I said, "Aha, affirmative action is good; it worked for him" (laughter). But it was, and you begin to see--I mean it, it, it becomes clear that the question is never--the question is never about privilege, you know, that, that we, we celebrate privilege--that many disadvantaged people don't have that privilege; we pay a double tax for that. We're not given the same chance. I mean Cornell didn't look at me and say, "Well, he can't achieve." What Cornell said was, "Here's a guy we can help shape." I remember Warren Olney [Warren Olney IV] and his letter of recommendation, which was a really strong letter of recommendation. He said to Cornell, he said, "Whether you accept him or not, he's gonna be a leader. You have a choice to help shape the kind of leader he will become." Speaker 1: Great. It's kind of a privilege for them to be associated with you. Speaker 2: That's what he--that's what he said; I don't, I don't necessarily agree with that, but I thought it was very--I thought it was a very strong line. That, that is the role of our institutions, is to shape leaders; it's to shape the people who will run this world. Story_ID: 636519 Speaker 1: What other clubs and organizations did you belong to? Speaker 2: Well, the one I'm most--the, the most amazing one, and the proudest one is, is the--probably Quill and Dagger, and that's the senior honor society. And, you know, it's funny, the other day I came across--I, I was at--I, I, I went on the web and I looked up Quill and Dagger and they had a list of all of their famous alumni, and I looked, I saw all these guys who won the Nobel Peace Prize and everything, and I said, "How the heck was my name on there?" (Laughter) And it's at the--you know, it's under science and technology, and I said, "Wow, they put--they actually put me there." This society is so funny because what happens is in your junior year, they identify you, and in the middle of the night folks show up and blindfold you. I mean secrecy is a big part of this, and you wind up in this tower. We have the Quill and Dagger tower at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. Then they remove your blindfold, and you're sitting in a room, a huge room, with all these candles and people dressed in white robes (laughter). You can imagine kind of the (unclear)--no hoods, just white robes, okay? Those are the people who have really gone on into government. A lot of--you know, a lot of Fortune 500 companies--many people from those kind of universities do that, but the Quill and Dagger was one of the honors that I, that I had. I was an RA [resident assistant] at Ujamaa [Ujamaa Residential College] which is, is the African American--or the African studies residential hall at, at Cornell; the best thing about that is that that's where I met my wife Jean [Jean Hamilton Taborn], that she was in Ujamaa, and so she kept coming for the vacuum cleaner. RAs kept the vacuum cleaner back there; we would check it out, so that's what happened. Story_ID: 636520 Speaker 1: An aside, the Quill and Dagger; you mentioned famous people from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]--Paul Wolfowitz. Speaker 2: Yes, he's a member of Quill and Dagger as well. Speaker 1: So, that's a good network to be a part of. Speaker 2: It is a good network; it's--what--like all networks, it's--it really depends on how well you want to work the network and what circle you really want to be in, but it, it's, it's a wonderful opportunity, and I think that's the obligation of all of us in our communities, to make it inviting for young people to really reach out and connect. Story_ID: 636521 Speaker 1: Speaking of connecting, you were starting to tell us how you met your wife [Jean Hamilton Taborn]. Speaker 2: Yes, I was joking about the vacuum cleaner, yeah. She wouldn't tell that story, but I think what she would say is that her initial reaction of me was the kid with the big Afro and the bullhorn who made all those protesting noises about Cornell's [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] investment in South Africa, and those kind of issues. Speaker 1: And divesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And divesting, right, which I, which I felt fairly strong about. And I'll, I'll tell you, many years later, when I met Nelson Mandela, I was fortunate enough that Kweisi Mfume had me as his guest when Nelson Mandela came here at the [U.S.] House of Representatives, so we had breakfast with, with Nelson Mandela. But since then, I've asked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was your reaction to Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: Very, very powerful. One, of the peace within that he had; I thought that that was powerful. I think that the absence of hostility was very powerful, that he was not seeking retribution, but he was seeking unity because we can all be hurt, it's what happens after you're hurt; that's one of the things that has become clear to me in life. And you see that right away in South Africa; I've been to South Africa several times, and in South Africa, you hear that, that reaching out of--we've gone past that. I'll, I'll tell you another piece. In Rwanda, you know, some of the--the un- how unbelievable it is that a country like that has been able to heal after the genocide that takes place, and it, it, it, it, it break--it almost breaks my heart that people aren't so visibly angry, but I understand that. Speaker 1: But Nelson Mandela was not visibly angry. Speaker 2: Nelson Mandela was not visible, visible, visibly angry. And what Nelson Mandela also said was how important it was for us in this country to use education and use our power to help, not--you know, not join in in the revolution but to use the--how precious education was. You know, I went out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this that you met Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: When Nelson Mandela--I, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Early '90s [1990s], obviously. Speaker 2: Yeah, when he came and addressed the joint section--session of [U.S.] Congress, I was there. You know, I went out later in Cape Town [South Africa]--outside of Cape Town on an island [Robben Island, South Africa] that he was held, and when I heard from many of the people there the sense of who, who, who were held at the same time as Nelson Mandela, what they said was the punishment. The punishment was not to be allowed to read, to not learn; that's how they were punished--the isolation that took place. And you get a different sense of how important the education, having knowledge is to, to, to that whole group. Story_ID: 636522 Speaker 1: Were you able to put all this together in college at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? You were out there with your signs and the bullhorn protesting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I was, I was. I put that together, but I, I did not put together the issue of reconciliation at that point, you know; it was pretty clear either or. Speaker 1: So, at that point you were, you were simply angry about apartheid and about the treatment of Nelson Mandela (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was angry at the university for supporting a system that, that perpetuated apartheid. Speaker 1: Did you have a big group of protestors? Speaker 2: We did, actually. And, and, and the group was, again, a multicultural group, and one of the things that you saw very quickly at Cornell and now you kind of see the part of my history where I believe so strongly in multiculturalism and how people come together--absolutely. Speaker 1: And now you embrace African American groups, Latin groups as well. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Were you embracing those at Cornell as well? Speaker 2: Yes. You know, Cornell has a school of industrial labor relations, so there's a big labor group there as well. So you begin to look at some of the issues Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] looked at, which were the issues of labor rights for the poor. I mean that's a major issue, and you have a part of the labor, labor group that's very--I would say left of center; they believe very strongly in these issues of, of worker equality, pay equality for women and for men; that, that, that's a very strong issue for them. And those were the same groups that joined in on this issue of divesting from companies that invested in South Africa. Speaker 1: Well, interesting, but some of those labor--interesting enough-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because these groups, these labor groups fighting for justice, but also there was a time, and Ralph Ellison writes about this, when these very labor groups were keeping blacks out. Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's a--now that was a fascinating, that was a fascinating book. I assume you're talking about the 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That was an issue, but there was also a separate issue and I, I can go into that a little bit; I think it's really important that they--what happened in labor in this country was that as blacks left the plantations, which were horrible, but remember that the slaves brought so much in technology to the New World--rice in the South; that agriculture of technology was brought in by African slaves, and so many advancements in agriculture were, were actually done there. If you were a slave owner and you needed to build a house, you went to the slaves; they were the ones who were the mechanical engineers, they were the draftsmen and all--they had all of the skills and crafts of that century. Now, let's fast forward as the civil rights--I mean as the Civil War happened and slaves moved away. What did we see happen? We saw all of those technical skills; today we call 'em technology skills--all of those technical skills being taken away. The historically black colleges [HBCUs], what we see today we're not supposed to teach technology. We were, we were to be prepared to be teachers and preachers--maybe play some music, but no technical skills. Speaker 1: When you say technical skills back then, you're referring to-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I'm--all the crafts--the, the craftsmen jobs--iron and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, Booker T. Washington philosophy Speaker 2: Right. And we're gonna get there because it--exactly that. So, we were moved away from the technical skills; those skills were being done now by immigrants coming in. This is the conflict with the labor issue. The immigrants were coming in--Baltimore [Maryland]. When we look at Baltimore and Frederick Douglass, for example, they were the best corksmen in the world. Those are the people who actually plug in between the wood on a ship so the water doesn't get in. Blacks were considered the best. As the German and Irish immigrants came into Baltimore, they said to the ship builders, or the ship repair people, "Don't hire blacks; we have riots here in this area." Ultimately--I mean it's some great history here, but ultimately blacks were forced out of this trade as in many trades. Now, when Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] came about, the secret of Tuskegee was that we started to secretly teach-- Speaker 1: Vocation. Speaker 2: --vocation, and that's the big deal. So there was a lot of the conflict; a lot of this conflict that happened was, was really conflict over jobs, and Baltimore, with the technological revolution that happened in this--in, in, in, in the 19th century was really the, the creation of the railroads. Railroads started here; they did not use slave trade for that because instead they had blacks fight against the Irish and others to bring down the wages in order to build the railroad--the, the, the rail transportation that actually made this country an industrial great country because of our ability of transportation. So, some of that changed, you know? I mean we, we still have a big issue with racism in the labor movement, no question about that. With that said, there's still good people there who realize what the problem was, and they joined us on this issue in South Africa. Story_ID: 636523 Speaker 1: And so you were out protesting, and you were also a scholar at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you do any internships? Speaker 2: I did. One of my favorite internships--I believe so strongly in internships, and if anyone ever listens to this, starve rather than working for a couple of pennies at a fast food restaurant; not that there's anything wrong with a fast food restaurant because you can have a great career at McDonald's. In fact, the president of McDonald's is an African American man [Donald Thompson]. But if you can get an internship in your field, or something you're interested in, that matters, and it matters later in life. My internship is a fascinating one, and one of the internships I had, and most meaningful ones that I ever had was with Congressman Julian Dixon [Julian C. Dixon], and Julian was from Los Angeles [California]. I had been hired by lieutenant governor Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], who was from Trinidad, to be his intern as lieutenant governor. So it was my--it was from my freshman year going into my senior year, and I show up in California and I'm all excited, I'm ready to start working and Merv said, "Well, listen, you know, Prop- "; I think it was Proposition 1 or Proposition 13, which was the zero tax on real estate act that passed in California. He said, "I can't pay you," he said, "but you can come work for free." I said, "Well, I can't do that, I'm too poor; I can't do that for you." So he said, "Well, I don't know what to tell you." He really felt bad, and Dym- Merv Dymally was a great, great man, and we had a great relationship. So I wound up--I think my first job during the summer, I wound up working as a secretary in a radio--in Willie Davis' [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis] radio station (unclear); he had a beer brew distributing company on one side, and a radio station on the other, and in-between that, I went over to--actually, Merv told me to go over to Julian Dixon who was an assemblyman. He said, "Go over to Julian's office and see what you can do." So I showed up in his office--a friend, a friend drove me there, and coming out of his campaign headquarters on Crenshaw [Boulevard] was Julian Dixon; standing next to, to, to assemblyman Dixon was this young fellow with a cast on his leg and, he had the, the, the, the--I forget what they're called--the, the things to help 'em walk. Speaker 1: The walker. Speaker 2: The walkers, yeah. And so Toni (unclear), who was a political person who had taken me under her wings, she said, "That's Julian's campaign walker; run over to him now--." The guy's leg is broke--, "Run over to Julian and say you want to volunteer, and that Merv Dymally sent you over." And I did that. So the rest of the summer, Julian and I walked the streets of that district. Julian would be on one side of the street, I would be on the other, he would knock on a door, I would knock on a door, somebody opened up. I said, "Wave to Julian Dixon." And if they didn't, then we would--I would hang the sign saying, "Julian Dixon was here." Story_ID: 636524 Speaker 1: So, as the campaign neared the end, Julian [Julian C. Dixon] said, "What is it that you want? What can I do," you know, "for you?" And I said, "I wanna go to Washington [D.C.]. I wanna be your intern." I said, "But I got two conditions." Now, imagine me telling him I got two conditions. I said, "One, I want it to be a meaningful internship, and two, I gotta get paid." (Laughter) So, he got into office, and I received a call at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], and it said, "You're an LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson] intern, and congressman wants you there." It was a great summer, I'll tell you. I had a--I showed up in Washington, D.C., had no money 'cause it took--takes a while for a check, but quickly I learned that it was something really cool about working at the congressman's office; they get invited to a lot of stuff, a lot of receptions, and I could just go. I would find out, "Who's holding a reception?" "Oh, it's that committee." And I would just shoot over and they would actually hold--you could get all the free food that you wanted (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, what year is this? Is this the late '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This must have been 1978--'78 [1978], '79 [1979]. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, during the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration? Speaker 1: No, Julian--I believe that Julian's first term probably was during the Carter administration, absolutely. You're right, so it was during the Carter administration. You're good (laughter). Speaker 2: So, could you feel that atmosphere though, a Democratic president and a Democratic congressman? Speaker 1: No, I, I--you know, I really--I, I still hadn't quite connected that part. I mean I, I felt the excitement of a freshman congressman, and I was so caught up in being a part of a member's office that knew you, so when Julian went out to speak, you know, I, I--I, I do remember in his--sitting in his Mustang [Ford Mustang]; he'd bought a new Mustang, and back then--and this was during, you know, when we had to wait for gas, right? It was during the Carter administration. And we would have to drive around, so I would be with his chief legislative aid, Bevan [Bevan Dufty], and the congressman, and myself, and here's an intern driving around with them, and Bevan didn't smoke but I smoked and Julian smoked, and we were just smoking up the cars back then (laughter)--but I don't smoke now. But it was--it, it was just so exciting to be, be part of that office and to be part of that history. Story_ID: 636525 Speaker 1: You know, Julian [Julian C. Dixon] went on to play such an important role on the ethics committee [House Committee On Ethics], and heading the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] committee as well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was gonna say that next because a lot was going on in D.C.-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: --at the time. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You know, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry is active in, in politics, Walter Washington is active, they're striving for a state rule, and even statehood (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which they should have. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: Which they should have. Speaker 2: And Julian Dixon was the man in charge on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], in a way, so what, what did you witness? Speaker 1: I wit- well, what I witnessed about Julian is his--Julian was from Washington, D.C.; he was born in Washington, D.C. Julian was also a probation officer, so he saw a lot in Los Angeles [California] there. But Julian was the kind of guy who really worked the inside. He was not the kind of guy that would be out on the front the way Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] would be; Julian was much of--much more of a quiet worker. I do remember how interesting it was that when we went into some of the areas in Los Angeles, that people didn't know their assemblyman, you know, when he was running for [U.S.] Congress. Speaker 2: He had a pretty diverse constituency. Speaker 1: He did, but Julian was not a flashy--he was not a flashy person; he was a real thinker, that's what I got outta Julian. And the organization--Julian, Julian, Julian really cared about organization. And he was a man of his word, he really was. I mean how many people would have kept a promise to an intern? What did--what, what would it have mattered? But you know what else struck me? And this is--goes back to the issue of privilege. When I got to Julian's office, there were three interns; two were there weren't paid, but they were--their parents had been heavy contributors or supporters of Julian's, so you could only have--back then, you could only, only have one paid internship. I don't think you can have any today; I don't think there's a--I think they, they actually got rid of the LBJ [Lyndon Baines Johnson congressional internships]. So, an opportunity for a low-income--a, a, a student to intern in Washington will not happen unless the Congressional Black Caucus pays for the salary. Story_ID: 636526 Speaker 1: So, what was the lesson learned through that experience for you? You don't get what--you don't get anything unless you ask for it, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Abso- absolutely. I mean you, you, you have to be there. The lesson that was learned is that you have to seize the opportunity when you see it. That opportunity may not happen again, and I hesitated for that moment. Had I not listened to the lieutenant governor [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], and gone over to Julian's [Julian C. Dixon] headquarters, had I not listened to Toni [ph.]--I, I didn't know Julian Dixon; had I not listened to her tell me to get out her car and run over there and say, you know--say those few words, I would not have precinct walked with Julian Dixon, I probably would not have gotten to Washington [D.C.], not in that time period, you know, the way it laid out. You've gotta--sometimes, when that door opens, you just have to be prepared to seize that opportunity. Speaker 1: And you have to have a little bit of courage. Speaker 2: You have to have courage, absolutely. Story_ID: 636527 Speaker 1: Women's rights going on around this time as well; was that pretty obvious on campus? Speaker 2: I'd always looked at women, obviously, as being equal; I mean how, how can you not? You grow up with a mom, you know, you grow in an area where there's very few men. When you don't see--I don't think I had a male teacher--an African American male teacher; I think I had one in my--until I got to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] where I had black male professors. Speaker 1: So, you ha- you were doing the protesting about South Africa--divesting from South Africa, and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there women, particularly--probably not many black women on campus, but were there any sort of feminist activism? Speaker 2: No, I didn't see much, I didn't see much of that because I think we all started from a sense of everybody was equal, that we kind of had moved into that--you know, at least my generation, or the folks that were on campus. Speaker 1: Was there an African American studies program? Speaker 2: There was an African American studies program ran by Dr. James Turner. In fact, one of my first jobs at Cornell was to work in a library at the African American studies center [Africana Studies and Research Center, Ithaca, New York]. My advisor was able to get me a work study job there, so it was great that I could sit there around all of these books and history, and read from the African journals 'cause we got a lot of journals that came in from Africa, and I was able to read that, and they actually paid me (laughter) to do that; it's incredible that I got paid to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You knew how to get paid, did you not? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, you, you, you, you have to--and when I say paid, it was enough to eat. Story_ID: 636528 Speaker 1: I mean if you can imagine--let me tell you my, my first days at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. And don't forget, I was an intern in places without being paid. I showed up at Cornell--and don't forget, I left Chicago [Illinois] when I was really early--really young. I showed up at the school, and that freshman year was the worst winter that they had had in a decade. I did not even have a winter coat. I--there's a woman, I mentioned earlier about my [maternal] grandmother's sister [Novella Nicholson]? Well, on her side, she had two daughters, Jeanette [Jeanette Nicholson (ph.)] and Doris-[Doris Nicholson]. Doris was a teacher in White Plains [New York], and I hadn't seen her for years, but these were people who just thought I was the greatest, you know, I was just a great kid. So, I got on a bus and I went--I'd stayed with Doris for Thanksgiving; she bought me a coat, she bought me clothes--all of that stuff, and she really became my mother in many ways. I mean she--I--and we're so close; my kids [Ty Taborn and Courtney Taborn] are so close to her right now. We were, we were in Chicago a couple of weeks ago, and they stay the summer. They don't see their grandmother [Vivian Wallace], they see her; I mean--but she really made sure that I had a meal program at the school and she just watched out for me. So my mother [Edith Wallace Taborn] had gotten me to a certain point, which I thought--I think is so wonderful, but then the community steps in and they move you to the next point, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But does the community automatically do that, or did you really have to sort of seek out-- Speaker 1: I had to seek her out. I, I, I, I could have not had gone and, and, and seen her but I did, and she was so proud; she, she has no children, she had been married once, but she, she, she remem- she knew me and she always liked me so much, so it was a great, it was a great time in her life and in my life for us to re-connect, and for the family part to really play a role out there so she, she, she has played such a critical role in that part of my life to now--to where I am. Speaker 2: What's her full name? Speaker 1: Doris Nicholson, and she's now back in Chicago. Speaker 2: Can you spell Nicholson? Speaker 1: Sure, N-I-C-H-O-L-O-S-O-N [sic.]. Story_ID: 636529 Speaker 1: Did you graduate from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: I left Cornell my senior year. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well, I had another opportunity and that was this company I now run, Career Communications Group [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: This is around 1981, '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: This would have been '81 [1981]. Career Communications Group, as you know, is a multimillion dollar corporation, one of the most successful companies of its type. My thought at the time was I was gonna take a year off and get this thing, and to, you know, to make sure that the, the publication actually succeeded, return to Cornell and then go get my master's degree--M.B.A. at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], and over--later, a law degree, and then go on to Washington, D.C. Well, a line that I thought was on my resume turned out to become a lifestyle, and as I moved through and I saw a lot of people of my generation, of this technology generation, who took advantage of that window, Bill Gates, Michael Dell, so many others who had an opportunity and who seized that opportunity, I seized the opportunity as well, and now, you know, at this part, you know, with a couple of honorary Ph.D.'s, and the impact that I believe the company has made on so many people, you also complete things in life, and therefore--you know, I've gone back in the last year to Johns Hopkins [John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], and I'll be actually finishing up and getting that little piece of paper that--I made a promise to my [maternal] grandmother [Vivian Wallace]; I told that wonderful woman, I said, "I'll always do it." And even though she's not here today, I know she's looking down at me, and every day I'm sitting in these, these classes and I'm, I'm studying and half the professors wonder why the heck I'm there because (laughter), you know, they say, "You should be teaching the class." But I sit there and I do the work, and I work hard and I get A's, and the reason I do that is because if I'm gonna do it, I'm gonna do it right, but secondly, it's for her, and I want her to know that I keep my promises. Speaker 1: And what will your degree be in? Speaker 2: Interdisciplinary studies. So, I'm a trade of all (laughter)-- Speaker 1: A jack of all trades (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A jack of all trades. Speaker 1: A real Renaissance man. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 636530 Speaker 1: So the start of this company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland], this multimillion dollar company-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it, it began at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: It began, it beg- I started on a school newspaper, it was called Umoja Sasa; it was a school newspaper. It was a black nationalist newspaper, so when you open it up, it would be "Frats Attack Blacks," and that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: And you were, what was your role on the newspaper (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my original role was as an edit- as a journalist, just as a reporter; I quickly became the editor-in-chief (laughter) of the thing. Speaker 1: But that's not a radical. Was it radical? Speaker 2: Well, it was radical until I kind of changed the focus of it, and I changed the focus from being a newspaper--well, there were several things that happened. It was funded by the student finance committee. The student finance committee actually cut off the funding for the--for the publication. I decided that what was important was to raise advertising dollars, so I went to a good friend of mine, who had become a good friend of mine, which was the real conservative guy, Charlie Williams [Charles Samuel Williams], who was the associate publisher of Cornell Alumni News, and Charlie and I sat there, and I would meet with Charlie almost every day. "Charlie, you know, let's talk about--I wanna turn this into a magazine and I need to get advertising, and all that kind of stuff." So, I had to reshape it, and a, and a magazine that meant a lot to me was The Economist, out of London [England], and I said, "I wanna be--." There were two magazines; it The Economist and the New Republic. The New Republic used to be liberal. I loved those two books, okay? And I said, "I'm gonna shape this into a thought-provoking book. I wanna move away from this black nationalism rhetoric that, that I saw." Not that there was anything wrong, but it was really a lot of rhetoric, and I don't think it was getting to the heart of my concept of, how do you move forward? How do we find solutions? And, and, and it almost took me back--the newspaper almost took me back to the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and the Muslims, kind of the same kind of stuff. But, you know, but it was what, what, what was there. Speaker 1: And it's sort of--in the beginning of the '80s [1980s], there was kind of a resurgence on college campuses (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a resurgence, right. Speaker 1: --with this black consciousness movement. Speaker 2: Right, right. So that, that caused a little bit of a conflict; they used to call it purging all the time, you know--purge and--well, I guess they did some purging, but I'm the only one who's kind of survived the purges (laughter) along the way. But I was able to get advertisers to come on board, and the way I did that, I picked up IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]; those were some of the early advertisers that I was able to get. The way I did that was that we found that when recruiters came on campus, they did not see the black students. So, I said, "Well, why don't you take an ad in Umoja Sasa announcing your visita- your, your, your dates and, and then students can come see you at a hotel." So, I was able to get a number of companies to, to do that. Well, obviously, as time went on, we lost--we, we had lost our student finance money, so we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you lose the student finance money? Speaker 2: The, the students just didn't refinance it. We didn't have a place to stay on campus. I said, "Okay, well, I'm gonna take it." A lot of professors--Charlie Williams, said, "Just take this thing, you know, stop being ambivalent; take it and make it into your image; you can do this." And he encouraged me, and Umoja Sasa really--I can't say it transformed, but what it--what came out of it is U.S. Black Engineer and Information Technology, which is one of the, you know, most successful publications for technology people of color in the world. From there, we then developed a Hispanic Engineer Information Technology [Hispanic Engineer and Information Technology], I have Science Spectrum magazine, I also have Women of Color in Technology, then I launched the conferences--Black Engineer of the Year Awards that's in its twenty-second year, Women of Color in Technology [Women of Color in Technology STEM Conference] which is in its twelfth year; I started Hispanic Engineer and National Achievement Awards [Hispanic Engineer National Achievement Awards], we've had a whole range of television programs that have won many awards, such as 'Success Through Education: A Salute to Hispanic Excellence,' and 'Success Through Education: A Salute to Black Excellence,' ['Success Through Education: A Salute to Black Achievement'] so, a line on my resume really did become a lifestyle that I believe has helped transforming the way we look at one another. Story_ID: 636531 Speaker 1: So what was the mission of the company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland] when you started? Speaker 2: To change the way we saw one another, and how the world saw women and people of color. You know, to really address this issue of, of accomplishment, of moving away from this issue of charity, of the right thing to do or it's a good thing to do, to one that it was absolutely necessary that we have so many great people out there, and you know, my words are actually--back then have actually proven to be very true as we look at this global economy now. Where is the future of America? Will America be able to retain her global leadership--her market leadership? And there's a question mark on some of that. I mean increasingly we're being challenged by India, we're being challenged by China, we're being challenged by parts of Eastern Europe and certainly the Soviet Union [Russia] has come back on the scene. We're seeing nuclear powers--emerging nuclear powers that could challenge us as well--Iran. So, all of these things are happening and how, how do we react to it? Well, we need more men and women who are critical thinkers, who have some kind of training in science, technology, engineering, math, or at least the management of it, to move into our workforce, and those people increasingly are women, blacks, Hispanics. You know, seven outta ten of the workers entering the workforce fall within those groups, so we're really losing this large number of white men who dominated the workforce; they're retiring, they're leaving. Who's replacing them? The federal government is facing a huge challenge with something like 50 percent of most of their managers retiring over the next ten to fifteen years. Speaker 1: And so at twenty-one years old or so, twenty-two, you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We saw it. Speaker 1: --you were aware of this absence. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Well, I knew--I saw what the numbers were. The demographics have been there; the fact that we're just acknowledging 'em now, and that Tom Friedman [Thomas L. Friedman] just wrote 'The World is Flat' ['The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century'] doesn't mean that it happened, you know, two years ago. Speaker 1: How did you know? Speaker 2: Well, I was--I always looked at the numbers. I ran the engineering manpower numbers, I looked at what companies were doing, I looked at the kind of growth that was happening, I saw the, the beginning of the explosion and, and PCs [personal computer], and technology, and knew that our industry increasingly would be moving toward information scientists and what I used to call careers of the mind, M-I-N-D. And what I said--while I was at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], you know, one of the things that was so interesting--I didn't take many under--I didn't take many 100-level courses; I took all of these 300-level or 400--I was in all these great grad courses, so I spent a lot of time looking at Latin America, social science, economic development, and I saw that in those countries, increasingly--and particularly in Latin American countries, we were looking at transfer of knowledge, you know, how originally manufacturers would go into these countries and simply hire the labor--cheap labor. But now, many of these countries were saying, "You have to transfer that knowledge from the U.S. to here where we are, so we can begin to build our own infrastructure." And I said, well, if they can do it, why can't the black community do it? Isn't the black community in some ways an internal colony?--if we wanted to look at it that way. I said, why can't this community talk about building infrastructure and talk about building institutions, and strengthening of those, those institutions? Of course it can, but how do we get there? How do we find a meaningful path that could change people's lifestyles in a meaningful way, in a significantly short time period? Story_ID: 636532 Speaker 1: So what did you do the first couple of years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was technology. Speaker 1: --as you were building this company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]? Take me through a couple of those turning point moments. Speaker 2: Ah. They were very tough moments because, as I said, in many ways, it would have been easier to have started a new company with that concept rather than being saddled, you know, using the name Umoja Sasa, which means unity now in Swahili. I remember going into New York [New York] ad agencies and talking to them and they would laugh at the name Umoja Sasa. I remember some companies who looked at it said, "Why would we ever put an ad into this kind of, into this kind of publication?" And what, what struck me is that I sought what was my core belief, and I aligned it with what were their core beliefs. My core belief was helping the community find a path to wealth creation through technology; their belief was that we need good employees and we need people trained in technology--that was the common denominator, that's what I pursue. I don't pursue things that separate us, I pursue the things that maintain my integrity and can maintain our partner's integrity. But the thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But what were the struggles the first two years? Give me some concrete struggles. Speaker 2: Finances. One of the reasons I came to Baltimore [Maryland] was because of Billy Murphy [William H. Murphy, Jr.]--Billy Murphy being, you know--who ran for mayor, famous from the Murphy family. Billy Murphy's an MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] engineer, and I was introduced to Billy. I moved into--the company moved into Billy's building on Calvert Street; he was behind the building, and we moved right into that immediately with Billy Murphy, with Dick Falcon [Richard V. Falcon], Jake Oliver [HistoryMaker John Jacob "Jake" Oliver] who's now the publisher of the Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]. Jake was on the board of Maryland National Bank; he came to Baltimore, Maryland National Bank, gave me $100,000. The people were from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]; I remember what they said, I remember the banker, John Black. He looked at me, he said, "You know, we're not betting on this publication, we're betting on you because we believe in you, and with a, with a sign of your hand, a $100,000 loan." That was critical. Some of the other critical pieces that we had were really convincing companies how important this role modeling piece was, so one of the early companies that came on board was IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]; IBM absolutely believed in diversity and reaching out, and put their name behind many of our activities. Story_ID: 636533 Speaker 1: So, financing--were you able to accrue enough capital? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, it's all--it's never enough, let me tell you (laughter), and I think everyone would say that. But we had--the biggest issue for us, I believe, was the cash flow, you know--bringing dollars in. And I, I'll tell you someone who was just absolutely wonderful was my wife's mom, Gwen Farraro [ph.]. You know, one of the things I'm so proud about the company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland] is that we've never missed a payroll; that doesn't mean that we've been paid personally every, every time; that's obviously not true. But our employees have never had to wonder whether they would be paid or not. We've never missed a payroll, and I think that's a great blessing in over something like thirty years. But her mom--Jamaican immigrant as well--came here, wound up working for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], and she would always, always be there, you know--needed $30,000, $40,000, Gwen would, would send that over to us and help us through a really tough, a really tough time, and that's what--Al Gore, incidentally--when, when Al Gore spoke at the UNITY conference for, for journalism [UNITY: Journalists for Diversity], I was there. He talked about that wealth, the accumulated wealth or the inherited wealth; that's what doesn't exist in many poor communities, you know. Who do you pull on? Most businesses, most start-ups don't go to banks to get money; they rely on family, friends, and those kind of social networks. Bill Gates--initially--I mean his, his, his father, his father's a--not his father [William H. Gates, Sr.], but his stepfather's a lawyer [sic.], his mom [Mary Maxwell Gates] played a critical role. I mean those connections are opened by those, those internal networks. Speaker 1: I know like, Todd Alexander in Atlanta [Georgia] borrowed, I think, twenty thousand dollars from his mom (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --to start his wine company, the (unclear), so that is common, not only in the black community, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I like the way John--John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] spoke about it in his autobiography which I absolutely love. I think he--he's such a, he's such a role model to me; I mean he, he tried to borrow money and, and they said, "No," so he went in and said, "Well, I wanna go on a vacation," and they gave him the same amount of money (laughter) to get started-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --so I mean it's just absolutely hilarious. I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You have to use some ingenuity, apparently. Speaker 2: Right, right. You know, people are more--they will--they may bet on you if you're gonna consume something, but they won't bet on you if you're gonna invest in yourself and the community. Story_ID: 636534 Speaker 1: Who were some of your other role models as you began this venture? Speaker 2: Right. Well, I mentioned Billy Murphy [William H. Murphy, Jr.]; I think Billy Murphy is absolutely one of the greatest thinkers of this time, particularly on a, on a criminal side, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you looking to people in the business world primarily? Were you looking for people in journalism as well? Speaker 2: No, I don't think as much in journalism. I think I have had a real--I was really clear about our editorial mission, but I did look at people of integrity and I looked at people who persevered. Ray Haysbert [HistoryMaker Raymond Haysbert, Sr.] who, along with Senator Cathy Pugh [Catherine E. Pugh], brought me into The Presidents' RoundTable [The Presidents' RoundTable, Inc.]. The Presidents' RoundTable is the--is this area's group of the largest and most successful black and Latino-owned businesses, and I became the youngest member; I think I've been part of The Presidents' RoundTable for fifteen years. Ray impressed me so much with the Parks Sausage [Parks Sausage Company, Baltimore, Maryland] story, you know, how they, you know, started Parks and, you know, they went through a couple of mergers and came out of it, but Ray is just really a man of integrity, so I was im- I was really impressed with him. Kweisi Mfume--you know, I became good friends with Kweisi when he was a city councilman; I was very impressed with the way Kweisi would--was a coalition builder and how he brought people together in, in so many ways. Speaker 1: What kind of person was he--a dynamic--or is he a dynamic person? Speaker 2: Well, as you know, Kweisi started on the Baltimore City Council, and he was a radio--he worked in Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]--not worked in Morgan but he did a radio program at WEAA [WEAA Radio, Baltimore, Maryland]; later, he was elected to [U.S.] Congress following Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III], and then he went over to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as the president and CEO there. He recently ran for senator--Maryland state senator; he should have won, but there's some dynamics there that I think are interesting about Baltimore City [Maryland] and how our votes are shaping up here, and it's more white registered voters in Baltimore city than there are blacks, and the, the city's over 60 percent black. So, yeah, he was a very dynamic, and he continues to be a very dynamic person--good memory, able to reach out to people, and able build bridges. Story_ID: 636535 Speaker 1: So what were your achievements between say 1981, 1985? Speaker 2: Wow (laughter). That's a--between 1981 and 19-- Speaker 1: With your company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]--the early years of your company (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes, yes. I think we made a--our company made several significant achievements; one was the Black Engineer of the Year Awards; that is one that I--that, that continues to bring me great pride. Let me tell you what we did there. We brought together the eleven historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs] with accredited engineering programs, and those schools include Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Texas--I mean North Carolina A&M [sic. North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]; now, Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], and several others. Those deans have really not worked as much as a cohesive group as they do now through the event, and out of that, we focused the corporate 500s [Fortune 500] attention on those schools. Now let me give you an amazing number in the, in the United States. we have on the, on the campuses, 33 percent of most African American engineering graduates come out of those eleven schools; they enroll about 28 percent. There's over three hundred accredited engineering programs, so when you look at what these eleven programs are doing, it's pretty amazing. So, if we wanna increase the pipeline, it strikes me that more money should go to Howard University then to Morgan State; let's build their capacity, let's get more students out. Now, you might say, "Well, we're--you know, is our historically black college as good as a, a, a white college?" Well, you know, often the question is not even presented that way; often the question is: "Is Howard as good as Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?" Two different schools, right? But the engineering program at Howard University is accredited, and all engineering schools are accredited. So that means at the minimum we're all bringing people on at the same level. When we begin to look at where most of our doctors--our professionals come from, they come, they come out of historically black colleges. So, I just think that was--the--our ability to bring those guys together--those schools together--there were several women at the time who were deans. Bringing all of those schools together and bringing that attention is very significant 'cause I think we help build some infrastructure at HBCUs. And, and that--incidentally, that's why Morgan, which very seldom gives out honorary Ph.D.'s, awarded me with an honorary Ph.D. and, and I think the chair I'm sitting in, or the chair that's on the other side of the room, is from the president of the university, it's a chair from Morgan State in my honor. Speaker 1: Beautiful thing. Speaker 2: It is, it's-- Speaker 1: And you have another honorary doctorate from which school? Speaker 2: Eastern Shore [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland], and that is being--I, I've been given an honorary degree there, and that will be a doctor of sciences. Speaker 1: Very nice. Story_ID: 636536 Speaker 1: Were there other achievements in those early years of the company [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]? Speaker 2: Women of Color. Women of Color in Technology Conference [Women of Color in Technology STEM Conference] was so important to me. What I had seen over, over the years is that during this technology revolution, how much wealth was really being created in this country. And still looking at the salaries of women in science and engineering, and seeing and hearing of the struggles that women were having pursuing these fields, I said something absolutely had to be done. And you know, sometimes the person who's the best advocate from a rhetorical position is the person who has--who seemingly has the less to, less to gain. So here comes a guy out there making all of this noise, and we were able to get this Women of Color conference in technology launched; it's--the lead sponsor is IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] with Northrop Corporation [Northrop Grumman Corporation]; we have tons of companies who attend, and we're recognizing all of these incredible women who play such a key role in science and technology. I'll tell you, one of the--one of my sheroes of all time is Nancy Stewart, and many people may not know Nancy Stewart, but Nancy Stewart is now the vice pres- senior vice president information systems for Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.]; she's an African American woman, and she was able to get to that level, and she said the only reason she got that last promotion was because the Women of Color conference in technology acknowledged her as the Technologist of the Year, and put her on the cover. She said she was sitting in a board meeting when the CEO of Walmart held up a magazine and announced that promotion. Now, I'm a tell you how technologically gifted Nancy Stewart is. After Hurricane Katrina, you may recall, all of the communications issues, all of the logistic issues almost made us wonder what was going on; had anybody ever practiced--done any exercises? It was one company that didn't have a problem; that was Walmart. Nancy had designed the information system with off-the-shelf stuff that you could pull right up into the parking lot, connected all of their inventory, knew what stores were open, which--what to do, moved the logistics around. She so impressed the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] that she's been in there briefing them on how to get their systems up and running in case of another disaster like this--African American woman. Another winner we had that amazes me is from--a Vietnamese refugee who's now the senior technologist at Texas Instrument [Texas Instruments, Inc.], the highest-ranking woman there. Duy-Loan Le came over here; her father and brother--brothers--remain in Vietnam. They escaped, they came to the U.S., and she promised her father that she would just keep--she would continue; she's--she hasn't seen him since. Today, she's one of the highest--she is the highest ranking woman--technologist there; we honored her as Technologist of the Year. So the stories are out there, but are they acknowledged? We do it; we tell that story. And I, I just have to do this one last--this one last piece, and you said, why does it matter so much? I received a letter from a young woman who said to me that she had considered suicide because she was failing in college. But she had come to the Black Engineer of the Year Award, she heard about a woman--of--one of our award winners stood on that stage, from Chicago [Illinois]--Sherita--who's a, a--Sherita Davis [sic. Sherita T. Ceasar], who talked about the difficulties she had, and how she had considered suicide but she didn't. Sherita went on; she's now vice president of Comcast [Comcast Corporation]. She went on to become very successful; that young woman said had she not heard that story, she would have killed herself, but it changed her life, being in a room and hearing that someone shared the same frustration, the same doubts, and was able to overcome it, and she knew she could, too. That made me feel proud; so those are some of the achievements. Story_ID: 636537 Speaker 1: So this convention, this--the Black Engineer of the, of the Year Award [Black Engineer of the Year Awards] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --is given out annually in Baltimore [Maryland] every year? Speaker 2: We've been here--again--moving into our twenty-second year. The Black Engineer of the Year awards the Black Engineer of the Year, which is the top achiever in science and technology, along with approximately nineteen other winners in different categories; most of these people are the technological leaders, so when you come to Baltimore for the Black Engineer of the Year, about ten thousand people, mostly professionals--college students, pre-college--you're gonna see people like Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford] walking around who's the first African American astronaut to actually go into, go into space--the first African Cuban to go, you know; it was African Cuban that went before anyone--went, went up with the Soviets. But in any case, Guy Bluford was the first African American to go into space. You will see Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory] who went into space; they all show up. It's like a family reunion. Every other person is a black history moment in and of herself, but now you see 'em all there, and it's just a tremendous impact of networking and power that takes place there. Speaker 1: And I've been there-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and I've witnessed it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So it--you're the creator. Speaker 2: I am the creator, along with Dr. Eugene DeLoatch [Eugene M. DeLoatch] from the dean of engineering in Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and, at that time, [HistoryMaker] Lucius Walker, who's the dean of engineering at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 636538 Speaker 1: It's such a great story, 'cause we met in-between (unclear) Beltway at Howard Johnson's right off of BW [Baltimore-Washington Parkway]--either off of 95 [Interstate 195] or BWI [Baltimore-Washington International Airport; Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, Baltimore, Maryland], and we met there for breakfast and, and this is what we said. Morgan had just started its engineering school [Morgan State University School of Engineering, Baltimore, Maryland], I had just moved a company here to Baltimore [Maryland] and moved in with, with Billy [William H. Murphy, Jr.] because Billy needed us in order to buy the building, and we said, "Our lawyer's there, great," you know; this is--what, what, what a better deal can you put together? So, we just moved into that, and Dr. DeLoatch [Eugene M. DeLoatch] used to come to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and speak, so I met DeLoatch before, before he left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to become dean of engineering at Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. And a--I tell you, a friendship as--was born back then that has changed the world. Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: That had to be, counting twenty-one years back, it--Black Engineer [Black Engineer of the Year Awards] must--was started in 1980--I wanna, I wanna guess 1981; come back to the exact date. But what we wanted to do was to bring young people into the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]; if we got kids excited about science and technology, where would they go? And Morgan now graduates or, or Morgan now has--six out of ten of all the black students in Maryland enrolled in engineering are now at Morgan State University, and I feel proud that I'm part of that; in fact, if you go to the school of engineering, they have the wall set up of the founders of the school of engineering, and I'm proud that my name is included as one of the founders of the school of engineering because it means so much to me that they recognize that achievement, but what equally is, is important is that we're generating technical talent to go out there and change the world. Speaker 2: When you hear about prominent African American institutions and organizations like NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]--you mentioned the UNITY convention [UNITY: Journalists for Diversity]. You hear these stories about how, you know, ten people got in a room and they start talking about what they needed to do and, and years later--ten, twenty years later, it's this phenomenal enterprise. And do you have stories about, you know, those different times you guys would have breakfast at Howard Johnson's? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Are there other moments where you met and, you know, there's a story surrounding how you developed this concept? Speaker 1: Well, I think that AMIE, Advancing Minorities in Engineering [sic. Advancing Minorities' Interest in Engineering] is a great story because that is actually an association of the deans where they work together, and that came out of Black Engineer of the Year--one, one meeting that, that took place. But I think what's even more important to me are, are, are the, the chairs that were developed. There's a 3-M chair that was developed that--of over a million dollars, that was put at North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]; that came out of 3-M coming to Black Engineer, and also moving over and making that investment. But I'll tell you one of my, my favorite stories--Bill Swanson [William H. Swanson], at Raytheon corporation [Raytheon Company]. Bill Swanson runs--he's the CEO of a $23 billion corporation, and he's invested millions of dollars into Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and in his note, he writes, "It's because of Black Engineer of the Year that made me focus in on what we, as corporations, should be doing." Now, that means a lot to, to Tuskegee and to their program, to have that kind of investment and that kind of trust. So those are the kind of stories that we see; we help everyone win. Story_ID: 636539 Speaker 1: You have all these publications and the distribution? Speaker 2: Our distribution goes two ways, professional and to students with both distributed on college campuses at the career placement centers. And then we have single copies that go out to all of our professional readers. Speaker 1: How big is this distribution list (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Our--between our Internet readership and the magazine's readership, it's about fifty thousand for--'bout--each magazine has that kind of distribution. We're finding more and more people will access the e-mag or the e-version off of the Internet, which has worked great for the distribution of the magazine because we bring in a lot of new professional readers. Story_ID: 636540 Speaker 1: This company, Career Communications Group [Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland] also is in--I mean involved in other endeavors as well? How did you start the TV show ['Success Through Education']? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a wonderful question but we--the television program was started with the idea that we needed to reach more young people and their parents. What we call the social networks of changing the parents' concept and the community's concept by using persuasion that these are good careers, and when you stop and you think about it, a lot of parents didn't think about encouraging their kids to go into science and engineering. "Oh, that's too hard, that's too tough; you shouldn't do that." Speaker 1: Well, you also mentioned the effort, you know, in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], to get blacks (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --teaching and preaching. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. So we needed to change that concept and what's the best way of doing that? The best way to do that is to show someone like Admiral Tony Watson [Anthony J. Watson], on the television show, who came from Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and he's one of my best friends, and became a nuclear submarine captain, and he drove nuclear subs throughout--he's one of maybe one of twelve blacks who have ever been submarine captains in the history of the U.S. Navy. So if he can leave the ghetto--in fact, if--from Ebony it said, 'From the Ghetto to the Pentagon' [sic. 'From the Projects to the Pentagon,' Hans J. Massaquoi]. I think that was the story that Ebony wrote on him. Think about this--Dr. Mark Dean; Dr. Mark Dean is an incredible story. The IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] PC [personal computer] exists because of this African American who co-invented the key components that allowed the computer to move out of the business community going to the desk, so without Dr. Dean and his accomplishments, there would not, I believe, at this stage of the game, have been a Bill Gates, a Michael Dell--any of those other folks because there was no machine, you know? IBM PC opened up this, this, this infrastructure. And we can go on. Right now, Linda Gooden [Linda R. Gooden], who is the second-highest person at Lockheed Martin, the highest-ranking black woman in the entire aerospace defense community; she was black engineer [Black Engineer of the Year] two years ago. Linda Gooden is right there in Virginia; she took--this woman--I'll tell you how amazing Linda is. Linda took a, a department; she created a department. She only had $300 million in that department in sales the first year. By--two years ago, she had over sixteen thousand employees, and they moved that company to $9 billion; that's why Lockheed Martin's name is now Lockheed Martin and information technology, because she brought in the most profitable part--she did that. So, if our young people hear that kind of story, then they know how to achieve; they have the stars that will light the way for 'em. Story_ID: 636541 Speaker 1: You mentioned a couple of people; you mentioned the astronauts who attend the Engineer of the Year [Black Engineer of the Year Awards]. Tell me, did you have face-to-face interaction with someone like Colonel Frederick Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory]? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Wonderful; both, both the colonel and his wife [Barbara Archer Gregory] are just wonderful, wonderful people. You know, what's so amazing from my perspective as being a person who kind of documents these accomplishments and their history, is really being around people who have really accomplished so much, but perhaps their stories have not really been told, and instead, the stories we see are the stories of a black teenager being marched across the, you know, six o'clock news, and all of these things about, you know, dogs that are biting--of dog fighting. You know, I went through the Sunday newspaper a couple of weeks ago. I like to do what I call a gut check, to make sure I'm not crazy, and I looked at the stories and tried to figure out how many were positive about blacks. You go to the sports section, you'll find stories about blacks, and you go to the front page and you might find, you know, some negative stuff. You go to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Murders. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what you're gonna find there. Speaker 1: Robbery. Speaker 2: And you go the entertainment and maybe you'll see something about somebody who can sing, dance, or make you--you know, make you smile, but the other stuff is absent. Now, my critics might say, "Well, there's negative stuff about whites and everything else," and I would, I would agree. But if I go to the business section, I see about people who run the country; if I go to the political section, I see about people who run the country and run our economies. So, it's offset; the negativity is often offset by all of the positive stuff that's in there, and what we try to do is do all of the positive stuff, and I think that's why people come to the conferences and why they embrace that part of the mission that says, "We're not victims, we're people who can contribute and who have contributed, and who have a rich history and a legacy of contributing." Speaker 1: And the astronauts shared their stories at the convention (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. You know, these astronauts will sit there and speak to a middle school student because I think what's more important to many of the more successful professionals, or to all of us, is what kind of legacy do we leave behind. You know, and I mean this stuff it, it, it disappears. Story_ID: 636542 Speaker 1: You were mentioning an event on C-SPAN that was covered at least by C-SPAN (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --involving some black generals, and that also was a way to sort of showcase the achievers in the world of the [U.S.] military. Tell me about that experience. Speaker 2: I was, I was extremely proud; I--let me go back. A couple of years ago, when we sat there--about three, four years ago as I saw all of the news coverage, and all of these generals and colonels and actually we found the colonels who were on CNN and places like that--the military experts; and it struck me. I said, "I don't see any black faces." African Americans have played a very rich history in the military. I know there's a whole lot over in Iraq, and I know that we played a role in Afghanistan, so where are the black leaders talking about this? So I emailed some retired generals--a four star general, Lester Lyles [Lester L. Lyles], [U.S.] Air Force, four star general Johnnie Wilson [Johnnie E. Wilson], [U.S.] Army, three star general George Ballard [sic. HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Joe N. Ballard], who used to be the chief of the [U.S.] Army Corps of Engineer, three star general--vice admiral, that is, Walt Davis [Walter J. Davis, Jr.], who actually flew--you know, had aircraft carriers and was a Vietnam Tomahawk 14 [sic. Grumman OV-1 Mohawk] fighter pilot. And I said, "Let's come together and do something at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] on black participation and terrorism, you know, what we've done to fight terrorism." So, we went to Morgan State and C-SPAN actually showed up and covered this. The auditorium was packed, and it was so important for the young people to see that there was a real role of accomplished people who knew what they were talking about on this issue, because when we talk about terrorism and the attack on America, most likely these are gonna be devastating acts happening in urban areas, and disproportionately it very easily can happen to this community, so is this a community that's really being talked to right now? Speaker 1: Tell me something memorable about that experience. Was there a student who went to the microphone and asked a, a compelling question? Speaker 2: I actually think the most memorable, memorable part of that was the--was actually from General Al Edmonds [Albert J. Edmonds] who, who explained to the students about the importance of security clearances and how a security clearance now--how to get a security clearance, and what African American students should be careful about. Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: He said that without a good credit rating, you can't get that, and many of our kids in college are getting credit cards, and they're getting in debt, and they will never be able to get that security clearance because of a bad financial piece, and no one's ever told them that. And the difference between entry level with a security clearance can be up to twenty thousand dollars, a starting salary. That's a message that I tell everybody now (laughter). Speaker 1: And he gave them the entire list--no criminal background (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. And those are the things that people, you know, pretty much seem common, you know. But credit, that's something that a lot of folks hadn't even thought about, and it was important. And then he also explained to them how we can get you through the process a lot quicker; let's get you into an internship before you're out of college. We can start the clock ticking so that you can get--so you can be sponsored for that. That, I think, can make--has made a big difference. Story_ID: 636543 Speaker 1: You have the panel; you also, several years ago, started that TV show, 'Success Through Education.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me what that show was about and-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --who appeared on the show. Speaker 2: Well, let's see, Heavy D, Eddie Olmos [Edward James Olmos], Jimmy--Jimmy Smits from 'L.A. Law,' as you remember. We've had a--Jada Pinkett [Jada Pinkett Smith]--we've had a lot of stars who appeared there. Let me tell you what this--how we, how we did this. We really wanted to connect with young people and talk to young people about the challenges that exist in their lives, you know. How, how do you develop a life plan? How do you become successful? We don't care if you go to engineering or become a doctor, or anything else. How do you fulfill your dream? And so we would bring in a star, or a number of stars, to sit in a room at a school with a bunch of young people; it, it was a rap section--session. And we would address issues like peer pressure, violence, sexism--all of these kind of issues that impact a person's decision. And then in-between that, we would cut the vignettes, so if there was a challenge about a person who, who, who, who was under peer pressure, we would then tell a story of Sherita Ceasar [Sherita T. Ceasar], for example, out of Chicago [Illinois], and her history in the projects and how she avoided getting pregnant and using drugs, even though her family said that would happen to her. Speaker 1: So you would do an entire news package on Sherita (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, entire, entire package--about three, four minutes on her, and then we would cut in-between with videos. Well, that became one of the most syndicated educational programs on commercial TV. Speaker 1: Where was it broadcast? Speaker 2: Oh, it was broadcast on WNBC [WNBC-TV, New York, New York]--all of the O & Os [owned and operated] aired the show. Speaker 1: NBC O & Os (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) NBC--well, it would depend--we, we had our choice; we were in syndication. We would go with the station that gave us the best time, and it was done on a barter system; we did not pay a penny to get into any of the major markets. We gave up seven and a-half minutes of the show, we kept seven and a-half minutes of the show. And so our--you know, our advertisers were all packed into that, to that time. So we--you know, it, it was, it, it was really a historical breakthrough because many advertisers said it should be on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. Well, no, we want on commercial television, and we--I think we were very successful. I--we ended up, I believe, in over eighty-one markets, but we were in all of the major markets. Speaker 1: Starting in 2000--around there? Speaker 2: It was--yeah, it was around 2000. We won the School Bell Award, we won the Charleston film awards, we won the Black Filmmakers Hall of Fame award [Black Filmmakers Hall of Fame, Inc., Oakland, California]. Speaker 1: Did you ever see [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett's show in Chicago [Illinois], 'Face to Face'? Speaker 2: I, I, I've been on Vernon Jarrett's show. Vernon is a great person, yes. Speaker 1: Was your show at all similar to, to the kinds of things he tried to do? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I--'cause Vernon was a talk show--it was a one-on-one; I think this was really--the, the, the star brought the energy to the twenty-five or thirty young people sitting in that roundtable with that, with that star, and we heard a perspective from young people that I think is kind of difficult to get on a one-on-one; it was an energy that was there--very, very high energy. And it's something that a young person can look at today and still relate to 'cause the problems are still the same. I mean maybe Eddie Olmos is a little bit heavier, you know, but he's still just as good (laughter). Speaker 1: The mission--while the format was different, the mission may have been similar. Speaker 2: The mission was similar, yes. You're talking about with Vernon doing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, to showcase successful African Americans-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to motivate children in neighborhoods who may not have had those role models. Speaker 2: And that was a great--and, and yes, the mission was exactly the same, and that's what we both tried to do. Persuasion--we come at people a lot of different ways with persuasion, don't we? And the message here--we've got to mix up the message and Vernon, he does such a great job, as you know, as, as an interviewer; at least he, he really kept me on my toes (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, me, too (laughter). Story_ID: 636544 Speaker 1: You did some writing for The Baltimore Sun, as well. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about those op ad pieces. Speaker 2: Well, I, I wrote--I wrote some op eds, but I'm most proud of Jubilee [Jubilee Baltimore, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland], which is the magazine that I wrote the technology column for, and that column I brought on a monthly basis to the community to do its technology projects and the burning technology issues. So I, I tried to put a perspective for the audience--the Digital Harbor [Digital Harbor Foundation, Baltimore, Maryland], for example. In Baltimore [Maryland], the governor, O'Malley [Martin O'Malley]--now, he--when he was mayor of Baltimore, he talked about the importance of the Digital Harbor--how do we bring in more businesses to Baltimore and bring those businesses into the areas of information technology? So the Digital Harbor was one concept--enhancing the infrastructure of the harbor for, for, for companies. Well, here was my question. My question was, economic development in cities was largely based around several things, particularly at NIT [negative income tax]. Do you have a reliable workforce--educated workforce? Do you have reliable and cheap telecommunications? And do you have reliable energy grid? And obviously, do you have reliable transportation? So, if you can supply most of those four, then why not stop talking about the Digital Harbor and talk about the digital, you know, inner-city? Right. Put it there, let companies come there. If we can give them Internet access--high-speed Internet access, cheap energy, transportation, and a reliable workforce, it can be anywhere. And so how do we build up those parts of the community that have deteriorated? So, those are the kind of arguments that I wanted people to begin to think about and understand that in an economy like today, it's about, it's a, it's about the infrastructure and it's about the brainpower. Now, I'm--I'll tell you something that has just really occurred to me about why we continue to struggle in many of our cities, and what I wrote basically in 'The Covenant' ['The Covenant with Black America'] with [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley, what I argued is that African Americans stand at a watershed point, a point in--of which we become irrelevant in this new global economy. And just let me give you a rough, a very rough count of what I mean. You look at Baltimore City, and there's eighty-eight thousand students enrolled in, in the, in the Baltimore City school system--about 116 schools. Less than nine thousand of those eighty-eight thousand students are white, so the majority of 'em are people of color. Now, you, you, you divide that up by thirteen and you see how many roughly are graduating every year because, you know, you got kindergarten and that kind of stuff. Then you look at the drop-out rate which is about 40 to 50 percent, some say even higher, among African American students. Now, given that in number we're talking about, and saying that they all would go to college, you then look at, well, what percentage will go into engineering? When we look at the national average of students going into engineering and what we get on the back side of that--of black students, eighty-eight thousand go in, and less than fifty-six can come out. Story_ID: 636545 Speaker 1: When you say eighty-eight thousand [students] go in-- Speaker 2: To the school system; less than fifty-six--when it's all said and done, we're getting about fifty-six African American kids out of Baltimore City public school system in engineering, based on those numbers give or take, you know; some years'll be better, some years'll will be worse. Now, if we're growing--if we predict the kind of shortages we have in the nation for people with that kind of talent, we're nowhere on the map. You got to import, you got to bring the scientists in to Baltimore [Maryland] to work at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] in the biotech industry; you're not getting 'em here. You got to bring in computer scientists and people like that from outside this area. So what it says is that the existing community here--potentially--is irrelevant. They can't even meet the needs, and that's why we go to China, that's why we go to India, and not necessarily 'cause they have better engineers there; we, we've got the best engineers in the world, we just don't have the power--we don't have the manpower. Speaker 1: The supply and demand issues (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Supply and demand; we just don't have it. I just--you know, and, and, and it's amazing to me, and so we keep raising the wrong argument. The, the argument is what are those numbers like? How do we increase those numbers? Because if we don't increase those numbers, then everything--then not--no--there's no support here except for one outta the goodness of people's heart because it's not making a difference; it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not (unclear) making a difference in how I run my business. Story_ID: 636546 Speaker 1: So, is, is Dixon [Sheila Dixon] supporting your efforts now? Speaker 2: Sheila's a wonderful person. I went to Africa with Sheila early on. I've had--actually I had a fundraiser right here in this house (laughter)--it wasn't a fundraiser, it was a thank you; she wanted to thank a lot of her constituents, and some labor union actually brought everybody in and we, we, we held it here, so Sheila and I really go back a long way. Yes, she does; I mean Sheila has a vision that I think is a good vision for Baltimore City [Maryland]. But let's, but let's look at the handicap; I mean I think, I think we have--we look at the answers in many places--in the wrong places. What can a mayor really do, right? You have what we call hyper-concentration of poverty here in Baltimore City; the majority of the poor people are here, the folks who could move to the suburbs, moved to the suburbs, and then Baltimore can no longer annex territory outside of itself, which it used to do. As people move to the suburbs it can annex those pieces and keep the tax base, right? So, Baltimore is an inelastic city; it can't grow, whereas other cities can grow; they can--and people move, you know, to the suburbs, which is really the metro area. You just grab 'em and you pick 'em up and you keep 'em in your tax base. So, the revenue that the city has, has to be invested and, and, and mostly in a lot of social services; it can't be--there's no money to invest in the kind of development that needs to take place, so there's only so much political people can do. I mean they just can't do anything different at that level. So, she was gonna do what she can, but from an economic development point, it's gonna--you know, it's, it's a challenge; she's locked by history, she's locked by the racism that's, that's taken place and, you know, some of the hard issues we should ask ourselves, you know. Why, why is it that more subdivisions don't take in more of the poor so that we can spread the cost of supplying the services that can ensure the success of these groups, rather than keeping them concentrated in one area where you have, you have a whole bunch of different kind of issues you must deal with. Story_ID: 636547 Speaker 1: These are the kinds of things you wrote about in the article in 'The Covenant' ['The Covenant with Black America,' Tavis Smiley] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, abs- in the, in 'The Covenant,' I wrote--in 'The Covenant,' what I said was: stop blaming the victim. If you walk away from it, that's really the take-away. What I said in 'The Covenant' was, understand the history of technology, and if you understand the history of technology and the history of the African American struggle, then you won't make the argument, why is it that black people can afford a four hundred dollar pair of sneakers and they won't buy a computer? I'm sure you've heard that before. A lot of--I've heard a lot of rhetoric around that piece. What I said in 'The Covenant' was this, that the history of technology since the Second World War [World War II, WWI]--'cause technology always existed, but we're talking about really computer technology, that it was funded by the federal government, and there were companies already set up to take advantage of it, and so there's--these institutions existed already, so they were able to exploit all of this new technology. 'Bout time the technology had filtered down to where black people were, all they could do is be consumers, and that has continued to every single wave of the four major waves of technology. Speaker 1: So, you traveled with the folks who were part of 'The Covenant,' [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley, Cornel West (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Eddie Glaude [Eddie S. Glaude, Jr.], to various cities throughout the country. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How was your message received by the people? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I think, I think it was--I did blacks in technology. It was received very well; I think people understood that when they stopped and they thought about it. You know, most people start off thinking technology is about the Internet and a PC [personal computer]; they're not thinking about digital technologies, nor were they thinking about in the beginning of technology, which was mass production, right? They, they made no connection; so once they see the entire story, then people understand what's happened. And all of these ways, we were fighting for civil rights incidentally; we were being held back so we couldn't even participate in that. But let me tell you how I end on a note of hope. I talk about digital technologies--where are we going now, and how quickly that's changing. In digital technologies, we have an opportunity now to have some major breakthroughs if we have people trained, and we have access to financing. We have the opportunity where we can break through and change our paradigm. Story_ID: 636548 Speaker 1: Well, talking about paradigm shifts-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I think that it was pretty revolutionary to have a group of African American intellectuals who've become now public intellectuals through 'The Covenant' ['The Covenant with Black America,' Tavis Smiley] you know, traveling around the country, appearing on C, C-SPAN and CNN, and part of that goal was to, to give black people of all economic groups-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a manual. This is how you should live your lives-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or revamp your lives. Do you think that approach is the way to go? Has it been successful? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. I think, I think that--I think Tavis [HistoryMaker Tavis Smiley], who I have the greatest admiration for--and I, I've worked with him a number of years--this was a gift; this was important for the community. I mean let, let, let's talk about what happened with this book. Number one, it was done, you know, largely by African Americans, it was nonfiction, it was the first book of its type (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] published it. Speaker 2: Absolutely, and it made The New York Times' bestseller list--never happened before. Yeah, there were fiction books that have--that have made The New York Times' bestseller list, but this was an intellectual, this was a public discourse, this was a non-fiction book, and it made The New York Times' bestseller list, USA Today, Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.]--it made it all. So what it said is that black people do read, but it needs to be relevant and it needs to be important, and these are burning issues in a community. So the fact--I'm, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: And there needs to be a marketing strategy that works. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tavis Smiley was on every black radio station almost every day of the week-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --selling the book to black people; not as, you know, sort of propaganda, but as this is a real need we have. Speaker 2: Well, I, I thought a, a couple of interesting things. He never went on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] so, you know, never made her bestseller, her list--I'm sure she has her reasons for that. It didn't make PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]; I mean wasn't on--I mean NPR [National Public Radio], so he had a real commitment there. You know, I go out--I mean it's so incredible that I go out and people hold that book as if it's the Bible. They write their name along the spine and the side, and it means something, but when you read those statistics in that book, you read--you, you, you begin to read those essays; they are well thought out essays, and I hand a book out to corporate leaders. I said, "You wanna understand some of the burning issues in the black community? I mean this is not a guide book on black people." I said, "But you wanna know about some of the burning issues, you read this if you wanna understand diversity." Speaker 1: What kind of CEOs? Speaker 2: Oh, CEOs of, of some of my clients, and they welcome the book. I send, I send, I send 'em--I, I autograph 'em and I send 'em to a lot of decision makers--people who I think would appreciate some of these key discussion points. Speaker 1: And what were some of the other stories on the road from people in the community who saw this as a bible? Speaker 2: Well, I saw--I was in Houston [Texas] and I, I, I, I'll tell you, I think the place was absolutely packed, and people held it and they read through it. I think the educational side of it is, is really important. You know, another place was so, so amazing to me--and this is a sidebar to the story--but I went to someone's retirement party, and I'm standing there and he found out I had the book, and she said to her husband, "I just bought it; it's in the car." And it's pouring down rain and she runs outside to get the book to bring it back in. That's the kind of reaction; people are reading this. Now, our challenge is how do we keep the momentum going? Now, one of the things that I've seen is that I, I see black covenant groups being set up in different cities. In fact, [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover is running such a program in Baltimore City [Maryland], and I'm helping him out with the covenant for Baltimore City. What are our major issues? Which, which are, you know, the same thing--education and you know, poverty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's one thing Tavis Smiley said on Tom Joyner's morning show ['Tom Joyner Morning Show']; he said, "Let's have these, these discussion groups," which is something you generally see on a university campus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but now you have public people who may or may not go to college having these kinds of conversations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Story_ID: 636549 Speaker 1: Were there interactions--sort of funny interactions, or poignant interactions behind the scenes? He had these sort of select African American intellectuals writing this book ['The Covenant with Black America,' Tavis Smiley] and speaking. What happened behind the scenes? Speaker 2: Oh, I gotta tell you something. I, I, I, I, I'll tell you, Cornel West--when I met him, you know--and I mean he, you know, he's such a giant, you know; he's such a giant. I think we--I, I forget where were--Atlanta [Georgia], someplace, 'cause Tavis [HistoryMaker Tavis Smiley] has a dinner for everybody, and so I'm at a different table and I go over to, you know, I go over to Cornel--to Professor West, I mean. I said, you know, "Let me introduce myself." And he said, "Yeah, man, I love your chapter." (Laughter) And he said, he said, "That's some good stuff." (Laughter) And, you know, he is so down to earth number one, but number two, you know, I never thought that he had really read the chapter, right? But he knew what he was talking--he had read the entire--the, the chapter. And so we had some time to talk about it. That, to me, was one of those, those, those moments of you've done a good thing, you know--that you've kind of connected, you've gotten something out there, and it's a message of hope again. I mean so much of the book really does concentrate, and it should, on some of the challenges we have. But what I was trying to do, and the reason I'm the final chapter there, as Tavis points out, he said, "I wanted to end on where we're gonna go, you know--what we can do, and you really address that, and that's why we asked you to do chapter ten." And also, Malcolm X is one of my favorites, so it's chapter ten, Malcolm X-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) A little symbolism there, double entendre. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Story_ID: 636550 Speaker 1: So what is your message then to the next generation and the generation after that? Speaker 2: Oh, my next challenge is that the world is changing quickly, that the technologies have--the technologies are coming faster and faster, the processing power is there, that almost anybody, at the right place at the right time, can come up with something that may change the world, you know, in, in, in a very real way. That's what keeps Bill Gates up at night; that's what keep Michael, Michael Dell and everybody else up right now at night saying, "Hey, what happens if you don't need an operating system anymore?" There goes all of Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation]; I mean it's very true; Google might do that, you know? So, all of these folks are sweating this power, this unbelievable power that's being created through what I call digital technologies. If we're ready, if you're a critical thinker, if you're looking at that, if we've got the critical mass, you know, why can't the next Bill Gates come outta Washington, D.C.? Speaker 1: Or Baltimore City [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Or Baltimore City, or Chicago [Illinois], or Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois]--any of these places, you know, if you're there. But you have to be prepared, not only on a technical side--you don't have to be a technical expert. Think about Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.]; Amazon is not necessarily a technical company, it's a company that's used technology to sell products, you know; that's a whole different area that we're talking about. Very quickly, what we're talking about is the difference between research science or research technology applied technology; how you take technology and you apply it to real world solutions, right? I could come up with an easy concept--quick, quick concept. I, I was at a school and I asked kids, I said, "Let me show you how you can build something, okay? By just thinking about technology, even though none of you are technology--." It was at Martin Luther's King High School [Martin Luther King Jr. High School] in New York [New York]. I said, "What did you do this morning? What's the first thing, you know, when you got outta bed?" "I looked in the refrigerator." I said, "Okay. Now, let's think about how do you build a, build a business around that, using the Internet, right, and using infra- or you know, tech- different kind of technology?" And you know what the kids came up with? Put something in your refrigerator that will scan all of the products, and when a product disappears, it will email you to pick up more milk. And that's applying technology using off-the-shelf technology. So the future is there for our people and it's one of hope; it's not one to be afraid of. Story_ID: 636551 Speaker 1: At this stage of your life, and you're still a young man-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --but what would you like your legacy to be, especially in the world of technology? Speaker 2: You know, someone once asked me who would I want to be if, if it wasn't--if, if I were not myself, and I thought long and hard about that and--but immediately, one person came to my mind; I would want to be my daughter [Courtney Taborn], my--she's now seventeen years old, but when she was young, and even now--she came into this world with an enthusiasm, with innocence, with this drive, and I so love seeing that in her as a young woman, and she continues to do that. She has this trust about her, and I think at the end of everything, my legacy is how have I changed young people? Have I created that in other young people? And I'm so proud to be part of her life, that's why I would wanna be her if I wasn't me, but I'm so proud to help her get to that point. So, in technology, what I'm looking at is how do we bring more young people to this area of excitement where they know that they have a role in this field? I just completed a new project with the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois], and it is a work--I think a academic work of art; it is called 'Digital Technologies' [sic. 'Learning, Race and Ethnicity: Youth and Digital Media,' ed. Anna Everett]. MacArthur Foundation spent about $10 million in this project; it's a ten volume set, and they went out and they found people who could write on digital technologies and where we are. My chapter is called--is about history, and it deals with race and ethnicity in digital technology ["Separating Race from Technology: Finding Tomorrow's IT Progress in the Past," Tyrone D. Taborn], so one, I'm proud to be part of this tremendous MacArthur Foundation piece, and I'm glad I was given a grant to do this. But what I say in that is how do we use the past to change the future in helping our young people embrace technology? And that is a legacy that I hope that teachers will use that encyclopedia--that whole series, and they will read it and they will understand the history of minorities in science and technology; that they will then understand how we have erased the history and the contributions of minorities and then taken credit for what they did. So we've said blacks didn't do anything; we found the invention, and then we put our names on it. And then they will also understand from there that if people are given back their history, if they understand their history and they believe they can be part of it--that being smart is not a white thing, but being smart is something that our people have always done, that they are more likely to succeed. And I made an academic argument using existing studies to show exactly that. That is the legacy that I see because if we can move that fifty-six students I told you about? If we can get that to three hundred, which is very possible, then look what we've done in increasing the manpower and the workforce, and getting women into the field. So, the work you will see out of me in the next few years of, really more and more scholarly pieces of work that I'm trying to get into the academic discourse, to make sure that teachers and educators are looking at. And, and let me tell you why that's so important. On that project of MacArthur Foundation, I told you there's about ten volumes; there's about ten of us on each volume. I only saw two black men working, out of all of those Ph.D.'s and people who were from all of the universities--from London [England] to India--all of these people that MacArthur brought in--there only two black men, me and another guy from, I think, University of Santa Barbara [University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], University of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--he teaches there. So, we've gotta change the mindset of the people who teach our kids, and they don't know any better; they don't even know they're, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're demeaning our kids or they're robbing our kids out of a dream; they, they don't. I mean I don't think it's nefarious; I just think they don't know. We've gotta educate 'em. So, this MacArthur Foundation piece is really a project I was so excited about being part of. It took almost a year and a-half to get this project done. It is now being published by MIT Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I, I'm just extremely proud of that. Story_ID: 636552 Speaker 1: You mentioned your daughter-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and we haven't had an opportunity to talk as much about your family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --your wife [Jean Hamilton Taborn] and your kids. So tell me about your kids, your wife; when were your kids born? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, all of those trick questions you have. This--and--let me, let me tell you; I, I don't wanna talk about necessarily the--my minor daughter but she's a--but I'll talk about my son. My son's nineteen, he's an adult, he's at College Park--University of, of College Park [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], and I'm very proud of that. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Ty, T-Y [Ty Taborn], and that is not short for Tyrone; it's Ty. Actually, I, I like to use his name now (laughter). I love Ty. But he is a student majoring in education; he wants, he wants to teach. But he's also a pilot, or he's taking pilot lessons and I think that's where he is right this second, or he was supposed to be there at three o'clock. Incredible kid with a real sense of social justice; that's the one thing that I noticed about him very early--his sense of what's right and what's wrong, of defending those that he feels are being picked on for no good reason. He went to Park School [The Park School, Baltimore, Maryland]. He just has that sense and, you know, I, I look at him, I say, "Oh, no, he's gonna be in law enforcement, he's gonna be in defense," those kind of things that are, you know, very clear cut. What he wants to do is, is education now, and I'm excited about that because he wants to go and help--I mean and teach, and reach out to our young people. Now, Courtney [Courtney Taborn], on the other hand, is--has all of those attributes that I just talked to you about with Ty; the difference is that everyone--she has that it factor, whatever that it factor is. I don't have that it factor. Ty's--Ty is great but is--you know, we have it factors with certain segments; she's got the it factor with anyone who comes, comes within her circle or in her space within a couple of minutes. People are just attracted to her; she has so many friends for--from so many groups. She brings people together and she has that sense again, of right and wrong, of bringing people again, together, and she's, and she's fun to be around. You know, when you take her on a vacation, you know, my wife and I just like having her around; it's like, "Wow, Courtney's here." Ty's like me, you know, he's called grouchy--I'm called Grouchy One, he's Grouchy Two (laughter). Speaker 1: Did they belong to groups like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and social organizations? Speaker 2: Yeah, they--absolutely they belonged to Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]; they, they both were part of, of that at, at our church. They were involved in a--they were involved in a lot of things at school. Sports--they, they both were great athletes, which I never was an athlete at all, but they both played varsity. Courtney was varsity hockey goalie at Park, Ty was on the varsity soccer team and he was the co-captain of the varsity baseball team, so they're, they're just real--I don't know where that came from 'cause my wife didn't play sports, I don't, I don't even like sports really. Story_ID: 636553 Speaker 1: And your wife has been a partner through this whole sojourn (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. She, she is the chief--she's actually the president--I keep forgetting that; she's the president and the chief finance officer [for Career Communications Group, Inc., Baltimore, Maryland], so it's--in addition to being married over twenty-something years, we've--you know, we've had--we work together every single day, and that's a--it, it, it doesn't seem that way though, you know? I mean it's a--it--obviously people ask, "Is it a challenge?" And I think the--our response always comes back to the same thing. One, our kids [Ty Taborn and Courtney Taborn] have gained so much out of this experience. One, they've had parents who have very flexible schedules, so things could happen for them. Kids have seen the world, I mean--and they've been to Africa, they've been to Europe, they're in the Caribbean quite often, we even went back to Jamaica; they've, they've been to all of these areas. They understand, I think, a large part of what this country is about, and they also understand we expect for them to be change agents. Speaker 1: And your wife's full name--I know you guys met back at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. It's Jean Hamilton--Jean Ann Marie Hamilton [Jean Hamilton Taborn], and she was born in Montego Bay, Kingston [Jamaica]; particularly in the area called Hanover [Hanover Parish, Jamaica]. Speaker 1: In what year? What year was she born? Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], 1959. And let me tell you; her story was interesting because her mother [Gwen Farraro (ph.)] left that area--left Jamaica and came to the United States, so she has a brother and a, and a sister, both younger, and the two of them eventually followed her mother here, so she stayed in Jamaica until she was fourteen, basically, by herself, and then she came. Her mother was able to, to get her here into the United States and they lived in the Bronx [New York], and from there she went over to--she went to Cornell and that's where we met, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Beautiful story. Speaker 2: Yeah, and what's amazing about that story is--so she, she looks at things from a different perspective really, and she comes here, and I guess on one, on one area of, of hope that when we--that I hope that people understand that as we look at the challenges of immigrants who come here and their success rate, and we look at African Americans and their success rate, there--there's a difference, and the difference isn't simply because one group is smarter than the other; the group, is that immigrants tend to come in here and work at a different pace because we're grabbing those immigrants who most want to be here. Speaker 1: They're hungry. Speaker 2: They're hungry, exactly. And if anything, we need to get that hunger that our ancestors had back into our community so that we play that role as well. Story_ID: 636554 Speaker 1: And finally, from my perspective, you've been doing this Renaissance routine for a number of years, which is very admirable, and you've succeeded at a kind of hybridity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Speaker 1: --or bring--bringing together communication and African American studies and Hispanic studies and technology--all these things, and you've been building institutions. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What is your greatest contribution--institutional contribution? Speaker 2: The Black Engineer of the Year Awards. That is one that has a--that really will make a difference and it has made a difference; it's increased the pipeline for young people. Actually, I have one other one, and that is Black Family Technology Awareness Week. Let me tell you about that program; this program is in Brazil, it's in Europe, it's in Africa. What it basically is, with Black Family Technology Awareness Week, we provide to local families, churches, faith-based groups, corporations, a toolbox that talks about the contributions of minorities. Also, we tell them what kind of programs they should run in their classroom, and they actually co-brand themselves with the program, and we reach millions of people every year with these fantastic programs and, and that's one that's really outside of my hands, that's why I forgot all about it. You put the ideal--the idea out there, and people they're, they're taking it and they're running with it. I go into cities and I'll see the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Black Family Technology Awareness Week, or the National Society of Black Engineers' technology awareness week, or something in Brazil. I'll go on the Internet, I, I see they have programs in Canada, and you never see my name attached to it; they don't even know we created the program (laughter). Speaker 1: What year did you create the program? Speaker 2: We created that program ten years ago with the generous support of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], and it is a program--it is a public awareness program. I almost think about it like black family, I mean like Black History Month now. During that period, people look for a program to do, and generally one of hope, and they do the Black Family Technology Awareness Week. It's out--it's just outstanding, and it, it always brings tears to my eyes. Speaker 1: Are you hopeful? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I have to be hopeful, and I do believe, I believe that our people have a history--all people, including Americans, but I wanna talk about the history of African Americans in this country; when it seems the worst, often, we find our way out, and it always makes me remember what my [maternal] grandmother [Vivian Wallace] said, and I said this earlier. That at a time when she didn't think there would be enough to feed everyone, not only was there enough, there was food left over. So, yes, I'm absolutely hopeful. Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Taborn, it's been a pleasure. Thank you very much (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's been my pleasure. Thank you. Story_ID: 636555 Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Taborn as a infant, and I would guess about sixth months--four months old? Speaker 2: This is 1959? Speaker 1: Nineteen--this is 1959. This program is actually--this picture is actually part of a statewide program that, that went out to mothers, and the idea was to show moms what their kids could be, so it featured William Donald Schaefer, Kweisi Mfume, and a number of other people who they thought might have a positive impact on mothers in a state. Speaker 2: This is Earl Taborn who played with the St. Louis Monarchs [sic. St. Louis Giants and Kansas City Monarchs], and it's an interesting story around this picture. His daughter is in--Maria [Rosa Maria Taborn], is in Mexico, but I received this--a card from someone who was trying to raise funds, and I said, "What a brilliant marketing idea." He found a, a picture of one of my relatives, and so before Earl died, he came to Baltimore [Maryland] and came to my offices, was covered by, I think, a couple of television stations. He was here as part of the national Negro League tour, and it was a very nice meeting to have him come into the offices before he took off. Of course, I sponsored that event (laughter) after I received this postcard. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this. Speaker 2: The Four Vagabonds was a, a--back then, in the 1940s when radio was large, many of the artists were radio artists, and my [paternal] grandfather [Norval Taborn] is the third one of--the person next to the guitar player. The, the Four Vagabonds performed on the Bluebell [sic. Blue Network], which is early to NBC, and they performed with Mike Douglas and others. One of the most interesting stories--oh, you can see it there--NBC Radio along the side. One of the most interesting stories is that some of his early music I actually found on the Internet, and Bill Gates had distributed the music, but now we can find more and more of his music. He's also in the National Hall of Rhythm and Blues--Rock and Roll [Rhythm and Blues Hall of Fame]. Speaker 1: Did you, did you already point him out? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, here he is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead and tell us what we have here? Speaker 2: The Taborn family moved into the--what is called the Pond Settlement in Carrier Mills, Illinois. They were the first black family to own land in the, in the--in a state. About ten years ago, the state honored that historical fact by naming the road the Taborn Road. Speaker 1: And they settled there in the 1800s? Speaker 2: In the 1800s they settled in the area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us what we see here. Speaker 2: Well, you're seeing--here, we see many of the Taborns that grew up in the Carrier Mills. Again, the rich history is that the family moved there, and settled that area; many other families followed later, those families being escaped slave families, and the area simply grew. Speaker 1: And this picture was likely in the, in the early portion of 1900s. Speaker 2: It is; it looks to be in that, that era. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, good. These are more ancestors? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) More, more Taborns? Speaker 2: Yeah, just more Taborns. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Yeah, we could actually read the caption. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, that's Courtney Taborn with me; we're in Port Elizabeth, South Africa. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And what year is that? Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Taborn. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Okay, Ty Taborn at thirteen. This is outside of Cape Town [South Africa] at a barbeque right on the ocean. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. All right, ready. Speaker 2: This, this picture is Ty Taborn with me outside in our backyard. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the occasion? Speaker 2: Oh, the occasion was receiving the Honorary Ph.D., doctor of public service from Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: In what year? Speaker 2: That was in 19--I mean 2000--not 19--2005, thank you (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Ty Taborn, Tyrone Taborn, Courtney Taborn and Sharday Verlack [ph.], the niece--my wife's sister's daughter. Speaker 2: And this is, again-- Speaker 1: Again, a Morgan State honorary Ph.D., 2000--I mean 2005; there we go (laughter)...