 Story_ID: 26281 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Grant Delbert Venerable the Second. It's G-R-A-N-T, capital D-E-L-B-E-R-T, capital V-E-N-E-R-A-B-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roman numeral two [II]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story behind that, you know? Speaker 2: Well, it's a simple story. I was named after my father, and they did not want me to be a "Junior," so they made me a "Second." The second story is that my father was born Grant Venerable, 1904, Kansas City, Missouri, and he added, or I should say, inserted Delbert when he was a teenager because he wanted to add another name that he thought was a little bit classy. He was named after his father, Beverly Grant Venerable, a very--rather, a British custom. And Beverly Grant was born in 1867 in Carrollton, Missouri, on the Missouri River. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was about the fifth child of Robert James Venerable. So the name changed somewhere back in the 1860s, 1870s. And Robert James was in slavery in Northern Missouri, apparently owned by a physician, but he apparently had a good deal of freedom to get around. He was an itinerant AME [African Methodist Episcopal] preacher. And he went from place to place preaching. So he had did pretty much what he wanted to do when he wanted to do it, which seemed to go into his children, so they were all very independent-minded people. And it led to very free and independent-thinking descendants. I think that was true on both on both my mother's and father's side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born August 31st, 1942, in the city of Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I call myself an educator. And I've had many titles. The most recent was Provost and Senior Vice President for Academic and Student Affairs in Lincoln University, [Chester County] Pennsylvania. I've also had titles as, clerk-typist when I was in-between positions in the 1980s; wine bar tender, wine server in the wine country, Sonoma, California; and various titles that enabled me to survive. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And by training you're a chemist, right? Speaker 2: I'm a chemist by training. Speaker 1: Okay. So, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: This is April the 9th, 2013, two thousand thirteen. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? And you don't have to give the address. Speaker 2: This is Tyrone, Georgia. Story_ID: 26282 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Offhand, fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm down in the Deep South, and that is a staple here, but I also like California cuisine, such as stir-fried veggies done very nicely in olive oil, and seasoned and put it over rice with raisins and peanuts or walnuts, and with a sauce over that. And also I like very nice salads, tossed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tossed salads. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Spring, especially in places where they have seasons like the Deep South here. California was pretty mild on seasonal, although there were subtle changes. But I love the fall and the change of the leaves. I enjoy the snow when it happens, and the spring is really wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, from here I like going back to California to the Bay Area. I like going around the Sonoma coastline, the Russian River Region, Sonoma Valley, California. And I also like going to Dublin, Ireland, and Ghana, West Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And the last question is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I probably have many, and I--"To everything there's a season." Story_ID: 26283 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your father's side of the family and your mother's side, but we'll start with your mother's side, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother was Thelma Lorraine, T-H-E-L--capital T-H-E-L-M-A, capital L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, Scott, capital S-C-O-T-T, Venerable, capital V-E-N-E-R-A-B-L-E. Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It was July 24th, 1916, one, nine, one, six. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories on the side of the family? Speaker 2: I think that the farthest back we can trace directly, because there were actually records kept, the farthest we go is to her great-great grandmother Lucy Scott, who I think was born in the 1780s enslaved in Virginia, who was brought into Kentucky somewhere around the Lexington area, and I don't know who she was married to or mated with, but she had a daughter named Ara, A-R-A. And Ara had many spouses, about four successively. We don't know who the spouse was that fathered my mother's grandfather Anthony Scott, but there was a plantation somewhere in the Lexington area; a place around Salvasy. I think its name has changed a number of times, Salvasy, Kentucky. Apparently, he was a favorite of the plantation, family and -- Speaker 1: How do you spell Salvasy? Speaker 2: S-A-L--capital S-A-L-V-A-S-Y. But it's also been spelled, S-A-L-V-I-S-A, Salvisa. The name Bryantsville also figures in as a date where my grandfather, Scott, was born, my mother's father. My cousins in California are still researching the parentage of my great-grandfather, Anthony Scott, the son of Ara, Ara Scott. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandfather's name was? Speaker 2: Was James Henry Scott. Speaker 1: Okay. James Henry Scott. Speaker 2: Born in 1870, died 1964, L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. He was born in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, Anthony Scott had a sister named Amanda Scott Atkins [ph.]. She moved to California before any of them. I think she was there in the early 1900s. Story_ID: 26284 Speaker 1: People tended to move in those days where they had relatives already living, or if they didn't know anyone, they just took a chance and started a new life. They were of some group of African American culture called "Children of the Exodus." And the short name was "Exoduster." Very little heard of today, but it was one of the largest, single migrations in American history among African Americans started by a man named Benjamin Singleton. They call him Moses. Singleton, who got 30,000 people, it is said, to leave Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi, some from Arkansas, to go to Topeka, Kansas, because the rumor is that Kansas was to be a black state. It was to be given over to the sons and daughters of slaves, ex-slaves. So, these were the really independent-minded pioneering spirited people who went, and I have Great-grandmother's chair in one of my front rooms that she sat on in the covered wagon that they rode on in 1879 from Kentucky to Topeka. There were other people; Martin Delany, Frederick Douglass, had said, "Oh, Moses, don't do that. We're going to lose our voting strength in the South if all these people leave." Moses said, "They're not going to allow you to vote, and these people want to be free." They didn't know where they were going, but they had farming skills, so they left. And when Kansas did not really develop the free state they hoped it would be, my grandfather and his wife, Lynetta Brassfield Scott, and their seven children left in 1919. They stayed in Kansas for about forty years, and then they moved on to California. But others of Grandfather Scott's siblings also left, the really pioneering spirits. And all of them went to Chicago [Illinois] except for Grandpa. But some of Grandpa's and Grandma's relatives went up to Montana instead. So you can imagine this is a different breed of African American developing. And they didn't know anyone. There were hardly any other black people in places like Montana. And they--some went to Colorado, and they stayed there, and they made their peace with the people they found there. So this created a different kind of ethnic cultural behavioral orientation of can-do people. They take it into their minds they can do something, they would do it. And people couldn't say, "Well, you know, you're colored, you're Negro, you can't--." That would never enter into their minds. Although they knew that was a factor, but they would tend to overcome that as a factor. So there was also a great aunt that lived in Montana for many years who had a gold mine, but that's on my father's side. So these Exoduster people wound up in California, and the first child was born in 1904, my mother's [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] oldest sister Irma Scott Moore. And then there were six children after that, four boys and three girls. So my mother was the sixth child. And there was a younger girl, Bessie, born in 1918. Speaker 2: In California? Speaker 1: In Cali--actually, Bessie--they were all born in Topeka-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then moved in 1919 to California. So they all had this rural Kansan ethos that they brought with them that I didn't understand until I saw it operative in myself when I found this rural calling. Even though I was raised in the great urban metropolis of Los Angeles, I tended to like to get out and live in more rural areas. So that rather carved out my career, like San Luis Obispo, my first assistant professorship in chemistry at California Polytechnic State University, where I actually lived in houses in the country; great open fields with surrounding mountains, streams nearby, seashore. Story_ID: 26285 Speaker 1: So, this is great history. What did your mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] say--now, your mother made that trip when she was about three years old, I guess, to California? Speaker 2: She was about three years old. Speaker 1: And, now what did she say about growing up? I mean, what stories did you get from your mother? Speaker 2: I heard a few, just a few. She didn't live very long. She died in 1950 of hypertension. But I did hear stories like, "It thundered so loud that the hatboxes fell off the racks in the closet." And she had sayings that she brought, like, "This room is so messed up, it looks like a cyclone struck it." And various expressions that she would use. She would talk about taking care of some of the farm animals. And that's about it. The only thing I remember is her sweet disposition, but she had a toughness to her that was invincible that, when she took it in her mind to achieve something, she did it. She was a woman that was very well loved by her friends, which she had many, her relatives. She was active in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at my elementary, Vermont Avenue School in Los Angeles [California]. That was probably the most racially-diverse neighborhood in maybe the country at that time, but certainly California; certainly Los Angeles. Speaker 1: Now, did she grow--was that the neighborhood she grew up in? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question. No, she grew up in another diverse neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Los Angeles, uniquely, had an area where recent immigrants arrived, took root, and then moved on from there. It was East Los Angeles called Boyle Heights, B-O-Y-L-E, Heights. And there you found first-generation people from Europe; for example, Germany. There were many Austria-Nazi Jews who lived there. There were Irish people. There were also Arabic people, especially Arabic-Christians, Lebanese Christians. My brother later married a woman whose mother was raised in Boyle Heights in the Arab-Christian Community. There were Asians; there were Japanese, first-generation; and Chinese-Koreans; and African Americans. But, of course, there were Mexicans. The Mexicans had been there first as the first non-Indian; first non-Native Americans in California. They lived there--it was a cultural Mecca. I call it "cultural Eden" because people got along with each other. My mother and her siblings were so close to Jewish people, they picked up the Yiddish dialect. And one of the brothers who worked for a Jewish family actually could speak fluent Yiddish, which made for interesting times on the streetcars when my mother and her siblings would get on the streetcars and start talking Yiddish to each other, and all of the heads would turn (laughs) in the streetcar and look at them. So, the first foreign language I ever heard was Yiddish. Speaker 1: You know any Yiddish now? Speaker 2: The only one I remember is mother--was [speaks Yiddish]. "What are you doing?" And so that paved the way to my learning Yiddishisms from the Jewish friends that I went to school with. My aunt, my father's sister, spoke rather fluent German, because she taught it in Lincoln [University] in Kansas City [Missouri]. My father spoke French. So my ears were very well attuned to foreign languages. They were not strange to me. I never had a reaction to people thinking people should only speak English in the United States. Story_ID: 26286 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable]--I take it she finished high school in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Yes. She finished at John Francis Polytechnic High School, very old high school in Los Angeles, maybe the third or fourth oldest. And she studied bookkeeping and pipe organ. And she went on to L.A., Los Angeles Junior College and continued to her associate of arts degree, which was quite something, to get an associate's degree. And a bachelor's degree was like a master's today. And she studied pipe organ and bookkeeping, which she parlayed into her first and only job was as a bookkeeper for Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company, founded by Pop Nickerson. And it was the largest black-owned business west of the Mississippi River. Hired--it employed many, many black Americans in Los Angeles. Many people became close friends through their Golden State affiliation. The first office was on Central Avenue, then it built a big, new beautiful building at the corner of--northeast corner of Western Avenue and Adams Boulevard, which was at the edge of the Sugar Hill neighborhood, where the well-to-do Negroes--as we put it then--lived in great, big mansions occupying one-half acre, one acre. Speaker 1: Is that like the Baldwin Hills area? Speaker 2: It's what Baldwin Hills was later, but the first site of the Negro affluence was Sugar Hill-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was adjacent to Berkeley Square across Western Avenue. Many physicians lived there, attorneys and Hollywood actors like Louise Beavers, who played Beulah and many roles with Disney Studios. But many of the 'Amos 'n' Andy' [sitcom] actors lived in that immediate area. Tim Moore lived very close to there, who played 'King Fish' in 'Amos 'n' Andy'. Ernestine Wade, who played Sapphire, and Amanda Randolph played Mama Stevens, actually lived a couple of blocks from where I grew up on Budlong Avenue and 29th Street. But these people were dynamic actors; and then, of course, their roles were severely limited as to what they could they play. But they were great actors. Story_ID: 26287 Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side, and we'll try to pull them together here. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us--well, your father's name is the same as yours, right except the--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. And, what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It was July 10th, 1904, in Kansas City [Missouri]. And he went to Crispus Attucks Elementary School, and that's how I learned about Crispus Attuck's [American slave, merchant seaman and dockworker of Wampanoag and African descent; believed to be the first person shot dead by British redcoats during the Boston Massacre, in Boston, Massachusetts] role in history. Speaker 1: So, let me ask the same question that I asked about your mother's side. How far back can you trace your father's side, and what were the stories about the activities of your ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Well, immediate ancestors, back to Father's grandfather, Robert James Venable; later Venerable, who was a barber after the end of slavery and an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] preacher. So the--the mother's side I meant to mention was tended to be Baptist, except for Grandfather's younger brother, Reverend Thomas Lesley Scott, who founded Grant Memorial AME Church in Chicago [Illinois] on Drexel [Boulevard]; it's now on Drexel. It was somewhere else when he founded it. But anyway-- Speaker 1: Does the Grant in the name of the church have anything to do with--well, no, because they wouldn't-- Speaker 2: Grant was one of Thomas Leslie Scott's professors at Lane College, at the seminary Lane College in [Jackson] Tennessee. And he named the church after his favorite professor. Speaker 1: Okay. Grant Memorial in Chicago. Speaker 2: So Thomas Leslie Scott actually was the first ancestor on my father's side who went to college, graduated 1908. Thomas Leslie-- Speaker 1: Scott. Speaker 2: Scott. Speaker 1: Now that's on your mother's side, right? Speaker 2: Mother's side. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he was the base of the Chicago family, along with other of my grandfather's brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. So he's the founder of Grant Memorial? Story_ID: 26288 Speaker 1: Now, on your father's side, Robert James Venerable. Now, you were telling me before the interview that family had once been "Venable" in Virginia, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We do know-- Speaker 1: It's, V-E-N-A-B-L-E. Speaker 2: A-B-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We know that, where I've been able to put together that, Robert James came out or was owned by the James Venable family of Kentucky, which migrated probably around 1800, from Charlottesville, Virginia. One of James Venable's brothers--it may have been Nathaniel--who founded Hampden-Sydney College in [Hampden Sydney] Virginia. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. Hampden-Sydney College, now, is this a black college? Speaker 2: No. It's a very traditional white college. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It was like the white Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] of its day and a college for men; an outstanding liberal arts college. But I'm talking about this was the white Venable family that we don't know anything about a genetic inheritance to the Venables of Virginia. We know that there is a cultural heritage. Speaker 1: Yeah, but the name is (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This, actually, I'm finding may figure more important than the genetic heritage. The genetics is nice to know about, but when you look at the history of the Venables of Virginia under Abraham Venable back in the 1600s who came from England, it's rather striking that this was a man who was a colleague of Patrick Henry--well, that came later, but Abraham's grandchildren were part of the American Revolution. And then other ancestors founded--well, not founded, but I think [President Thomas] Jefferson founded the University of Virginia [Charlottesville], but some of the Venables were also instrumental of that. One of the Venables was the president of the University of Virginia, who was a mathematician and physicist. Speaker 1: Now, this is--the University of Virginia was founded by Thomas Jefferson, and that's around in Charlottesville. Speaker 2: Thomas Jefferson. Charlottesville. Speaker 1: That's where Monticello [primary plantation of Thomas Jefferson] is and all that, around Charlottesville. Speaker 2: Yes. So I'm trying to remember which Venable--it's either--there was Charles Scott and then there was Francis Preston. It might have been--one was the father of the other. But let's say it was Francis Preston at the University of North Carolina. That's coming up into the late 1800s, early 1900s, who was a chemist and a mathematician, who also was the founder of Union Carbide Corporation, because he discovered the carbide process. So anyway, the point that I'm making is that, my family line has taken on many of the cultural traits of the original Virginia Venables in terms of academic achievement generally, but in particular in mathematics and scientific achievement. So here I have hued (unclear) out a path in physical chemistry. My father was quite outstanding in mathematics, which he took to Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] and became a graduate of Caltech in civil engineering. Story_ID: 26289 Speaker 1: What I put together is that, way back in the 1800s, Charles Scott Venable was president of the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. I think he might have been president of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] as well and maybe South Carolina. But he was a mathematician, astronomer. His son was Francis Preston Venable, who became gigantic in the field of chemistry in the late 1800s, early 1900s, who was president of the American Chemical Society, was a founder of Union Carbide Corporation because of his discovery of the carbide process you put carbon--calcium carbide in water, you get acetylene gas evolving from that. But this-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Union Carbide, this is 'Eveready' batteries and all that? Speaker 1: Yes. And then it was--of course, it's been bought out in the last decade or so by Dow Chemical. I used to have [Union] Carbide stock for years. But that establishes the cultural context of the Venable-Venerable family. I, in fact, knew Venerables on the white side who I got to know well while I was a graduate student. They lived in Northern Illinois. Well, his folks were also descended from the same Northern Kentucky County that my great-grandfather [Robert James] Venerable was descended out of. But, anyway-- Speaker 2: What county--you remember what county? Speaker 1: Shelby-- Speaker 2: Shelby County, Kentucky? Speaker 1: --County, Kentucky. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, while not able to establish a biological connection, we certainly had a clearly cultural affinity and an interpersonal affinity, so we were able to embrace one another as kin folk, as cousins. He was about a generation older than I. But it turned out they were related to one of my professors at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] in chemistry. That's how I first heard of them. All to say that my family had the scientific-mathematical context, heritage to it. It's an unseen thing, but it still goes through family systems. Genes don't carry everything, but they carry structures that can actually embody cultural behavior, cultural learning. So that's becoming more and more established now in science. So that's Father's [Grant Venerable] side. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, when I first came in, we were talking about one of the other HistoryMaker scientists we interviewed, Demetrius Venable [physicist; also a HistoryMaker]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you said that he's more than likely related to you. He's from Virginia, and his father was a tremendous mathematician himself. He's a theoretical physicist. Speaker 1: Yes. That's from that same Venable cultural line. Speaker 2: And Demetrius Venable became the head of physics at both Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and Howard [University; Washington, District of Columbia] Universities. Speaker 1: At Hampton and Howard. Yeah, I certainly--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Is there a story, sir, about how the name, you know, changed form, you know, from Venable to Venerable? Speaker 1: You know, I could only speculate. And I know initially when I talked to my father in the '60s [1960s], 1960s, we thought, "Well, maybe it was to separate themselves from the plantation family spelling," which was a more common thing to do. I think another possible explanation is that, Great-grandfather, being in an ecclesiast was attracted to the word "Venerable," because it's a prominent title in the Anglican Church; today, the Episcopal Church in America. The AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church really descended right out of the Episcopal Church. And so a lot of the AME liturgy and ritual, it's still very Anglican. And although we don't see the Venerable title in the United States, we see it in England. And where someone is the very Venerable Reverend Jones or whoever it was, and I thought that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: "Of the Esteemed and Respected Elder," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Great-grandfather may have been attracted to that as Venerable (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so Venerable means, just for the record, means "Esteemed and Respected Elder" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --last name. It means "Esteemed" and it's a formal title in the Anglican Church, just like Reverend-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in the other churches. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 26290 Speaker 1: So, now, your father [Grant Venerable], born in Kansas City [Missouri]; did he talk about growing--did he grow up in Kansas City? Speaker 2: He grew up in Kansas City. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Until he was 15. Speaker 1: You said he went to--he attended-- Speaker 2: He attended Old Lincoln School which, of course, per tradition, was a segregated school. It was where the "black citizens," quote, had to go. Yet, it was a far superior education than what the white students had at the school they attended, which was one of the great paradoxes of the day. You had that same thing with Kansas City, Kansas, next door in Sumner High School. One of my friends, Arthur Spears, attended school, and he's up at the City College of New York, but then you had Sumner in St. Louis [Missouri], which was a very great school. You had these dotted across the South, because they had principals who swore that they would get the best possible faculty. They would get--they would hire teachers who were qualified to teach college, except that the African American scholars were not really admitted to teach in universities in general in that day. So they collected in these few high schools. This is where another little piece of history comes in. The principal was John Edgar Robert Lee; J. R. E. Lee; principal of Lincoln High, Kansas City. Speaker 1: This is the principal of Lincoln High School when your dad was there? Speaker 2: When my dad was there, when my aunt was teaching there; aunt Neosho Venerable. Speaker 1: John Edgar-- Speaker 2: John Robert Edgar-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Lee, who I learned this from Lloyd Louis (ph.) in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Oh, Robert E. Lee? John Robert E. Lee. Speaker 2: John Robert E. Lee, yes. And Lee had been a dean at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and while Booker T. Washington was president. So he was planning to become president to succeed Washington. When Washington died prematurely in 1915, the politics moved their way, and they called Mr. [Robert Russa Moton] from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] to come be president, and Lee was so upset that he left. And he got the principalship at this high school, Lincoln High, which was just a regular high school. So he says, "I'm going to show those 'you-know-whats' at Tuskegee. I'm going to make this high school better than their college." So he set out to hire the very best educators he could get, and it elevated Lincoln to be one of great high schools of the Midwest in the Prairie Region. Obviously, my father got such a quality education there in mathematics, in the liberal arts, that he--when he migrated to California because of what they thought was a tuberculosis spot on his lung, he got to San Bernardino where some of his father's siblings already were living, went to San Bernardino High School, they put-- Speaker 1: How old was your father when they moved-- Speaker 2: 1919 he was-- he turned fifteen that year. So he was fifteen when he started at San Bernardino High School. Speaker 1: So he moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at age fifteen. Speaker 2: And that was San Bernardino, which is sixty miles east of Los Angeles at the foot of the mountains. Speaker 1: Now this is interesting--they, your mother and father moved to Los Angeles about the same year. Speaker 2: Same year. Co-incidentally the same year. Didn't know each other. Of course, he was twelve years older. San Bernardino put him back a year because he had come from a segregated black school. They, you know, the thinking, "Well, he couldn't have had that good of an education." He still graduated in 1920, and he was, I think he turned sixteen in 1920. There were five other black students at San Bernardino High School, including the Johnson brothers who became very famous professionally in California and close friends of my father. And one was George, who became a law--a professor of education, law and was an appointee of the [President Dwight] Eisenhower Administration on the Civil Rights Commission. And then there was Lawrence who became an optometrist. There was Ken who became a surgeon in Sacramento [California]. Really to get an idea of the seeds of the black middle and upper--middle class, it was developing at that time in California. So they went on to the University of California for their education, their higher educations. Speaker 1: Now, before--when we talked about your father's--I guess his first cousin, Lloyd Louis, in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was a more distant cousin. But people didn't make anything of those things, only European people did that (laughs). But, I mean, black people knew who they were. They knew they were relatives. So they were--might as well have been first cousins. Speaker 1: Okay. So a cousin--he wasn't a first cousin--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They were more like brothers if anything. Speaker 1: Okay. He went on to Ohio. All right. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 26291 Speaker 1: So, your dad [Grant Venerable], now, so when he finishes high school in San Bernardino [California], does he go on to college? Then he goes on. He goes to four or five colleges. He goes to Santa Ana Junior College to start because for that time, his mother, Louise Venerable, had moved to California, Santa Ana, to be a domestic servant on this big ranch. And then Dad moved there and went to Santa Ana Junior College. He excelled in track and field. Then he went on to the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] where his mother wanted him to major in pre-medicine, which he did for three years. Well, understand, USC, in those days, was pretty near lily-white, if anything. There was not more than six Afro American faces there. And they were men mainly who became pretty prominent later, like, Thomas L. Griffith and his brother, Lloyd, who became lawyers; and then Tom Griffith became the first black judge in California. There were others, like, Bryce Union Taylor, who became one of USC's top football players. He became all-American. There was Arthur Spears' father, Max Spears, and then my father. But my father transferred at the first sight of blood in his junior year and realized he wasn't cut out for medicine. He really wanted to go into the mathematical disciplines. So he transferred to--up Vermont Avenue. USC was down in Vermont in Jefferson; so he transferred up to where--to the Southern Branch of the University of California [SBUC]. It later became UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] when it moved to Westwood, but all through the '20s (1920s) it was SBUC. And that's where the first really large group of black people attended college and, which was a unique situation, because California was integrated, and you didn't have that--those large influxes at other state universities in the Midwest or back east. So, here they were, just very free to go to this great university. So Ralph Bunche [American political scientist, academic, and diplomat who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Palestine; involved in the formation and administration of the United Nations] was there, same class as my father. There were many other people who would now be in their hundreds if they were still alive. Jackie Robinson [American baseball player who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB)] came a little later in the 1930s; in fact, married a girl from the neighborhood who lived across the street from my father's sister, Neosho [Venerable]. And then, he ran into some problems. Dad--well, he transferred for a year to U.C. [University of California] Berkeley. He was in Alpha Phi Alpha up there and lost his academic focus, I'll put it like that. But he made friends with many fine men up there that he was--and women, who he was friends with for the rest of his life, including my godparents, Dr. William R. Pittman, dentist and Taria Hall Pittman, who became the western regional chairman of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And that's another little story. But he went back. His mother called him back to Los Angeles to get focus. And at the--just a month before graduation, the head of the math department at UCLA expelled him for a sin; which would be if you--it's a very minor sin today--he dropped a course without getting the permission of this chairman. And the chairman was so outraged that he says, "Well, you're not going to get a degree here." And so he had to leave. That was rather severe. Story_ID: 26292 Speaker 1: But it forced destiny that he [Venerable's father, Grant Venerable] didn't know he was going to have. He decided to get serious and follow the rules, and he would apply to the California Institute of Technology [Caltech] in Pasadena [California], just about fifteen miles across town. And he did finish there. He was enrolled there three years. In 1929, he sat in a lecture given by one of Caltech's most famous professors named Albert Einstein. And the reason my dad could understand it was because he could understand German, and Einstein could only speak German at that time before he went on to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], where he stayed the rest of his life. Then my dad graduated in 1932 in civil engineering. The big irony of that is that there were many men in that class; there were sixty of them who, many became quite famous. One was William Pickering, who was the first modern day director of Jet Propulsion Lab [JPL] that put up America's first satellite, the pioneer. And another man, who was more notorious, was William Shockley, who was--co-discovered the transistor and won the Nobel Prize [in Physics, 1956] in the, oh, late '50s (1950s) for that. But Shockley got a second notoriety much later, somewhere around the--when I was in graduate school, 1967, he came out with this theory about black inferiority and why blacks are so unintelligent, and he declared, "Oh, they're just genetically inferior," and began to espouse this to the horror of all of the men in that class at Caltech, wondering, "Where was Shockley? Grant Venerable was in that class. He would have known from that, that that was quite a superior person." And any way--but that was an interesting irony- And this was the mid-70s (1970s)-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of that situation. Speaker 1: --there was national news-- Speaker 2: It was national news--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --of Shockley's theory of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Shockley, to his dying days, said, "There were never any black people at Caltech." (laughs) So shows you how the mind can work when it's convinced of what it wants to be. Speaker 1: Okay. So now, there's a lot of college-type--your father, you know, ran the gamut of schools in California. Speaker 2: He did. He did. Speaker 1: So what year did he graduate from Caltech? Speaker 2: In 1932. Speaker 1: Okay. About how old was he--he was born--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was just a little--he was twenty-seven [years old]; almost twenty-eight when he finished. Story_ID: 26293 Speaker 1: What did your dad go on to do? Did he teach or what? Speaker 2: If you realize, 1932 as in the midst of the [Great] Depression, and as the old saying went, "few and none" (laughs); few white folks were getting jobs, and no black folks--. But he did--he spent a year working for his aunt, Margaret, in Montana. This was a sister, just a little younger sister of his father, who had married a French Canadian gentleman, and they owned a gold mine in Montana in the hills outside Helena, Montana. And he went up there to help try to make a go of this gold mine, but it did not prove successful in the end. But it gave him a lot of life experience. He came back to Los Angeles [California] and a friend convinced him to apply to Golden State Mutual [Life Insurance Company, Los Angeles] for a job. And he said, "Well, I'm an engineer," but he was also a survivor because the friend said, "You haven't got anything better to do." So he applied, and he got on as a salesman, an insurance salesman for Golden State; worked for a man named Bob Smith who taught him the refined social ways and processes of life, which as an engineer he had not developed yet. He was on the staff of Golden State for quite a number of years, but the second year he was there, he had a friend, Roy Spencer, and Roy Spencer was planning to go to Chicago [Illinois]--this was how people in those days did it. You didn't just necessarily jump on Greyhound or take a flight or a train. You found your most economic means. So three guys got together, because they all had to go back to the Chicago-Detroit [Michigan] area. Roy Spencer had to go for some reason. Dad had to go to see if he could connect with the chemist, Lloyd Hall, to see if he could get into the job networks that way. So Luther Scott was a friend of Roy Spencer my father had never met, and Luther had to go to Detroit to visit his uncle Thomas Leslie Scott, who founded Grant Memorial Church in Chicago, who was, by that time, at Ebenezer AME [African Methodist Episcopal] of Detroit. But he also to wanted to pick up a new car. That's how you did it in those days to save money. So he picked up the new car, my father got to meet Lloyd Hall, who was, at that time, at Griffith Laboratories; one of the two greatest chemists in the country along with Percy Julian, and he and Lloyd Hall became fast friends for the rest of their lives. On the way back, my father found out about--that Luther had a sister working at Golden State. She-- Speaker 1: Now, before we get there, I just want to know why your father was trying to find Lloyd Hall and what their connection was in terms of-- Speaker 2: They had not met. But you knew that was just common wisdom of that day. You go to the top people among your people, whoever those are that you know, and you sit down and have a conversation with them to see what might be available. It wasn't that Hall was necessarily going to hire him, but Hall knows other people. Speaker 1: Okay. So Hall is someone your father knew--(unclear) okay. All right. Speaker 2: So he was told to go talk to Lloyd Hall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they became close friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, the Halls visited Los Angeles maybe three times a year, and they would always come to see my parents. So he became--they became Uncle Lloyd and Aunt Myrrhene [Newsome] to me and my brother and sister. In fact, Hall is probably the reason I went on to study in chemistry. I was inspired by the stories of Dr. Hall's success at Griffith Laboratories in creating new compounds for human health and various other conveniences like weight loss-(simultaneous). Hall's success at Griffith Laboratories in creating new compounds for human health and various other conveniences, like, weight lost. Speaker 1: Now, Griffith Laboratories was in Chicago. Speaker 2: In Chicago. Speaker 1: And they specialized in what? Speaker 2: Pharmaceuticals and food preservatives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so Lloyd Hall became the--really the father of the meat preservatives industry. He made that breakthrough discovery so that beef and pork could keep fairly long periods of time without spoiling in refrigeration, not lose its color. And to this day, it's still Lloyd Hall's inventions that underlay those preservative processes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All Right. That explains it. Story_ID: 26294 Speaker 1: Now, that trip [Venerable's father, Grant Venerable's trip to Chicago, Illinois] was probably key in my existence, the most key trip because Luther [Scott], one of Roy Spencer's [Venerable's father's friend; all three went on the trip to the Midwest] friends said, "Well, I have a sister at Golden State [Mutual Life Insurance Company]. You should look her up." So that's where my father met Thelma Lorraine Scott [Venerable's mother] and they hit if off immediately. And that was 1936, and by 1939 they were married at the Scott Family church, Mount Carmel Baptist Church in East Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: So now, I was trying to think of--I may have missed this, but your mother was working at Golden State--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: At Golden State. Speaker 2: --and your father hadn't really met her. Speaker 1: No, he did not meet her until-- Speaker 2: --till the trip-- Speaker 1: --that trip to Chicago and then he came back, but she had already been at Golden State for two years. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: So she was about twenty years old at that time. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So is there a story about how they fell in love or anything that they tell? Speaker 1: The story is that they just (snapping of fingers), I guess it was a "love at first sight" kind of a story. They started going out, and that was the story. And then the word they used in that day was, "got serious." Speaker 2: Okay. Right. Speaker 1: And they decided to make their lives together, and it brought together two families with very great histories and legacies. Each family was a pillar of the black middle--upper, middle class of Southern California. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we're not talking about class in terms of money; talking about in terms of cultural development and education. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 26295 Speaker 1: It's a distinction, too, that you make here to it because, here your father has a degree in mathematics from Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --he studied with Albert Einstein, and he was an insurance man-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at Golden State. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He can't get a job as, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --doing what he-- Speaker 2: Few of his classmates got jobs right away, but later they did. He did work with a classmate from Caltech--after Golden State [Mutual Life Insurance Company, Los Angeles, California], he got a few jobs in mining engineering; used to make expeditions to the desert to Death Valley [California], did surveying and other things in engineering out there. Then he got entrepreneurial, and by 1945 or so bought a hotel with his brother-in-law Bill Tatum, Neosho's [Venerable's paternal aunt] husband, and tried to make a go of that. It didn't really take. And then in 1948, they formed a small corporation of stockholders made up of friends. And this corporation bought out the George R. Healy Company of Montebello [California], which was making dining room table pads and blackboard erasers. And that's what he did for the rest of his life, was make, really, blackboard erasers for major school districts across the country. And he applied his scientific engineering skills to making an eraser that was virtually indestructible. Speaker 1: So it doesn't matter what velocity you threw it at our classmates, it would-- Speaker 2: And even if you looked at erasers in that day, they were sewn. The back was sewn onto the felt strips. Those would eventually wear away. He developed a glue (laughs) that you couldn't break, that made actually the strips meld into the back, and you couldn't tear them apart. Kids could not destroy them, and there were stories of finding those. I would find old erasers of his years later, like, they'd have been service for ten years, and they were worn way down to the strips, just very few--well, most corporate industry in this country favors obsolescence. Make it wear out so they'll buy more. But he didn't have that. He had a quality ethic that you make it, it has to last. Story_ID: 26296 Speaker 1: So, sir, when you think about your parents' [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable and Grant Venerable] personalities; their sense of humor; the way they walk, talk, look, act; who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Both. I take after my father's deliberateness; way of thinking, way of speaking. He was very calm-kind-of-a-personality. But my mother was pretty calm, but she could also be--she was the more animated one of the two. She was the more affectionate one; he was the more calm and reserved one. But she came from a very openly affectionate family. Well, my father's sister was very openly affectionate, but he was more cool and reserved. But I--that's been an important mainstay for me in my profession is to stay cool under the most radical provocations. Sometimes people would wonder, "Well, how do you stay so calm with that kind of provocation." I just say, "Well, there's no sense in getting upset." (laughs) Speaker 1: Yeah. That is remarkable because your cousins in Ohio have the same deliberate approach to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's the very same. Very same. Yeah. Right. You got that right. My father and Lloyd Louis, Sr. were very alike in their personalities and even appearance. Speaker 1: All right. This is true. Story_ID: 26297 Speaker 1: So, now, do you have siblings? Speaker 2: I have two siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. And where do you fit in, in what order? Speaker 2: I'm the eldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The interesting there is that we were all born within a thirty-month period. Speaker 1: Can you name your other two siblings for us? Speaker 2: Lynda Blaine Venerable Ellington, Lynda, capital L-y-n-d-a, Blaine, capital B-l-a-i-n-e, Venerable Ellington, as in Duke Ellington, lives in Phoenix, Arizona. And my brother Lloyd, capital L-l-o-y-d, Dennis, capital D-e-n-n-i-s, Venerable, lives in Albuquerque [New Mexico]. He's the artist and a very engineering--very engineering instinct about him. So he combines the art and the engineering; and he's done many things like making frames, fine art frames, photography as well, exploring new forms of photography. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you grew up, the household consisted of you and your mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] and father [Grant Venerable] and your two--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. That was until--(simultaneous)--December of 1950 when Mother died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So then it was four of us until Dad remarried in 1953 to Ida Walls Lee, who came from an equally formidable family background. And Ida was born July 29th, 1910. Speaker 1: Now is she related to the Lee that was the principal of the school that your father went to? Speaker 2: Oh, no. I don't think they were connected. That was her first husband's name, Lee; Layman Lee (ph.), who had been an engineer, I think, with Lockheed [Corporation; American aerospace manufacturing company]. Ida worked at Lockheed during World War II. They had a daughter, Anna Elizabeth Lee, born September 8th, 1943. And so Anna joined the siblings, so there were four of us while they were married. Anna grew up to be a school teacher like her mother. I mean, Ida was an outstanding elementary teacher who mentored many teachers. And she taught at Hooper Avenue School, Los Angeles [California], which is one of the first schools that black people were assigned to teach in Los Angeles until they got over their racial hang-ups. Aunt Neosho [Venerable] was not even admitted to teach in L.A. [Los Angeles] schools, even though she presented her credentials in 1930; it was too early for Los Angeles. But that's the case with things like that. Although she had taught many years at Lincoln High [School], Kansas City [Missouri], and she taught German, and she taught algebra, trigonometry, and geometry. Speaker 1: That's your father's sister? Speaker 2: My father's sister, born in 1893. Very erudite, scholarly--mathematical scholar who also was an ordained Baptist minister and did a social working ministry in Los Angeles. She did not pastor a church, but she was widely revered by the clergy of Southern California; and not just by black clergy, but widely by people of all racial groups. Speaker 1: Her name as Neosho-- Speaker 2: Neosho Venerable Tatum. Speaker 1: Tatum, okay. Speaker 2: Tatum, T-a-t-u-m. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 26298 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes. I just--I wrote that in my memoir. The earliest memory was probably, I was not more than six months old, and I remember waking up in the crib out on the west lawn of my grandmother's home in Los Angeles [California], and there as a veil or curtain they put over babies' cribs so they can be outside and the insects would stay out. And I just woke up from a nap, and I remember looking up at the sky and seeing the guava tree overhead. That's the earliest memory. But the probably the earliest, more animated memory was actually on my fourth birthday in Lake Elsinore, California, where my great-uncle owned a home. And it was my birthday, and I was out barefooted, and it was so hot on the pavement, the sidewalk I was trying to pick both feet up off the ground to stop from burning my feet on the pavement. So that was another memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time or did you move a lot? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Same neighborhood. West Los Angeles [California]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--what was--is West Los Angles-- Speaker 2: Northwest of the USC [University of Southern California] campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the--probably the most, the earliest--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What--oh, go ahead. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: The earliest, important memories that had to do with people and family, had to do with the impending death of a young friend, my age. I think I may have been only five years old at the time, and it was the memory of starting to realize that one of my little playmates in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles], who lived across the street from my grandparents, who was the daughter of a close, close friend of my mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable], was dying. It seems to me it what today we might call cystic fibrosis, at least the symptoms of it. And she was really dying of the bronchial backing up in her lungs and her throat and just the remembering the hushed voices, the speaking on the phone in quiet voices; and then the day she finally did die, and just the sense of hurt and loss that I felt. So that's probably the earliest humanly, meaningful memory, because it had to do with life; the whole nature of life, and that life goes on. Story_ID: 26299 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your neighborhood in West L.A. [Los Angeles, California] Speaker 2: In general, it was called the West Side. That's what people generally called the area west of--perhaps west of Figueroa Street. It was--when it opened up to black people, it was a very nice area. I have photographs of what it looked like. It looks today like some neighborhoods in L.A. suburbs. It still looks like that; old, old, homes with beautiful lawns, well-manicured landscapes; a very upper-middle class kind of a setting where people took great care of their properties. And this was, as I said, a very racially integrated area inhabited by people who consciously chose to be amongst other people, as well as people of their own background; people who wanted their children to be around a diverse group. So we had neighbors all around the block, across the street. It was still a Caucasian majority, but there were appreciable black Americans, Mexican-Americans, Japanese, Chinese; others, Jewish, white people; they were there and lived quite harmoniously together. There was a neighborhood circuit like a small town; a communication circuit. When I was ten [years old] or eleven--yeah, ten, and I needed a Boy Scout uniform, well, for middle-class people, you save money whenever you can. It was still--this was the early 1950s, so if you could get it pre-owned, you put the word out to your neighbors. Well, "Delbert's joining,"--that was my middle name, that's what I was always called--"He's a Boy Scout now. He needs a uniform." So the call came in to my-maybe my mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] was gone by then, so it was my father [Grant Venerable]. "Oh, there's a family over--two blocks over. You call them." We didn't even know those people. But my father went over there and met them, says, "Yes, here's the uniform. You can have it." So that's how things--that's how closely knit the people were. One night--one early memory was my mother--this was about 1949--had been given a night blooming--oh, I can't remember the name of it--a special cactus flower. And, it might have been from a century plant [Agave americana], I'm not sure. But this thing blooms at night and only at a certain time, and it is so rare and beautiful to see. My mother took it in her large cookie jar after chilling it in the refrigerator, walked it around the block just to show the neighbors around the block. She didn't know everybody's names, but everyone kind of knew who everyone was, and they were most ecstatic. "Oh, thank you. This is so beautiful. Thank you for showing this so us." And it was--that was just normal. Story_ID: 26300 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and you've answered some of it already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of growing up? The out of doors had all kinds of sweet smells of the grass, particularly after it was freshly mown; the flowers, the morning glories that grew profusely, the couple of rose bushes. The neighbors had a lot of flowers. The--there was a--my mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] had a vegetable garden every year, so there was the smell of the squash, the green pole beans. Then there was the smell of the peaches and the nectarines on the trees; the smell of the figs when you would open them after picking them off of the trees. There must have been two or three fig trees. The smells in the house, interesting, because every culture has its own smell, and my house had its own cultural scent to it. I couldn't identify it, but for me it was a very clean scent; a very comfortable, fresh scent. And then there was the smell of the people. That seems like an odd to talk about today, but it was more common then. My mother was very astute in smelling her children on a daily basis, because she could tell what was going on inside of our bodies by what was coming through our perspiration and knew when something was out of balance. I knew her smell intimately as well as my father's [Grant Venerable]. They were quite different. Oh, that gets to be quite deep, into depth psychology there, but it had a--that has an effect in really shaping your destiny, because you unconsciously are comfortable around other people with those scents, and people that have scents that turn you off you tend to avoid. Now, we know about pheromones. Those are molecules you can't even consciously smell, but the brain knows they're there and identifies them. And they may show up as, "Oh, I'm not drawn to that person," or "I'm very drawn to this person." But that's one of the things I think about more these days as I get more into the study of depth, d-e-p-t-h, depth psychology. Speaker 1: Okay. So, sights, sounds and smells, are any of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sights, sounds. Ah, the sounds of the city of that time. Early 1940s, a very--not provoking, but a stimulating sound was the sound of waves of fighter aircraft, propeller-driven fighter planes in squadrons of, like, thirty at the time flying over. You could hear them coming. And children, people would run out of the houses to look. And you'd hear them as they were leaving the air space. But that was integral to what was happening, because you didn't--everyone was afraid of the potential sound of Japanese Air Force, aircraft, flying over, because the coast had already been shelled a few times by submarines that caused limited damage, but it was there. So that was part of a slight fear; not slight, it was a fear of people who lived on the West Coast. I didn't feel it from my parents. I think I would have remembered it if I had. But there's the sound of the local churches of tolling the hour, like, the San Agnes Catholic Church, which was a good half-mile away. Then there was the West Adams Presbyterian Church, which--they had had an amplified speaker system, so they would play hymns at the noon hour; things like that. Then the occasional emergency sirens of ambulances and police vehicles, but motor vehicles sounded different in those days than now. You could tell a stick shift car from an automatic. There were few automatic clutch automobiles. By 1950, people were craving automatics (laughs), but we all learned on a stick shift. But I could tell the difference between a Cadillac's sound and stick shift Ford sound. That just occurs to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 26301 Speaker 1: I didn't even get to church. But anyway, that was a whole different story; smells and sounds and sights. Speaker 2: Well, what about church? Was church important growing up? Speaker 1: Church was very important because we went to my father's [Grant Venerable] church, which was Bethel African Methodist Episcopal [AME] Church. And by 1948, my great-uncle, Thomas Lesley Scott, had been reassigned by the bishop from Detroit [Michigan] to Los Angeles [California] as he was going into his latter years. So he came to be the pastor there. And, of course, church services lasted two and a half to three and three-quarters of an hour. And Mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] would come equipped with little notepads in her purse and pencils for us to draw when we kids would get bored with long sermons. But the choir was beautiful. The choir was very talented, and many, many outstanding friends in the community were in that church. And then occasionally, we got to go to grandmother's church in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles], Mount Carmel Baptist, where more of the family actually were in the choir. My cousin Millie played the Hammond organ very skillfully, and I learned a lot of the good black church gospel music just by ear, by listening to Millie play. I could sit down right now and knock out some of her best hymns. AMEs tended to play more high-church, more Methodist Episcopal hymns-- Speaker 2: Congregational hymns. Speaker 1: --and liturgy. And the Baptist church, it had congregational hymns, but there was always a little bit of a syncopation, which really fascinated--we kids liked that. And it wasn't, like, with--today we have--we have drum ensembles and things that was not present. In that day it was piano and organ. Story_ID: 26302 Speaker 1: Well, where did you start school? What was your first school? Speaker 2: The first school was Vermont Avenue Elementary School, the corner of almost Adams Boulevard and Vermont Avenue [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's one of the oldest elementary schools in Los Angeles. It was the main--one of the main elementary school training sites for the University of Southern California [USC]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have a--did you like school first of all? Speaker 2: I loved school, and I felt school loved me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think there's a key in that. I've never said that phrase before, "school loved me." But I think it would have been hard to convince kids at that school in that day otherwise. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have an opportunity--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Which meant we didn't want to miss school. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject or teacher? Speaker 2: I had-of course it was all in one room, all of the subjects, and all of my teachers were my favorite teachers. Yes, some were maybe a little more. So, when and father [Grant Venerable] recognized too that was, but kindergarten was two loving women. One was a little sweeter than the other; one was tough love, one was sweet love. But these kindergarten rooms in L.A. [Los Angeles] schools were just rich in resources; toys, little animals, fish in aquarium, a lot of artistic equipment, music; because that was the day the PTA [Parent teacher Association] supplied room mothers to each class in the school. Some--and that mother [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] would come and share whatever their talent was, whether it was storytelling or music. So my mother, when she was room mother, would come and play the piano, because there were pianos in the kindergarten classroom and some of the other classrooms, which I insist is one of the things that makes for a sane society, is when you have music in the grades, in the K through 12 [kindergarten through twelfth grade]. You don't have that, you might as well write off your society as not as sane as they should be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I could--I could name my teachers (laughs) even today from all the way, kindergarten on up to the twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Now, did you--well, I don't want you to start doing that. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: But in elementary, did you--I mean, did you develop your interest in art? Speaker 2: I would say yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At home, of course, there was great freedom and encouragement to do art, but school just really helped to accelerate that, because even after kindergarten there was a resident art teacher who came in once a week, something like that, to teach an art lesson. And those, they were mainly women in those days who taught the art or music. There was the resident music teacher. And their contribution is really what made everything hold together. Story_ID: 26303 Speaker 1: Did you start taking music at that age, too, you know? Speaker 2: I started music before kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was three [years old] when Mother took me across the street to Dovie Steward (ph.), who came out of Texas, and I guess Dovie Steward was already about--almost fifty years old then. But she had a reputation of taking children out of the crib and teaching them piano. So by the time I was in kindergarten, I was already playing some very elementary piano pieces. So I got music-focused through home. In high school, I started taking from Harriet Williams, who was out of Hampton Institute [now, Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. She had studied and was a collaborator with R. [Robert] Nathaniel Dett, who wrote a lot of the choral music that we hear in the black church. Okay. Back to elementary school. Speaker 1: Okay. So back in elementary school, now, I'm thinking of primary years; did you like to draw? Speaker 2: Very much so. Very much. And the classroom teachers encouraged me very much. By sixth grade, I was doing watercolors at a pretty respectable level, so much so, the district superintendent of that area wanted one of my paintings to put up in her office, so that's the last I saw of that painting. You know what that also touches on, you know, there's--lots been made of Kenneth and Mamie Clark's [African American psychologists who as a married team conducted important research among children and were active in the Civil Rights Movement] work with the doll studies, and I guess at Columbia [University, New York City, New York], in offering, you know, white dolls and black dolls to white children and black children, and the black children tended to choose the black dolls because they--I mean, the white dolls because they weren't as pretty as the black dolls. And in doing paintings, the watercolor, we were encouraged to do scenes, and I did one of my family at the beach, and I don't think I still have it, but it was done with authentic skin tone. And I was that perceptive to be able to paint exactly what my family members looked like, at least in skin tone, and then tried to make features also look that way. It wasn't an issue in those days, but it was an issue beneath the surface, but it did show the freedom in which I was growing up. I didn't distort the coloration of the family members I was painting. And, then I was surrounded by a variety of skin colors in the family. So it wasn't a noticeable thing until later on, until junior high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Until Emmett Till [African-American boy who was murdered in Mississippi at the age of fourteen] got lynched. And then it was, like, it was on (laughs). Race consciousness was on. Story_ID: 26304 Speaker 1: Now, 1955, the Emmett Till [African American boy who was murdered in Mississippi at the age of fourteen] case. Speaker 2: That was a traumatic year. It was paradox. It was enigma. Disneyland opened in 1955 in the summer. Speaker 1: So you were about, what, you were about thirteen [years old]? Speaker 2: I was twelve most of that year until August 31st, I turned thirteen. That was also the year of the very unhappy separation of my father [Grant Venerable] and stepmother, Ida [Wells Lee]. Something I couldn't understand at the time. It took me years to understand. But, you know, it was Aunt Ruth Louis that really explained it to me, interestingly--someone that--Uncle Lloyd Louis' wife. Lloyd Louis, very well-known figure in Dayton, Ohio, but he and my dad grew up together. But anyway, that was also a part of my emergence and understanding. Human relationships, how things can get out of sync with people, how you can avoid it; sometimes you realize it's not--it cannot be avoided. But, anyway-- Speaker 1: What's interesting here, this is a connection, and some may think it's spurious, but your Aunt Ruth Louis was related to Charles Hamilton Houston, right? Speaker 2: Yes. She was a Hamilton. Speaker 1: Who is the architect of the '54 [1954] [U.S.] Supreme Court decision in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All that-- Speaker 1: --his people pushed that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --you know, I've been really-- Speaker 1: --his students pushed through the '54 Supreme Court decision (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's it. At this point in my life, I stand somewhat astonished that all those vibrations were impinging on me at that time. Here was my godmother who was the--had been a regional field secretary for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], who used to, as she put it, walk the levies with sharecroppers in Mississippi back in the early '50s [1950s], gathering data, hard data; interviewing people who were very suspicious, understandably so, of outsiders, black or white outsiders coming from the North. It meant she had to have a way with people to--before she even talked about, you know, what are some of the problems of this certain incident where somebody disappeared and their body was discovered later down in the river. She was sent by NAACP Executive Director Roy Wilkins, as one of the very astute field investigators, to go down to interview people surreptitiously, importantly so the people would not get into trouble. Here is Charles Hamilton Houston, Ruth Louis' first cousin, who's the founding dean of the Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] Law School, whose personal mentor is Thurgood Marshall, who together, Houston and Marshall and others, architected the strategy behind 'Brown v. Board of Education', which is dealing with the school district where my ancestors on my mother's side are from, Topeka, Kansas. So this decision is handed down, the first one in 1954; the second follow-up decision was the all deliberate speed decision that the segregationists used to delay things. So it delayed way up to 19--early '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 26305 Speaker 1: But anyway, that summer, 1955, my father was--took us on a trip, a train trip, while he was in separation from Ida, and so we left on the train in Los Angeles [California], visited kinfolk all the way back. We visited Topeka. We visited Kansas City [Missouri], St. Louis [Missouri]. The furthest east was with the Louises in Dayton, Ohio. Then coming back West, we stopped with the [Lloyd and Myrrhene] Halls in Chicago [Illinois] and then went west all the way to Oakland, California, to be with the Pittmans; Turia and Bill Pittman. Well, Turia, as I said, is in the midst of NAACP investigations going on. We were in Oakland, almost headed back to L.A. [Los Angeles], when word was hitting the streets that this young man [Emmett Till; African American boy who was murdered in Mississippi at the age of fourteen] had been lynched in Mississippi, and I was, at the time, selling 'Jet' magazines on the local streets around my neighborhood in Los Angeles. Here, it was on the cover of 'Jet' sometime in September, 1955. I read it cover to cover, everything about it. Imagine that going into my thirteen-year-old consciousness where his mother had had an open casket funeral, photographs, right there in 'Jet' so the whole country could see it. And it just grossed out and shocked the entire nation. Well, it shocked me. And it was my first--first contact understanding that there was something called "racism" and "Jim Crow," and people have wondered, "Well, how could that be? You've been black in a nation." Well, that was testament to my parents [Grant Venerable and Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] shielding us kids from the realities of racism. They'd picked an area where it would be minimal. Other places in L.A., it would have been bad. Well, was that a good thing? I say it was a good thing. I did not need to have that invade my young creative mind until I got to a certain point where I could begin to deal intellectually in a somewhat mature level, but getting there was not easy. I felt anger, I felt outrage. I expressed it, fortunately, in the eighth grade, in Foshay Junior High School. And I stood up (chuckles) in class once--we were having a discussion, and I denounced every white racist Down South, and I asked my father, I was so angry, I said, "Why don't the blacks, why don't we lead the blacks and get guns and go shoot up all of the white people in the South." And testament, evidence of my father's coolness and calmness was his thoughtful rationality. He just looked at his son, me, and asked quietly, "When you do that, you do down, you get guns, you kill off--you kill up white people, what do you think is giving other people permission to do to you?" And I just--I just thought that over for a moment, and I said, "Oh." (laughs). I said, "That's not a good idea." And my dad never even said it was a bad idea. He just asked me one--Grant Venerable-types-Socratic question, that became a foundation of my own pedagogue as I went forward to become a high school teacher, then a university professor, and then a chief academic officer of the university. That I was the one that began--had to ask questions Socratically to my faculty colleagues, who were outraged about something where I would say, "Well, what would happen if--." Then they'd say, "Oh, same thing." So, Emmett Till's death was, I'm sure, a seminal moment, a teachable moment all across this country. I've run into friends that I met later and discovered that was a moment of change for them, that woke up--woke them up from childhood innocence, and they were not all on the West Coast. Many of them were right here in Georgia that I met up with when I came to be provost at Morris Brown College in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: (unclear) all over the country. Speaker 1: Youngsters who had grown up in a racially segregated society, we were so shocked by that. It--it woke them up to a greater context and probably to greater possibilities of being in this society. Story_ID: 26306 Speaker 1: Now, you were also drawn to science, of course, and were you--is there a place in your elementary school experience where you really focused in on science or did it occur at home? Speaker 2: It started right at home. It started with my becoming nearsighted at the age of seven. This 'Book of Knowledge' collection--there were about twenty volumes of the 'Book of Knowledge' sitting in my parents' [Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable and Grant Venerable] bookcases flanking this big fireplace in the living room; other volumes of literature, which they purposely placed there for their children's curiosity, to lead them there. And once I got hold of the 'Book of Knowledge' around age five--I really learned to read from Grandmother Venerable, who would just drill us, just read to us. Parents would read to us, and then I would learn to read; all of us learned to read. Then it was accelerated in school. We had out loud reading sessions in school. But, anyway, I could pick up and read anything that was drawing my attention, whether it was how the food is processed in the body and goes in the throat to the stomach, passes through the colon to how does the moon go through eclipses? And I would get so excited with what I would learn, I would further ask my father [Grant Venerable] for further clarification. And he was full of ways of demonstrating things. He could demonstrate the eclipse. We had a little globe, a model globe, and he would have a light bulb and a lamp without the shade, and he would have a little baseball that would be the moon, and show how this baseball would cast a shadow on this little globe from the light. I got so excited by things like that. I would have to share it now. Here's where the teaching instincts start to come out. I'd go up to the fifth grade and tell my teacher, "Can I show the class how an eclipse works?" That was the only male teacher I had in elementary, but he was also focused on science. And he said, "Sure." So that's how he encouraged--you can imagine it if he had said, "Oh, well, not today." No, he said, "Sure. Can you do it tomorrow?" And so I brought a little--a little duffle bag with all these things in it and showed the class. So when we reached geography of California, and we were making a papier-mache topographic map of California showing the mountains, the bays, the coastline, and I said, "The mountains are not high enough. The coastal mountains are lower than the Sierras." And I--so I was the one who oversaw the correction of the mountains' heights because I was keyed into that. Maybe that happened in the fourth grade--I don't know. But that's really what got it started. Story_ID: 26307 Speaker 1: By junior high and high school, I was doing little things more with chemistry. In high school, I bought some little solar cells; put them on the roof to capture sunlight, and I would string a wire from there down into my bedroom and stick the end of the wire--made an electrode, and stuck it in some water, a little jar of water; then I would add salt to it to see what that would do. And, of course, then that would start to electrolyze the water, and I'd start to generate chlorine from the chloride in the salt, in the water. But there were other incidents. I discovered classmates in chemistry at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] were all doing things like that. One classmate was blowing up tree stumps, because that's what thrilled him; how to make explosives that had different qualities. One was making wine, one was doing--oh, something else, but anyway, all that challenges and stimulates youngsters. One day, I almost destroyed the kitchen table because I had got hold of some metallic sodium in a lab I was working with it in UCLA, and just wanted to do a little experimenting, and I didn't put down any covering on the table, and I stuck this sodium in the water. Now, I don't want any kids listening to this to try this (laughs), 'cause, it could be dangerous. But just a little sodium in there, and even some metallic magnesium, it's like fireworks coming up, shooting up out of the water. And the sparks, you know, I was thrilled. But the sparks were landing on this nice linoleum table, and they were making--it made burn marks in the table. And I said, "Oh, no. My father [Grant Venerable] is going to--he's going to get me for this." You know, he did not. He just said, "Well, we've got to be more careful here." And those marks stayed there. They weren't big or--but they were little, about five of them on this table. They were, like, memories of my entrance into chemistry. And I was even in college by then, so. Speaker 2: So you were allowed to--you did experiments in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I had that freedom to explore. Speaker 2: Now, did you take part in science fairs in school? Speaker 1: I did. In high school-- Speaker 2: High school, okay. Speaker 1: I did one major exhibit, a project, a show, and it was at the Museum of Science and Industry, and it dealt with two things: it dealt with this electrolysis; it was, like, using--it was a little plant with a seed, electrolyze water with salt and produce hydrogen gas/chlorine gas. But it turned out the more important part that impressed the judges was, I had a way of having--of where the ocean waves would come up, and then you would let them go--recede back into the ocean and move paddlewheels that would actually turn a generator. And so I had that all on this mock-up--on this project board. And that's what got me an award, because of that. I actually did computations on the potential power that could be generated in different times, what sizes of waves could produce so much power. But that actually segued into my senior year. I just got manically focused on computing the energy output from nuclear--thermonuclear fusion reactions. I'd actually sit up in physics class--. Story_ID: 26308 Speaker 1: We were talking about high school science fair, chemistry. Speaker 2: The science fair, my computations from the ocean waves turning turbines and generating electricity, transformed into an interest in thermonuclear fusion. When I first learned about that, I think in my last semester, second semester chemistry as an eleventh grader, and I was just fascinated to look in the tables of masses of different isotopes of atoms and draw out the thermo--the nuclear chemical reaction, like, two hydrogen atoms--well, actually, two deuterium hydrogen atoms reacting to produce a helium atom; and then computing, because the helium atom has a lower mass than the sum of the masses of the two deuterium atoms that are reacting. So where did that little piece of mass go that didn't wind up in the helium product? It went in the energy, in the great deal of energy. And that's what runs--drives our sun. And then there's other kinds. I just--I tried other nuclei just to see it. It was so stimulating to my curiosity. Well, unfortunately, I didn't get but a B in physics, but I did very well in chemistry, and I wound up in the physics side of chemistry once I got my Ph.D. [degree]. Speaker 1: Well, we don't want to get you that far yet. But that's--now, in high school, you took chemistry, physics--did they offer calculus in high school? Speaker 2: They did, but you had to go up to Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California] to take it. And that's a little story in my own life that was one slight regret. But junior high is really where the preparation, the foundation got built after sixth grade with a teacher. Fifth grade, this teacher who was focused on science, and the sixth-grade teacher was one of these very comprehensive kinds of teachers, she was an--interestingly, a white woman from Mobile, Alabama, who had migrated to Los Angeles, who was very comfortable with black people and black culture. So she was one of the early teachers teaching black history. And that was in the early '50s [1950s]. Hardly anybody had heard of it. Well, I was getting it at home, but she was also teaching it in her classroom. But by junior high, which was a whole different deal now, I had to rotate between classes, which freaked me out a little bit at first, then I had to go to another room for math, and a room for English class, and another for art, social studies and all of that. So I got a solid foundation in algebra and in science there. Speaker 1: How far did you go in math? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. I did introductory algebra in junior high school, and then in high school it was geometry I and II in the tenth grade, and then intermediate advanced algebra III and IV in the eleventh grade, and then trigonometry in the twelfth grade. I forget what my other math was or even if I took math in the last semester. That's when I was in the student body cabinet class as the president of the student body. And so that happened at the same time. I probably should have been commuting on the streetcar the six miles north to Los Angeles City College to take calculus, which would have helped me get started at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] more easily. But it didn't. Speaker 1: Now, the high school you attended was Manila (ph.) High School? Speaker 2: Was Manuel Arts. Speaker 1: Manuel Arts. Speaker 2: Manuel Arts High School. That was its official name. It was an interesting name. It was focused on liberal arts, but it--originally it was established as a vocational arts high school in Central Los Angeles, just south of the USC campus [University of Southern California]. But as the population of the city increased, they needed another comprehensive high school. So they kept the same name, Manuel Arts, but just made it comprehensive to Liberal Manuel and Fine Arts. It was one of the oldest, maybe the second oldest high school in the city; second or third oldest to Los Angeles High, which was founded in the 1800s. But it had a great faculty. It had a great academic faculty. And one of the foundation courses was Latin. My father [Grant Venerable] insisted that we take Latin because, he said, that's the foundation of not only all the romance languages like French and Italian and Spanish, Romanian, but of German and English and Dutch as well. So I went on and took the math as well as biology, chemistry, and physics in high school. And that was my platform to get into college. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 26309 Speaker 1: Who were some of your high school teachers that were important? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, the first one I just thought of was, I think her name was Lowell Tilby Shepard (ph.). I think it was Lowell T. Shepard. She was one of the few black teachers in the high school, and she had a doctorate degree from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. She was from down South, and she taught English and public speaking. So I gained my first real public speaking discipline from her class and some real scholarly acumen in having to research topics for debates that we had in there. So that was a key class in my development. Also was Louise Nash (ph.) in geometry. I had her probably longer than any other teacher. But she had been teaching there--a lot of that faculty--for twenty-five or thirty years; so they've been there through the transition from all white--gradually it was now about 40, 45 percent black and other ethnicities as well. And that faculty was the mainstay of that school's power. You don't see that any more, unfortunately, and the school districts haven't figured that out yet, that the way to success to the youngsters is you got to keep those teachers there for at least twenty years. And the principals have to stay there, too. Now, if they can figure that out, they can succeed. And that's--we were getting the benefit of these veteran teachers. Another class was biology. Molton--Ms. Molton (ph.) and Mr. Wilson in biology, and then Mr. Richard Burt (ph.), who really (chuckles) made me become a chemist. And I wasn't working at full speed my first semester, and that gentleman was a chemical engineer who actually had a night job at a corporation. But he shook his finger at me as I was enrolling into the second semester, and he said, "You're getting an A this semester, aren't you?" And what could I say? I said, "Yes." So that's what I did. There aren't enough teachers in the school who do that, who recognize the potential that's there, and they pull it out. He knew he could challenge me to do that. The Latin teacher, it was the same thing. She had students who were getting Cs in their other classes, and they'd get As from her, because she sat on them and made them love Latin. There were other teachers, but--a Mr. Turnquist (ph.) in trigonometry, who was great fun and instructive as a teacher, but that was the platform. Robbie Chester, a woman, was a friend of our family, was also a math teacher, but I never studied with her. My brother, Lloyd, studied with her. My father [Grant venerable] had a practice of he did not want his children in the classes of teachers who were friends of the family or relatives just to keep it objective. And that started with him. His sister [Neosho Venerable] never wanted him in her classes. So anyway, Mrs. Chester was one of the great teachers there. Story_ID: 26310 Speaker 1: In your senior year you were senior class president, right, of the student-- Speaker 2: In my senior year I was class president in the first semester, and then stood for election and became student body president--student government president in the semester-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of the senior year, which opened a number of associations, like, you were asking about why did my father [Grant Venerable] go see Dr. Lloyd Hall [chemist] in Chicago [Illinois]. That connected with some significant people in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Who for instance? Speaker 2: The--it connected me on 'Boy's Day in Government'. They couldn't figure out where did--this guy is so diverse in his interests. Most of the boys were hooked up with, like, to be mayor for the day or city councilman for the day, or county supervisor. I wound up as president of the Los Angeles County Chamber of Commerce [Los Angeles, California] for the day, which meant I got to meet the man who was the actual chair at the big breakfast where they had all of the boys meet with their counterparts, and that was at the L.A. Breakfast Club, one of these very upscale clubs for corporate captains of industry. And that's where I met James S. Cantlan, capital C-a-n-t-l-a-n. And I knew Cantlan for the rest of his life, which was fifteen years from then. But he was so impressed with the speech I gave to introduce him that we formed a bond. And he was also, at that time, the chief operating officer of Pacific Telephone. So I could--when I was downtown, I would drop in just to say hello, and his secretary knew to let me in. Says, "Oh, yes. Mr. Cantlan is here. Come right in." Story_ID: 26311 Speaker 1: So, what kind of counseling were you getting in high school in terms of going to school? Speaker 2: Oh, that, I'm glad you asked, 'cause that relates to really one of my most significant teachers, Florence Springer [ph.], who was also one of the outstanding counselors at Manuel Arts High School [Los Angeles, California]. I got good counseling. I say that because my father [Grant Venerable] also had counselors on the outside that he wanted me to see, and that was a day when the Ivy League institutions were starting to think about opening up to black students; not doing it really yet, but starting to think about doing it. And so counselors were encouraging us to shoot for Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], for Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], for Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], which I was going to apply to anyway and to not just apply to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] or UC Berkeley [Berkeley, California]. And, yet, things got a little snaffled and confused in there, because I got pulled out of the school's counseling traditions by the outside people that my father had been recommended to see, and that was through the National Scholarship for Negro Students, which was trying to place students in Harvard, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge], Columbia [University, New York, New York], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Stanford; and it didn't work for me. It didn't work. I was in a slight depression anyway in my senior year. The fall that I took my SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test], College Board Exams, I didn't do as well as I probably would have if I had not been in a state of depression. So a number of my childhood friends who were twelfth graders that did quite well on the SATs--by quite well, I mean, scores in the 1300, 1400 and above area. And I was pulling in 1190, which my father was most unhappy about. I was most unhappy. It wasn't a bad score actually in that day. If you talk to the College Board people, which I did several years ago, they said, "It's been rescaled over the years. It would be the equivalent of a 1350 now. But then it wasn't enough to get Harvard's attention or Stanford's attention or even Caltech's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had a 3.7 GPA in high school, which-- Speaker 1: But what was--why were you depressed? What was going on? Speaker 2: That's something I couldn't figure out until years later. But my Aunt Neosho [Venerable] had died the previous June, 1960. That was a real downer 'cause she was surrogate mother since 1950. She was the main female mother relative in my life, and that took a lot of the steam out of me. I did not do well in my first part of my senior year in college--I mean in high school. And there were some very personal stuff going on, and by that, I mean, I started--I was very short. I was a late bloomer physically, and that was starting to depress me. I said, "What's going on? All of my friends are, like, five foot nine inches, and I'm still five foot one, five foot two, and-- Speaker 1: You're a senior and you were about five, one or two? Speaker 2: Not--actually seven--by the time I was seventeen [years old], I had grown up to five, four, or so when I turned seventeen. But I was still feeling many depress--things just kind of added up. By the time I walked across the platform to get my diploma, I was five, five. Well, that was the height of my father's uncle, Blaine. And a lot of the men in the family were short, and my parents [Grant Venerable and Thelma Lorraine Scott Venerable] thought I would be short, so they really redirected my consciousness from worrying about being short, 'cause so many friends were tall. I said, "Well, why are they tall?" I said, "Well, they had tall parents." Well, as a matter of fact, by the time I finished UCLA, I was five [feet] ten [inches]. So I had done a lot of growing in college. Very interesting. But I think in a way the shock of my mother's death had actually suppressed a lot of my neurochemistry. That's just speculation, but that was just what was. So things began to come back together at UCLA as I began to emerge from depression. Speaker 1: So you were eight [years old] when your mother passed-- Speaker 2: I was eight, yeah. Speaker 1: By the time you were eighteen, it was 1960, right, and you're getting ready to graduate from Manuel Arts-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --okay. So, you didn't--you weren't--didn't do as well as you wanted to on the tests and so what was the result? That you didn't get in those Ivy League schools? Speaker 2: I didn't get into the Ivies, but it was well good enough to get into the University of California. Story_ID: 26312 Speaker 1: And I'd been looking at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] as a football school, so it was--I said, well, you know, I'd never wanted to go to UCLA. I wanted to go to Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California]. But it turned out to be the best possible school I could have gone to for college. And that's because of the character of the teachers, the people I was around, the classmates I was around; and I was able to awaken from this long dormancy, this academic dormancy. I entered as a physics major, but by the second year, I had found my way into a chemistry major and took chemistry IA and IB and got As in both those key courses, and that was my launch pad for doing well in a chemistry major. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So who were some of the teachers and mentors at UCLA? Speaker 1: The first year, probably my French teacher stuck out as particularly inspiring. And so I managed to go from a C to a B in her class. I got mainly all Cs that first year 'cause I was still in the throes of the depression. Calculus was Cs. That just depressed me further, but I started to pull out of it by the end of that year. And so the second year, I was in the freshman chemistry and began to really come alive with that. That was with Mostafa El-Sayed, who was a new young assistant professor out of Egypt. And El-Sayed became one of the top chemical physicists in the country. He is now at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], in fact. He retired from UCLA, and Georgia Tech brought him to set up a laser lab. Then it was Kenneth Trueblood, who was a masterful X-ray crystallographer; determined the structure of molecules. And his main mentor and collaborator was an English Nobel Prize winner named Dorothy Hodgkin [Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1964]. And Trueblood probably really shaped my scientific intellect from the challenge of his chem [chemistry] IB course. So if you got an A from Trueblood's class, I mean the other professors looked at you like you really had something going. So that was enough to--momentum to push me through all my chemistry courses; physical chemistry, analytical chemistry, organic chemistry. That's what my memoir writing has focused a lot on. Story_ID: 26313 Speaker 1: My main mentor after freshman chemistry was Willard Frank Libby who was UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles] first Nobel Laureate, and he got the prize in chemistry in 1960, which was the semester I arrived at UCLA. He was the man who developed radiocarbon dating. I got a--I met a gentleman who was head of the physical education department, which was becoming the kinesiology department. His name was Donald T. Handy. And he was the brother of my junior high school principal. And someone told me, "You should go meet Don Handy. He's the brother of Carl Handy, who you so admired at Foshay Junior High [School; Los Angeles]." So Carl was one of those kinds of principals who really knew how to goad youngsters to success, and he acknowledged me as this half-pint youngster who was president of the class. I was four feet, nine inches as a ninth grader. I had to stand on a box to speak from the podium, and he recognized me as, like, little Napoleon in that school. So, anyway, I did meet his brother, who really literally, took me over after he talked to his brother, and he became my main mentor. He was, like, Dad at the campus. And that gentleman opened doors for me that were critical to be opened. Speaker 2: Now, this is Handy? This is Professor Handy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This was Professor Donald Handy. Speaker 2: Donald Handy. Okay. Speaker 1: Who was maybe just, well, just three years younger than my father [Grant Venerable]. But the Handys were both from Los Angeles, from South Los Angeles. They were part of this vast white community that lived in that central and south central part of Los Angeles back before the 1960s. So he recognized my intelligence and my motivation, and he opened doors. He said, "I want you to meet Bill Libby," or "I want you to meet Saul Winstein." I'll probably send you this picture, but anyway. Speaker 2: We'll get it later. Speaker 1: Saul was the top guy at UCLA in chemistry, who also had grown up on the Central L.A. [Los Angeles]--in that Central L.A. area, and he went to Jefferson High School. Handy went to Jefferson High School. Speaker 2: Saul (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Saul, capital W-i-n-s-t-e-i-n. Saul-- Speaker 2: Winstein. Speaker 1: Winstein. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's the first one Handy wanted me to meet. Says, "I think you should talk to Saul Winstein." I didn't realize that nobody gets to talk to Saul Winstein, practically, if they're an undergraduate. But Handy made the way, and Dr. Winstein wanted, you know, respected his friend and received me. And we had a twenty-minute chat, and he told me a little of the history of his history, that he knew how to create a connection, that he came up in this area, and that he knew James Lu Valle from that same area, who was one of the top black chemists who went to UCLA, who my father already knew and knew about. So that really connected. Ralph Bunche [American political scientist, academic, and diplomat who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Palestine] went to that same high school, Jefferson High School and came to UCLA. So, anyway, Saul told me a little about his background as a chemist, how he came to UCLA. He and my father were, like, exchanging places. My father was at Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], while Saul Winstein was still in high school. My father left Caltech, then my father--Saul Winstein went to Caltech to get his doctorate. But, anyway, there was some--kind of this karmic connection going on. So, I said, "Well, I'd like major in chemistry." So he took me to the office, and they had me sign up. So that was a significant event. And then three years later, Saul Winstein and his wife, Sylvia, commissioned me to do a painting of his work. And it became one of my best known paintings in the chemical world. Story_ID: 26314 Speaker 1: So--now, how did this activity start, like, painting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It really-- Speaker 1: --chemical concepts and-- Speaker 2: It started as a hunch. I had--the thing I'd left out, when I left junior high school [in Los Angeles, California], I won the PTA [unclear] Arts Scholarship to go to the Los Angeles County Art Institute, where there were these fourteen-year-old, fifteen-year-old recent junior high graduates. It's now called the Otis [Art] Institute. Charles White [African American artist] was there on the faculty. If you know anything about-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --him. He wasn't there then, but he came later, and I met him-- Speaker 1: Charles White is one of the few black artists (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The black artist. Speaker 1: --and he deals in charcoal (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Charcoal, yes. Speaker 1: --pencil. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: I studied with a man named Joseph Mugnaini who taught us oil color technique. But I didn't have anywhere to take it until I was in Dr. [Kenneth] Trueblood's chemistry IB class [University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)]. And Trueblood brought in colored chalk to draw molecules and color on the blackboard. They just--really wowed, stimulated my mind, not just scientifically, but artistically. And I said, "I think I'll try that with my oil paintings." So I started doing a few little oil paintings of molecules; very crudely at first, but I kept doing it, and by the time I was a junior to a senior, I was doing some fairly, nice-looking paintings. And I did this painting for the Winsteins [Saul and Sylvia]. I did one for another professor, Professor Pecsok. And I did one for a Professor Smith. But they look much like the paintings you see around you. So he was a significant figure. That's how I started doing the artistic work. Story_ID: 26315 Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in any other, like--or any other extracurricular activities at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]? Speaker 2: Now, that's really where the river met the road at UCLA that was--that really supplemented--complemented the academics. First semester I was at UCLA was to enjoy the outstanding speaker series that UCLA made possible with its great resources. So I was able to hear Langston Hughes [American poet, social activist, novelist, playwright, and columnist]. He came to the campus, spoke in one of the classrooms--there were only thirty-five students that attended, but that was, like, a signpost--cosmic signpost to my future in being the provost at the university where Langston Hughes graduated over forty years away. And so, Hughes came, he recited some of his poetry. He was a great folks speaker, he's a storyteller, and he just had the audience just eating out of his hands. So that was one of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I think it was the--I think his short stories about [Jesse B.] Semple were made for--some were made for CBS Television in those days. I remember there were a couple of them appeared in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: I didn't realize that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. A couple of long forms of Simple. Speaker 2: So but--you know, did you ever meet Langston Hughes? Speaker 1: I never did. Never did. Speaker 2: He was just as down to earth and folksy as could be. He probably was visiting William Grant Still [African American classical composer who wrote more than 150 compositions] while he was in town that time, now that I think of it, because he was writing librettos for some of William Grant Still's operas. So, I know there's a lot written about their collaboration. I already knew the Stills at that time, because in Foshay [Junior High School, Los Angeles, California] I was a classmate of Judith Ann Still, and then that's how I got to meet the Stills. Then the next significant speakers were Ralph Bunche [American political scientist, academic, and diplomat who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Palestine], who, we would see from to time over the years just because my dad [Grant Venerable] would take us to receptions so he could see friends in the L.A. area. And then James Baldwin spoke and--these were very substantive issue-related speakers right in the midst of the Civil Rights Era. Then--well Strom Thurman, Senator Strom Thurman spoke; George--Governor George Wallace spoke. So it wasn't just on one side, one end of the political cultural spectrum. They wanted the students to hear the viewpoints of everybody. Harry Golden, the Jewish raconteur and lecturer spoke. And then who spoke? Malcolm X spoke around 1962. And that was probably the most shocking speaking any of us in the grand ballroom at ever heard, because the message was so radically different. And it was really too much for my young middle class ears at the time. But over time, all of African American people had assimilated the message of self-reliance, really, it's what it was of Malcolm X and not letting anybody else define you as a ethnic people. That was radical then because we were so used to being defined and trying to live up the expectations of the definers, and not that I really went in for that. It was something still in the subconscious, I think, that affected most African American people. So, after UCLA, I was pretty independent minded and was defining myself. Story_ID: 26316 Speaker 1: The other significant part was moving to campus [University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)] in 1962, living there instead of at home, which made all the difference in the world in feeling a part of the university and the university life. And that's when I really started to make friends on campus; when you could study with friends late at night, live in the dormitory with them, get up and have breakfast with them. It was in that context that I met John Hope Franklin [African American historian], who was the guest of the campus. Franklin came to UCLA at least once a year anyway because he--I think he worked with one of the history professors. They were collaborating on textbooks. I mean, those were days when the conservatives of California were calling Franklin a communist for writing about black history, and the history of racism, and how we're getting towards integration. Well, Franklin segued that was part of Charles Hamilton Houston [prominent African American lawyer] and Thurgood Marshall's [Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, serving from October 1967 until October 1991; U.S. Supreme Court's first African-American justice] brain trust. He was a young man then who did the history of segregation and racism and its impact on black people. So, anyway, my last year at UCLA, Franklin was a guest in my dormitory, and we happened to be the only ones in the dining room for breakfast, because I was up late for some reason, and I saw him across the room and said, "That looks suspiciously like John Hope Franklin whom I've seen in the pages of 'Ebony' magazine and 'Jet' magazine." So I picked up my tray--my father [Grant Venerable] had taught me to be a little bit bold like that--and I went over and asked him--I said, "Hello. Are you who I think you are?" (laughs). And if you've ever met Dr. Franklin, you know he had a great wit. And he says, "Well, I don't know who you think I am, but I'm John Hope Franklin." (laughs). And he said, "Sit down." So, anyway, we met, and I knew him for the rest of his life, 'cause I had just been accepted at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in the graduate studies, where he had been for two years in the history department. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he says, "Well, when you get there, look me up." Story_ID: 26317 Speaker 1: Now, there were tremendous changes in the Civil Rights Movement when you were in school at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Tremendous. Speaker 1: I know of--well, one--1963 where the killing of Medgar Evers [civil rights activist] and the March on Washington, the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], the death of [President] John [F.] Kennedy. All that's in the same period. Speaker 2: All that. 1963. Speaker 1: Yeah. And there are demonstrations all over the country. All over the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. 1965 spring with Selma [to Montgomery, Alabama; marches]. Speaker 1: '64 [1964] is Freedom--summer of the Democratic Convention. Speaker 2: 1964, one of my high school friends, Joseph Bates (ph.), went down there to be a Freedom Rider. His family had fled. They had migrated out of East Texas to get away from Jim Crow. And they had a big dinner for him. They were black Baptist, but they gave him, like, the equivalent of the last rites of the Catholic Church before they left. They were so afraid for his being down there, but he did come back safely. So, yeah, all of that was taking place. Speaker 1: So did you know anybody that, you know, journeyed to [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] for the March on Washington? Speaker 2: Not at that time. I met friends later who had, but--and I knew Joe. I didn't know that's what he was doing at that time. But it had sent shockwaves, of course, in Los Angeles [California] at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. I remember the--after the church bombing, there was a vigil at the campus that was poignantly touching, and that at noon there were always the chimes that tolled the hour. Actually, I think ten minutes of noon the chime mistress would play hymns on the chimes. And there was an agreement at noon this particular day--there was a moment of remembrance of that Birmingham tragedy in which there was a moment of silence, and then she played "We Shall Overcome." I'll never forget the deep pathos. People were in gatherings around trees, the silence, the pathos, just meditating on what had happened; and, then, of course, down in Birmingham itself you had Angela Davis [political activist], you had Condoleezza Rice [political scientist and diplomat], who knew at least one of the girls in the bombing. And those two women, as a result of that, went two different political directions. Academically, they both became highly capable and skilled, but they were different politically, but they were both equally committed. So, then the assassination of John Kennedy just sent that campus into deep, deep mourning. But I'll never forget how gleeful some of the conservative students were, and made no attempt to hide their joy that this horrible liberal president was no longer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--anyway. Yeah. Speaker 2: They felt that strongly. Some were not that rabid. Some of my friends in the dorm, who were very conservative, just said, well, they did not like President Kennedy's policies, but they didn't go so far as to be gleeful about him. I also learned something about human nature then that--I had friends, you know what they say, "across the aisles," and that I could have very close friends who had political views that disagreed with mine, as long as we had common touchstones that were our bond. Now, that didn't include friends who advocated lynching or genociding my people or something like that. But just differences of opinion. But I was choosing friends on that basis--I said, "I can't be friends with them." But I learned later that wasn't true. Story_ID: 26318 Speaker 1: Getting towards 1964, '65 [1965]--now, you graduated [from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)] in '65 [1965], right? Speaker 2: June '65 [1965]. June 17th. Speaker 1: June '65 [1965]. Okay. Speaker 2: June 11th, 1965, actually. Speaker 1: And what--now, you were--had you already arranged to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at this point? Speaker 2: I had been admitted, I think, around December of '64 [1964] or January '65 [1965]. I had applied in September '64 [1964] as a result of a significant trip I took to New York in summer '64 [1964] with my--with the chemistry fraternity. They were having a conclave on Long Island, Alpha Chi Sigma. And they wanted two delegates to go from my chapter. So we split the money that the fraternity provided. So I had enough to take a Greyhound Bus. It took seventy-two hours to get there. It was one of the richest seventy-two hours I've ever spent seeing the country close at hand, riding with people of diverse background, and, wow. It was an amazing trip, and I enjoyed it; ended up at Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York City and stayed with a classmate from UCLA, chemistry, who turned out to be one of the distinguished chemistry professors right now up in Maryland. But, anyway, I stopped in Chicago. I had stopped in Dayton [Ohio] on that trip, again, to see the Louises, and then stopped in Chicago, not with the Halls that time, but with my cousin Marian [ph.] and Walter and their children, who I had formally just met the year before in Los Angeles. So I was really wanting to get to know my cousins I had never met before. So Cousin Marian, who was, I guess, mid-forties then, sent me with her sixteen-year-old son, Scott, to meet Peter Hambright (ph.), W. Peter Hambright, who was a Ph.D. candidate in chemistry working for Professor Fleischer (ph.). And so Peter showed me his lab, showed me around the department and asked if I'd ever thought about applying to Chicago for graduate school, and I said, "No, I just think it would be a real long shot." So, he said, "Okay." I got home from that trip and almost waiting for me was a letter from the graduate advisor of the chemistry department at the University of Chicago, Bernard H. Shumacher (ph.). And Dr. Shumacher invited me to apply to graduate studies. And I said, "Oh. Okay." But I played it smarter that time, and I listened to good peer advice as well as professor advice. I applied to a school I thought pretty sure I could get into that was very good, University of Kansas; outstanding in inorganic chemistry. It was the school of my ancestors. The first people on my father's [Grant Venerable] side of the family graduated there in 1912; my aunt Neosho [Venerable], 1914. They were the--practically the only state university in that, you know, west of the Rocky--east of the Rockies that was admitting black students. Anyway, I applied to Wisconsin, Illinois, and Chicago. So I had a spread of challenges. And I was offered admission to all four. The money wasn't as good at Chicago as Wisconsin, where I was really eager to go, but I said, "If I can get into Chicago, I will go," particularly since Professor [Willard F.] Libby [at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA); Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1960] recommended me highly and Professor [Mostafa] El-Sayed to go to Chicago. That's the best school in the country for experimental physical chemistry, so that's where I went. Story_ID: 26319 Speaker 1: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] produced a number of black Ph.D.s in those days--I mean in the days preceding you. Speaker 2: That's right. Yeah. Speaker 1: A few that were respected ones like Dr. Henry McBay [chemist]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, did you know about that legacy? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, there were eight African American students in the Ph.D. program in chemistry in the decade of the 1960s. Seven of those were there in 1965. Reatha Clark King [also a HistoryMaker] had already graduated in '62 [1962] or three [1963], so she was the elder of that group. There were not--that was the most black Ph.D. candidates anywhere in the country. More than Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], more than Atlanta U [University, Atlanta, Georgia], more than Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]; and it was just one of those quirks of--divine quirks of history that we were all there. So that was Gloria Long Anderson [also a HistoryMaker], who was the senior one of those. She had come from Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] and then graduated organic chemistry and went to Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to head up the chemistry department. Thomas Cole, Jr. was there and did an extremely famous piece of work for his Ph.D., constructing a molecule that was a cube, a cube of carbon atoms in each apex of the cube and one hydrogen atom. It was an impossible task until Tom and his professor, [Philip] Eaton figured it out. And then there was Billy Joe Evans [also a HistoryMaker]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --who was in very physics kinds of physical chemistry, Mossbauer spectroscopy, and he landed his professorship at [University of] Michigan-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in Ann Arbor. And then there was Peter Hambright [ph.], himself, who was from Chicago, and Peter landed in--at Howard [University] as a distinguished professor until he died a couple of years ago. I think that covers it. Tom--yeah, Tom Cole got his Ph.D. in organic chemistry. Abe Barton (ph.) was there and finished--I don't--I lost track of Abe, but I think he subsequently passed away, and James Baldwin (ph.) was there. And I don't know where he went after that. He was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta] graduate, and that's the same time while there I met Dolphus E. Milligan who was a Morehouse graduate. Have you ever heard of Dolphus Milligan? Speaker 1: It seems as though I have. Speaker 2: He should be in the archives, but he passed away at a young age-- Speaker 1: Dolphus-- Speaker 2: --in 1973, I believe. Speaker 1: Milligan, M-i-l-l-i-g-a-n? Speaker 2: M-i-l-l-i-g-a-n. He's from near Montgomery, Alabama. But Milligan was a young up-and-coming infrared spectroscopist. When he spoke at the Chicago Section of American Chemical Society in 1969, and I took James Baldwin to hear Milligan so we could meet him, and so he was like a mentor for an evening. But--and he subsequently passed away. But he along with McBay, they were, like, in the same class of--that--McBay was, I think older. But there were three prominent men out of Morehouse who got their Ph.D.s in Chicago. I'm trying to think of the other man's name, but Milligan was, like, the lost child of Morehouse. And I think it was because he was cut off in the prime of his life. And so he did not acquire the fame that McBay did. Of course, McBay is the first word out of the mouths of Cole, and Billy Joe Evans, and Gloria Anderson. And when I get there, because he was the great man down at the Atlanta University Center, and it was, like, "Well, McBay this, McBay that," and so I knew who McBay was. This child of California. And there was the great mathematician in the 1940s there (pause). Anyway, name escapes me at the moment. I'll think of it. Got three-his three math degrees within, like, four years. Got his Ph.D. at age nineteen from math--in math at Chicago. Anyway, what else? Speaker 1: This is an African American you're talking about too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this somebody we ought to know. I mean, I'm sorry. I can't think of it. I should be able to (simultaneous)-come up with it myself (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I will. But Lloyd Hall [chemist] went to the University of Chicago. He did not take a degree, but he did advanced study there after finishing Northwestern [University, Chicago/Evanston, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, this is--had the black chemists attempted to organize themselves at all at this point, because I--? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Through NOBCChE. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers. Speaker 1: Who would--had they organized by the time you got to-- Speaker 2: No, they were not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, they were not. Speaker 2: --existent. They didn't really come into being until maybe the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Right. About '72 [1972] or so. Speaker 2: And then they organized around the Percy Julian [African American chemist] legacy and McBay legacy. Another little fact of life is, that coming from the West Coast, I was cut off by the Rocky Mountains from the Southern communicational networks. So I was like an unknown in that network until later. I think until I came into HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] as a provost. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 26320 Speaker 1: So, well, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], what was your focus of study? Speaker 2: Physical chemistry. In the spectroscopic molecular side of physical chemistry. And at some point, it got focused into inorganic transition metal systems as my systems of study. And so, some of the paintings that you see around you in the living room are those complexes represented in art. Gave me a little bit of a challenge, little bit of a tight moment there when some of the more doctrinaire chemists who were younger, did not feel art was a proper outlet for a scientist. So-- Speaker 1: So did they actually tell you this? Speaker 2: I was told by some--but they were not the old pros, the senior people in the department. They were more the younger men trying to demonstrate that they're real scientists and deserved tenure on the faculty. And so then I was told that I had to--I needed to choose between art and science. And so I really had to go underground a little bit, and I think some of the inorganic people may have felt that way. So it was good that I did receive my degree with an inorganic system I was studying, but I was coming at it from the view of a nuclear chemist and a radiation chemist. Speaker 1: So you were painting even as you were studying? Speaker 2: I was painting. That, in fact, was one of my important recreations. I was swimming daily, but I was painting on--it took a couple of weeks to really do a painting from start to finish, but, you know, it wasn't every waking moment. But it really kept my sanity, as well as playing the piano, and expanding my piano and later organ repertoire. So I'm really using both sides of my brain rather than getting over specialized on the left side, which can drive people crazy, which I've done a lot of writing about how that can impact academic people when they get overly rational. You can actually--the brain can flip over on itself and become irrational, which is like a hyper-rational state that's not--it's not a healthy state. It's like being hyper-logical where there's no feeling; feeling is gone. You're so logical. Speaker 1: Okay. Somewhere Mr. Spock on Star Trek or something-- Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yes. Speaker 1: I guess that's the way he's supposed to be. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So in--so who were your--I mean, your major mentor at the University of Chicago or mentor? Speaker 2: Well, a number of the men who were my first-year teachers, they're in chemistry and physics. You do your coursework all in the first, three quarters. It's the quarter system. So from September 1 through end of May, you're done with courses. The courses really, at that time, were to give you the strength, the knowledge, the skill, to challenge the doctoral candidacy exam, which was written as well as oral. So you weren't really required. This is part of the [Robert Maynard] Hutchins [fifth president of the University of Chicago] legacy in Chicago. You didn't have to take any courses if you didn't want to except two that were, like, minor courses; you had to take those and pass with at least a B and a C. So I had these nine courses or ten courses and didn't do that academically spectacularly grade-wise. But, you know, I was getting Cs and Bs, and that's not an issue. In most other graduate schools that's an issue. You have to maintain a B average. All they wanted in Chicago was you pass that prelim candidacy exam. You get through that, you can get through. So the teachers that year were Leonard Wharton (ph.) in quantum chemistry, which really, I got a strong foundation for at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. And that's the quantum physics side of molecular structure and molecular spectroscopy. Spectroscopy meaning how the light interacts with the molecules and you get spectra of the molecules. And then following that semester was R. S. Berry (ph.), who taught molecular structure and spectroscopy. So those were two key courses from very two key mentors. I was taking some advanced inorganic chemistry as well. I took mathematics, advanced mathematics, which was specialized to physical chemistry and physics. And those were good, tough courses to take. But the action didn't really start until the second year. Just for your information, I did not pass that prelim exam because I pulled back--I shifted to the inorganic, unwisely. I did not do well--that's a longer story that's in my memoir. But over the summer I studied and changed back to physical chemistry, and my classmate said, "You never should have shifted out of there. Some of those inorganic people don't like you, and if you stay and do well, they still may not pass you, so you need to go back to physical and we'll certainly be there to assist." And so, I had about five classmates that gave me mock oral exams as well as written exams. We were that close-knit in the department, which is the way the University of Chicago likes to arrange it, because science is a collaborative activity. It's not really rugged individualism. Story_ID: 26321 Speaker 1: Can you explain the difference--this sounds elementary or it is--the difference between organic chemistry, physical chemistry, and inorganic chemistry? Speaker 2: Physical focus is on the fundamental principles that guide all of the behavior of atoms and molecules. Those come from physics. The inorganic and organic have to do with the varieties of atoms, elements you're looking at. So organic is looking at those compounds around their element carbon with its covalent bonding with hydrogen, and that's the bulk of all compounds in living systems; from methane up to DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid]. And then inorganic are the studies of the inorganic elements on the periodic table including carbon, but not necessarily looking at organic molecules, but you're looking at silicon as well; hydrogen, boron, lithium, the metals, all that. So I was looking at inorganic cobalt compounds that were made of cobalt and cyanide. And I would irradiate them with gamma rays or high-energy electron beams to see what kind of products I would get and understand the reactions that were involved. Speaker 1: Okay. Al right. It's the physical and inorganic that get the--I think people debate about. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We've even had a discussion on the phone about the difference was between physical and inorganic and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Physical can project itself on any of the compounds. Organic, inorganic is just the kind of compounds you're looking at. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 26322 Speaker 1: You completed your study at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in 1967, right, for your master's degree. Now, did you--so you had to go back and take these courses or take the test over again to pass that? Speaker 2: I had to take it over, and I did that in early September 1966 and passed it with flying colors, both the written and the oral. And it kind of blew everybody's mind on the faculty: "How did he do so badly before and then he did so well this time." Well, it was a number of factors, but I had them all under control by then. When I went looking for a research advisor to do my doctoral research with, it was really about three months too late, because my classmates had all taken the plum slots and working with professors that I was interested in working with. So I went looking in the physics department and actually did work with Mark Inghram, capital I-n-g-h-r-a-m, who was--actually, I-n-g-h-r-a-m. He was the chairman of physics at that time and a very fine, disciplined scholar who taught scholarly discipline. I think Inghram gave me my intellectual discipline, scientific intellectual discipline. And that's a discipline that defines everything you have to talk about before you talk about it. So you just don't just start opening your mouth and talking. You start defining and describing the system in precise terms. You draw the curves that describe the behavior, then you start to talk about it. And he used to call me up to his office every--once a week or once every two weeks, with his cigar and he'd sit with his feet propped up on the desk. "Oh, draw an energy-level diagram of oxygen on the board," or whatever molecule he wanted us to talk about. And then he would ask questions about it, and he'd make comments on my response. He'd either say, "Yes, that's right. No, that's wrong. In fact, that's quite wrong." And with that kind of feedback, it was strengthening my understanding of science at the fundamental levels that physics addresses. And he's the one that said, "Chemists always buy their instruments," and he says, "In physics, we don't buy instruments, we make them. That means we can trust them, because we know what--when the needle points to a certain number, we know what that means. We calibrate it thoroughly--." But that even taught me in chemistry, when I'd buy the instrument to calibrate it thoroughly so I know what it means. Whether it's a thermometer or an oscilloscope. So that paved the way for my going into my doctoral research, which was carried out at the Argonne National Laboratory [near Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 26323 Speaker 1: So at the end of that 1966-'67 (1967) year, I recognized this is really a little--this really isn't where I want to be heading if I want to get out of here inside of ten years, and I really want to pull back a little more in the chemistry side and I think [Mark] Inghram [Venerable's master's degree advisor at the University of Chicago; Chicago, Illinois] and someone else said, "You know, go look at Argonne [National Laboratory, near Chicago] and see what they have." Argonne already had a number of University of Chicago science faculty out there on the staff who had joined appointments. So, I went out there. I went to the radiation--I went to the chemistry division and--to look at what research was going on there. And that's where I discovered Edwin James Hart, who was one of the most renowned radiation chemists on planet Earth. Ed Hart had the unique fame of being the discoverer--or I should say, co-discoverer with his English colleague of the hydrated electron. Which I--I have-I've done three paintings of the hydrated electron. Speaker 2: Oka. Speaker 1: It's actually an electron particle in pure water. And molecules in the pure water means there's no contaminants in it, so it's just water molecules. They shift their positions, those nearby this electron, shifts their positions so they en--actually, enclose it in a cage of water molecules. And it is metastable for about a few milliseconds, a few thousandths of a second, before that cluster called a hydrated electron reacts with the water molecule, and it produces hydrogen gas and a hydroxide ion. And I used that hydrated electron to react with my cobalt cyanide complexes, because it's what we call in chemistry, a "reducing agent." It's a pure electron, practically, that you can react with that cobalt ion. And so, my cobalt three ion changed its--what we call its charge, electrical charge, from a plus three to plus two. And it does things, because it's holding on to like six cyanides. And it can't stand to hold on to six cyanides once it becomes plus two, and there's a lot of theory called, "Ligand Field Theory" that tells us why. So it kicks off one of those cyanides 'cause it. And then it reacts with the water molecule, and it becomes a new molecule. And all that happens within a period of about ten microseconds. Ten millionths of a second. And I was able to observe that with the instrumentation I was using at Argonne. And it's called "fast reaction chemistry," or "microsecond chemistry." And I was one of the most exciting things I could ever do in chemistry. So I found Ed Hart, got it worked out for me to have an advisor on campus, and that turned out to be Professor Jack Halpern, who was an inorganic transition metal chemist on campus. And it worked out before Professor Halpern and--for me to do some work interesting to him with transition metal, cobalt cyanide complexes. So that was the hook for Halpern to be my other dissertation advisor. So I had two. Most students have one, but I had two, and Halpern had to be the one to sign my final dissertation. Story_ID: 26324 Speaker 1: Okay. So, your dissertation was entitled 'The Pulse Radiolysis of Transition Metal Cyanide Complexes in Aqueous Solution.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you just described that for us, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Pulse radiolysis is a specialized technique developed in radiation chemistry that is based on a perturbation principle. If you have a system of chemical compounds--mine were cobalt cyanide compounds dissolved in water; hence, the name "aqueous solutions"--and you sting that solution either with a pulse of heat, a pulse of electricity, a sudden increase of pressure on it; and in my case I used radiation. A pulse, a very powerful, what we call "ionizing radiation." That means it's strong enough to drive electrons off of atoms and molecules. It takes a great deal of energy to do that. So this was in a class of physical chemistry of perturbation methods. You perturb a system, and you watch it come back to equilibrium. In my case, I did that using pulse radiolysis technique which was, you have a cell here; it was a quartz cell, a quartz glass cell with the aqueous solution dissolved in it. So a beam of light is passing through the cell along this long axis, and the light comes into a detector that can detect changes in the intensity of the light coming into the detector. So it looks at--the detector, the electronics knows what intensity it went in, and what intensity comes out. So there's this solution in here with the cobalt cyanide, and so the light beam is turned on, and this optical detection system is on one level. So this--now on an oscilloscope screen, all it sees is just a base level. All right. So this is sitting inside of a room about the size of this living room, and in it is this linear accelerator that generates fifteen million electron-volt electrons. That's low energy as physics goes, but it's high energy as far as chemistry goes. So the cell is sitting this way, the light beam is this way, and the radiation comes in perpendicular to it; goes right through it. Well, that pulse only lasts about fifteen nanoseconds. That's fifty billionths of a second. That's why it's called a pulse, because it's so short. But in that time, it utterly perturbs whatever is in there. Since what's in there is mostly water, water molecules, it perturbs the heck out of that water. It tears water molecules in the beam to pieces. Speaker 1: So it disrupts the chemical bonds of the-- Speaker 2: It completely tears the chemical bonds apart, so now all you got in the beams' paths are hydrogen atoms, hydrogen oxide radicals, electrons, protons, hydroxide ions; and so you've kicked this thing out of equilibrium, and it takes a few millionths of a second for it all to come back into equilibrium. Well, if you put something like cobalt cyanide in there, you have time. Now, there are stages of this process in time. The first stage is that the electron is kicked out of these water molecules, so there's free electrons swimming around in there. Within a few picoseconds, water molecules have formed around these electrons. So now they're called hydrated electrons. They're very reactive. So these hydrated electrons will react with something that they can react with like these cobalt ions. So they find the cobalt ion, and that reaction takes about, I don't know, a few millionths of a second to occur. And then something happens to the cobalt cyanide complex itself. It changes its configuration. It becomes something different. So the whole process may take, maybe, ten to twenty microseconds. That's what pulse radiolysis does. What did it enable me to do? It enabled me to "eye see" intermediate stages of this cobalt cyanide that you can't see in regular bench top chemistry. So this cobalt cyanide becomes something for just a few millionths of a second before it becomes something stable. And that's the thing that inorganic chemists are interested in, is this intermediate that doesn't live very long; just a few millionths of a second. So my whole doctoral dissertation was on something that lasted a few millionths of a second. And I studied several compounds under that circumstance. And in that way understand how the reaction takes place between the hydrated electron and the cobalt cyanide to produce a product that is stable. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're the first, I guess, to understand this process in that particular way? Speaker 2: In that particular system. I think my work was some of the first--earliest in transition metal complex chemistry. There was some that had been done, but mine was the first that actually connected it with some bench top regular conventional chemistry that was going on across the country, in other parts of the world, in more conventional transition metal chemistry. So that was the exciting thing about it. Speaker 1: So did it help the people who were doing the bench work? Speaker 2: It helped them begin to understand more how their reactions might be occurring. Story_ID: 26325 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, you went on to do postdoctoral study at the [U.S.] Department of Energy [DOE], right? Speaker 2: It was then called the United States Atomic Energy Commission-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it evolved into the United States Department of Energy. And the AEC was called into being, the Atomic Energy Commission, to hold custody of the atomic bomb and all of the research that developed the atomic bomb which, infamously, was taking place at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. So Argonne Laboratory was the first home of that nuclear science research after Chicago professor Enrico Fermi achieved the first self-sustaining nuclear fission reaction under the bleachers of Amos Alonzo Stagg Field at the university. Speaker 1: You don't have to be really right under them, but under the ground (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Under--not underground. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you see there were those bleachers that were still there, so it was in that space under the bleachers, and they probably dug out in the ground where to put the reactor. But, of course, nobody saw that except the seventeen scientists under there, but there were, like, 2,000 or 3,000 actually working on the project. Most of them didn't even know what they were working on, including several men like Lloyd Quarterman, that I later knew when I was working at Argonne. But they--General Leslie Grove and Oppenheimer, Robert Oppenheimer--ingeniously managed to bring people together to work on nuclear fission without knowing that's what they were working on, 'cause each had a little piece of the whole process. My professor at UCLA, Willard Libby, was there. He was one of the seventeen under the bleachers. So all those people had enormous clout in the science community. Speaker 1: Okay. I've never seen Stagg Stadium as it--I guess, as it used to appear, you know. I think it's changed--it changed-- Speaker 2: It's right there on Ellis Avenue--was on Ellis Avenue where the sculpture is, the Henry Moore sculpture is right now. Speaker 1: Oh, wait. It's been moved since then. Yeah. . Speaker 2: That Henry Moore sculpture more or less marks the spot where the-- Speaker 1: Where it was. Speaker 2: --the fission reactor was. Speaker 1: Yeah. They've developed over top of that, now there's a bookstore over there and a lot of things. Speaker 2: There's a big new library that looks like a flying saucer next to the big-- Speaker 1: Regenstein Library? Speaker 2: --Regenstein Library. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So. All right. So, out at--so this is--was this part of what they called the "Project Manhattan?" The "Manhattan Project?" Speaker 2: That was the Manhattan Project. Part of it was at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. But the fission reaction was carried out at Chicago. Story_ID: 26326 Speaker 1: And then I went--from there I studies with Lawrence Myers (ph.), who was also at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. He got his doctorate there in radiation chemistry in the 1940s. So I continued working, not on pulse radiolysis, but on gamma radiolysis, on compounds in the biochemical field, to look at the electron spin resonance spectra of the compounds that you would get after radiating different parts of DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid], like, thymic acid. I was there for about fourteen months in UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles] nuclear medicine laboratory. Speaker 2: Now this is after-- Speaker 1: This was after I finished Chicago in 1970 in March. Speaker 2: Okay. That's immediately after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So immediately, I drove back to Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: So you didn't--you were finished at Argonne [national laboratory], what, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, right? Speaker 1: So, I--well, AEC was the-- Speaker 2: Atomic Energy Commission [AEC]. Speaker 1: --regulative agency over Argonne Laboratory. So I went from that AEC lab to the nuclear medicine lab at UCLA-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which is also AEC governed. And then I got the AEC Postdoctoral Fellowship there. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Which was a godsend to get, I realize now. Story_ID: 26327 Speaker 1: You realize, again, you acknowledge this was the 1960s of turmoil. And I had done some innocent things that did not look innocent to certain people. In applying for my Argonne [National] Laboratory [near Chicago, Illinois] Fellowship and my AEC Fellowship, there's questions on race, which they've always been. And there was a box to check for "Negro," and I averted it and went--and then there's a box for "Other," and I wrote "Black" and checked that. And I dare say I was probably investigated as a possibly risky black radical, because nobody used black then other than the Black Panthers [black revolutionary socialist organization active in the United States from 1966 until 1982]. Speaker 2: In those days, now, these are the days in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: This is 1967. Speaker 2: Yeah. '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. These are the days you had a Black Panther Party in Chicago. You had the Communiversity going on at the (unclear) studies, a lot of-- Speaker 1: So I realize--and then I was also the convener of the Black Students Alliance on the campus; all made me eligible for FBI [Federal Bureau of Intelligence] surveillance. And so I know there's video footage of me in the university archives, because one of the professors told me he had watched some of it after he had met me. Yeah, I was a figure to keep track of on the campus, but they also found me quite clean, as they say in those days, so. Speaker 2: Yeah. So this is also the time when Dr. [Martin Luther] King--you were working on your Ph.D. when Dr. King's assassinated. Speaker 1: Yes, I was. Speaker 2: Though, the Chicago riots took place on the West Side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I was. Speaker 2: There was-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Half of the Black Students Alliance took over my apartment with my three other roommates, one of whom was a black Panamanian from Brooklyn [New York]; the other two were white upper middle class from America. So that was quite an interesting experience we all had, 'cause these students--I was their convener there, like, their chairman, and they were mainly undergraduates. There was a woman there--have you heard of Leath Mullings (ph.)? Yeah. Leaf was in that group. She was one of the undergrads there then. Roscoe Giles [also a HistoryMaker] was there. Roscoe was--he was an undergrad in physics, then, who went on to MIT [Massachusetts Institute fo Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But these were some of the smartest kids-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Leath Mulligan-- Speaker 1: --you've ever saw in your life. They were in the first large group of black students admitted by the University of Chicago as a prestige Ivy League caliber institution. Sharp as a tack. And they're the ones that felt they wanted me to be the convener of the alliance as a buffer between them and the black graduate students, most of whom were in sociology and political science, who had two different agendas. The undergrads had a more practical, immediate agenda; was like in the--when the West Side went up in flames after the King assassination, they wanted to be free to get out there to take food and clothing to people. The black graduate students were more interested in theorizing about the coming revolution, the black revolutions. The undergrads weren't interested particularly because it was too abstract for them. The university actually curfewed all the students in the dorms where a lot of the undergrads lived. So that's why the thirty to forty undergrads deposited themselves at my apartment so they would not be hemmed in, and they could have access to things they felt they needed to do. So that was an interesting moment. They disappeared. The administration didn't know where they were. If you were a president of a college and you could not account to the parents of your students where they were, that's a difficult situation. So it took me and one of my chemistry professors to be able to establish a communication with the administration so that they were assured that all was well, and then all was well. Edward Levi was president then. Do you remember who he was? Well, he was also--had been dean of the law school, a very careful legal thinker, but he was [President] Gerald Ford's--President Ford's Attorney General. He handled student--shall we say, uprising in a whole different way than Governor [Ronald] Regan did in California. So when the students took over the administration building at Chicago, Levi simply moved out to another building and said, let him know when you're done, but just stay as long as you want to (laughs). So they eventually came out on their own. California--Regan's technique was "Teargas them." And it just radicalized all the students on the--well, a lot of the students everywhere in the system. So, it was two different administrative approaches that also affected me (laughs), my development. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is--so you were involved in a lot of political activity during the time you were doing intense research as well. Speaker 1: Very deeply, but not as aware of them as I am now in hindsight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I said, "Geez, you were lucky you got your Ph.D." Story_ID: 26328 Speaker 1: So, now, you're out in California now at this point after your Ph.D. [degree], doing a post-doc [postdoctoral fellowship] for the Atomic Energy Commission [AEC], right? Speaker 2: And the laboratory, right, at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. Speaker 1: Okay. UCLA. And, now, '72 [1972], NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] is founded. Were you a part of those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I wasn't [unclear] part of that initial association. I did not hook up with NOBCChE until the early '90s [1990s] when I was teaching at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California], and then I was teaching in the Department of Black Studies. But NOBCChE was a good way to keep in touch with a lot of the chemists. So I was able to meet--oh, gosh--James--he was the chemist who worked with Glenn Seaborg [won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1951]. I think you know who I'm talking about. Speaker 1: Is it James Porter? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Porter. He was the man who worked with Seaborg and actually discovering some of the later elements. He knew how to set up the targets that--and did the analytical chemistry that proved that it was the element Seaborg thought he was dealing with. Speaker 1: Don't know. So, well, at any rate. Now--was Lloyd Ferguson [also a HistoryMaker] out at UCLA then? Speaker 2: He was at Cal State [California State University, Los Angeles]-- Speaker 1: Cal State. Speaker 2: --Cal State University-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of Los Angeles, and he hired me there for a summer. Since after my post-doc, I wasn't getting any bites on permanent faculty positions. All--and there were two possibilities that just went--went by the boards, and those are part of the deep stories of my life. UC [University of California], San Diego [San Diego, California] was--I actually thought I was going to get to go on faculty there for, like, the rest of my life, because I actually interviewed, I--the chemistry department liked me; they liked my art as well as my chemistry. I said, "Oh, that's really a nice situation." So they offered me the assistant professorship, and then it fell through, because there it's a joint system like at Santa Cruz [California]. It's both academic department and a college, and Third College. I don't know if you're aware of Third College. It became the Lumumba-Zapata College. It was the urban experience, third-world college of the day. And the conservative faculty were hitting the ceiling. Speaker 1: Now this is at San Diego State [University]? Speaker 2: UC, San Diego-(simultaneous) Speaker 1: -- (unclear) San Diego (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --in La Jolla [California]. And they were trying to shoot that college down. And you might know Joe--Joseph Watson, who was provost of Third College. That's what they called it then. He was trying to get me there, but that's one of the great sadness of that campus's history, is that the appointment was somehow sabotaged by the tenor, the tremendous struggles. This is 1970-'71 (1971) by that time. We're in the middle of the Black Power Era, and we're in the middle of proper, traditional academic faculties beginning to dig in their heels against the--what they saw as--the, encroachments of black studies on their nice European turf. And, of course, it was started at San Francisco State in 1967. Things were in turmoil at that point, and my position was swallowed up, like, in a black hole. Then one of the professors that I knew at Wisconsin saw what had happened and got--managed to get me an interview at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, called Virginia Tech [Blacksburg, Virginia]. And I interviewed there in May 1971, and it did not happen. It did not go through, and I was disappointed, but they weren't ready. That was too early in Virginia history. That was 1971. I met the then-governor of Virginia thirty years later at a conference, who told me, "Things are much different in the South now than when you interviewed at Virginia Tech." That's when his children--he kept his children in the public schools of Richmond, Virginia, instead of escaping to the white academies that were springing up all over Virginia and North Carolina. So, anyway, now, you know, since then, they've hired Nikki Giovanni [activist, educator, writer, and commentator] and a whole lot of other people. But it was too early for me to be appointed there. Story_ID: 26329 Speaker 1: So, Lloyd Ferguson [also a HistoryMaker] hired me in to teach [at San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], at least, that summer. Speaker 2: Summer of '71 [1971]? Speaker 1: In Summer '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was quite a guy; very practical, down to earth. Every few days he'd ask me, he'd say, "Well, you know, this guy came around looking for high schools teachers." Says, "You interested in teaching high school?" And I said, "No. I'm looking for a university position." So he wouldn't say anything. He'd ask me the next week. Says, "There's this guy, you want to talk to him? He's looking for high school teachers." I said, "No." So I get home that night, I get a call at my apartment and it's this guy. And he says, "Oh, Dr. Ferguson says you're interested in a high school teaching position." I said, "No, I'm not." He said, "Well, at least you can talk to this principal who's interested." And I did. And it's a good thing I did because I got a job, and it was a great job, and it was a cornerstone that made me a teacher that really helped--started me to learning the art of actual teaching, for a year at Duarte High School, about ten miles east of Pasadena, California. And that was the-- Speaker 2: What was the name of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: D-u, capital D-u-- Speaker 2: D-u-- Speaker 1: --a-r-t-e. Duarte. Speaker 2: Duarte. Speaker 1: Near the City of Hope Medical Center. And that principal was looking not only for an adept chemistry teacher, but someone who could also teach biology and help bring intergroup harmony, racial harmony to that school, which had race riots faithfully every spring. And so that year was the first year it did not have race riots. And it was due by (unclear) of the new personalities that he'd brought in there. Speaker 2: Did you--what did you do to kind of ease the tensions? Speaker 1: You know what, it wasn't even about that. It was about being the presence that I was, along with the other teachers. It formed a whole new atmosphere at that school. Students suddenly started focusing on those new people, on me. I became, like, a new, like a--a young magnet, a new sun for them to revolve around. I said, "This guy is interesting. He's weird, but he's interesting." So it's like we knew teachers captured the imagination of the students, and they lost interest in rioting. Speaker 2: Okay. So in 19--so you taught at Duarte for how long? Speaker 1: Just one year. Speaker 2: Just one year. Okay. Speaker 1: And in the middle of that year, I got an offer to teach at the California Polytechnic State [University], San Luis Obispo [California], which is on the coast halfway between Los Angeles [California] and San Francisco. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they had a resignation of someone, and I had visited there on the spring break, and they kept my application and resume on file. They took me to lunch to meet faculty, and that was the magic point. They weren't expecting this resignation. The chair called me in two weeks and said, "You still interested in that position? We had a resignation we weren't expecting in an area you would teach well in." So that's how I got on there...