 Story_ID: 633193 Speaker 1: So my name is [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment, and I am the interviewer for this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] session. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Will you please state your name, sir? Speaker 2: My name (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Including your middle name? Speaker 2: My name is Romance Leonard Watson [HistoryMaker Romance Watson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Will you please spell your name for me? Speaker 2: R-O-M-A-N-C-E, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, W-A-T-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And the date of your birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: January 4, 1930 here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County]. Speaker 1: Which hospital? Speaker 2: Cook County Hospital. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 1, 2012. Speaker 1: And will you please give the location of this interview today, the address? Speaker 2: 1900 South on Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am retired. Speaker 1: What was your occupation then? Speaker 2: Transportation company in Philadelphia called SEPTA, Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority. Speaker 1: And you retired in what position? Speaker 2: I was an information agent. I moved up from a bus driver to supervisor. I didn't want to stay in supervision so I wanted to go inside. So, they asked me if I would become an information agent for them and I retired in that position. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your other occupation? Speaker 2: Oh, that's singing, playing for the choirs and whatnot at my church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Holy Temple Church of God in Christ in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, very good. Story_ID: 633194 Speaker 1: Now we just wanna start with a, a few questions along the People magazine (laughter) kind of thing or even a Jet magazine kind of question. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? All foods, oh I love to eat (laughter), barbecue; fried chicken. I can't find any, anybody in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who can fry chicken like these Chicago [Illinois] folk, my sisters and my mother [Laura Watson]. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring and summer. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I haven't been on a vacation in I don't know how long, but I would love to go to Tahiti, which I've never done though (laughter). Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me, please. Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite phrase or saying or motto? Speaker 2: It is what it is. Story_ID: 633195 Speaker 1: As you can imagine the mission--with the mission of The HistoryMakers, we want all the details of your life that you can remember. You are a history maker. Speaker 2: God bless you. Speaker 1: So please tell me about your mother and everything you can remember? Her name, if you would spell it for me and the things that you remember about your mother, and where she was born, where her family was from, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: My mother was born in Atlanta, Georgia. Her name is Laura, Laura Wat- Laura Strong was her maiden name. L-A-U-R-A (cough). Pardon me, pardon me please. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Laura Watson, L-A-U-R-A, W-A-T-S-O-N [Laura Watson]. She mothered eleven children and she was a homemaker of course. That was my baby, I use to call her my baby, and I had started singing at the age of three. We were members of All Nations Pentecostal Church [Chicago, Illinois], Mother Lucy Smith [Lucy Madden Smith] was the pastor, founder and pastor and all of my family sang on the choirs. They were ushers, musicians and by the time I came along, and being in a musical family I just sang along with it and whatnot and they use to put me up on a chair in front of the microphone to sing at church. We broadcast every Sunday night from ten o'clock to eleven o'clock. We would then after our services there at All Nations, we would go over to 44th Street Baptist Church [New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], Reverend Thurston's [Elijah Thurston] church and from there we would go over to First Church of Deliverance [Chicago, Illinois], Reverend Clarence Cobbs [Clarence H. Cobbs] was the minster there. Now, from what I can remember we had a request hour where folk would call in and request various songs and they would request that I would sing certain songs. I was on a junior choir and my family group we sang--the Watson Singers. We sang along with all the greats: Mahalia Jackson, Robert Anderson, Willie Webb, Albertina Walker, Woodrow Walker and Gloria Griffin; all the greats. And we had a wonderful, wonderful time and there were concerts that we would go on. There'd be different venues that we would all meet and then after we, after we would sing and praise the Lord and have a wonderful time, we'd go to someplace to have something to eat and whatnot, like Gladys' [Gladys' Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois] over on Indiana Avenue. Oh, those were the days, those were the days. Speaker 2: And you did this with your family up to what age? Speaker 1: Up until the time I left to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 633196 Speaker 1: I moved to Philadelphia. Now, I started traveling with the Roberta Martin Singers back in 1949. We lived at 430 East 42nd Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Roberta Martin had a house on Bowen Avenue, which was just across from a vacant lot there in back of our house and she was the first woman I can remember driving a car. She was--oh, she had a 1940 Cadillac. And a lot of times I would sit on my back porch waiting to get a glimpse of Roberta Martin, and when she would drive up I would yell all across that alley and across that back lot, "Hi Ms. Martin!" And she would look up and wave back to me and say, "Hi, Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson]." Never knowing, never knowing that she wanted me to be a member of her famous group. Well, leading up to that time in 1949 is when she called me and asked me to come over and sing something for her. She was living in the 5400 block of Michigan Avenue, and I went over, Eugene Smith was there, and she asked me to, and she said, "And I've heard you sing before and whatnot, but I want you to sing this for me." I forget what it was, but I sang the song for her and she said, "Oh, what a wonderful tenor voice he has, Eugene." She said, "Would you like to be a member of my group?" I said, "Ma'am?" She said, "I mean it: would you like to be a Roberta Martin Singer?" I said, "Yes ma'am, yes ma'am" (laughter). I went back home and was telling my, my parents [Laura Watson and Amos Watson] and my sisters and all. They didn't like it. "Well, why would you want to go with Roberta Martin Singers and whatnot when we're trying to sing and whatnot and we want to travel too?" But, as the Lord would have it that came to fruition and I became a Robert Martin Singer in 1949. I started traveling with them in 1950 and we traveled the South: Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia. We would go in her car and during our travels every Easter season from Palm Sunday to Easter Monday, we would have a revival at the Mount Carmel Baptist Church in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Reverend D.W. Hoggard was the pastor of the church there, and we would go every year and as it were, I fell in love with the pastor's daughter and likewise she with me and I went into the [U.S.] Army in 1951, traveled all over Korea and Japan entertaining the troops and we corresponded back and forth, Phyllis [Phyllis Hoggard Watson] and I. That was my wife, that's my wife's name, Phyllis, and in 1955 is when we got married. Story_ID: 633197 Speaker 1: I just wanna stop you right there because we--I wanna go back. Speaker 2: Oh, indeed. Speaker 1: Okay, and thank you this is wonderful. I wanna go back and get more of your childhood and your mother's family. Speaker 2: Gotcha. Speaker 1: And then I wanna get about your father's family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then a little more details about your childhood and then we'll come back-- Speaker 2: All righty. Speaker 1: --to this phase. So, your mother [Laura Watson], she grew up in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, she grew up in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know how--anything about her family? Speaker 2: Well, she was-- Speaker 1: Did you meet your grandparents, and? Speaker 2: She was half Blackfoot Indian [Native American] and Daddy [Amos Watson] met her--I, I'm just going by what all the older--her sisters would tell us and whatnot, and they did not want them to get married so he ran away with her and brought her to Chicago. Dad--my mother's--I can remember back when I was three and a half or four. I can, now, now I'm good at going back. People say, "You don't remember that." I say, "Yes I do remember." My mother took, took us back down to Greenwood, South Carolina, my sister Floriene [Floriene Watson Willis] and I was four, I think I was four and I remember my grandfather killing a hog, slaughtering a hog and they said, "Oh, Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson], come on you can't remember back that far." I said well yes I do, I remember, it's very vivid in my mind seeing the--my grandfather slaughter that hog. And from that time coming back to Chicago, mother had multiple myeloma and she was, you know she was rather sickly and whatnot and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So, let's start with your mother again and what remembrances you have of her and her family? Speaker 2: I don't remember too much about where Mother--this is lore, and they say that Mother was half Blackfoot Indian, and that when Daddy met her he fell in love with her and she with him and he brought her to Chicago where they started raising a family. And Mother was--oh, that was my baby. She since--you know we--they'd had, had five children before I came along, five girls, so Daddy wanted a boy. So, when I came in 1930 that was the joy of, of their lives at that time. So I was considered her baby. Story_ID: 633198 Speaker 1: Daddy's [Amos Watson] side of the family, I remember him saying something about when they were in Africa, my great-great-great-grandfather how they were lured onto the ships and--with music and whatnot and when they got as many on the ship as they wanted, then they would leave the shores and pull out to sea and some of the, some of the Africans could not swim, but they didn't want to be enslaved so they jumped overboard to go back. And I remember Daddy saying something about they arrived in Atlanta [Georgia], and he said that their slave owner, Mr. Stevenson [ph.] had my great-great-grandfather, they used him for studying purposes and Daddy came--when Daddy was born, then they brought him--he came to Chicago [Illinois]--no, Atlanta I'm sorry, please forgive me, Atlanta and from there to Chicago. They came to Chicago I think in 1919, and they started raising a family there. And there's not too much, (clears throat) excuse me, not too much more that I know about my father or mother's [Laura Watson] side of the family-- Speaker 2: Do you-- Speaker 1: --other than that. Speaker 2: Do you recall which country in Africa, what part of Africa? Speaker 1: No, ma'am. Speaker 2: No. You just don't-- Speaker 1: No, ma'am. Speaker 2: --just figured you'd have that story to tell. Story_ID: 633199 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Laura Watson] and father met in Ch- in Georgia? Speaker 2: In Georgia, yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And then they came to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: And then he moved to Chicago with her, yes. Speaker 1: What part of Chicago did your family live in and from your earliest remembrances and, and some of the things you remember about your childhood? Speaker 2: The earliest-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): You can ask the question, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): But I just need to establish where we, you know in the--just take your time at the beginning, but just establish things if you can. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we're rolling. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, so let's, let's get your father's name to make sure--and could you spell that for me? Speaker 1: Yes, his name is Amos Leonard Watson: A-M-O-S, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N [Amos Watson]. Speaker 2: And he grew up in what city, what state? Speaker 1: In Atlanta [Georgia] and Greenwood, South Carolina. Speaker 2: And he, he met your mother where? Speaker 1: In, in Atlanta. Speaker 2: In Atlanta. Speaker 1: I do believe in Atlanta and during the interim between Atlanta and Greenwood, South Carolina, I don't know how they, they managed that, but most of our family is from Greenwood, South Carolina. Speaker 2: And where again did your mother again grow up? Speaker 1: In Atlanta. Speaker 2: In Atlanta? Speaker 1: In Atlanta, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And they met in Atlanta? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Okay. And if you'll continue then with--you're saying they, they met and moved to Chicago? Speaker 1: They moved to Chicago, yes, where they raised their family, started raising their family (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And why did they move to Chicago? Do you know why? Speaker 1: For a better life. Speaker 2: Okay. And, so you have a number of siblings, how many siblings do you have and can you give their names and perhaps the chronological order in which they were born? Speaker 1: Yes. There were seven girls and four boys. Starting with (cough) Canary [ph.], my sister Canary. Then my brother Isaac [Isaac Watson], then came my sister Ophelia [Ophelia Watson] and then my brother Amos, Jr., he later changed his name to Wardell because he didn't like the--being teased as a kid his name being Amos they would refer to 'Amos 'n' Andy' and he did not like that at all so he changed his name to Wardell, Wardell A. Watson. After Wardell became--there's Alice [Alice Watson]. After Alice, Vivienne [Vivienne Watson Vaughn]. After Vivienne, Sylvia [Sylvia Watson], Loretta [Loretta Watson], Floriene [Floriene Watson Willis], then Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson] and my baby brother Irvin [Irvin Watson]. Speaker 2: Now how do you spell the Loriene? Speaker 1: Floriene? Speaker 2: Floriene. Floriene: F-L-O-R-I-E-N-E. Speaker 2: And are any of your siblings still with us today? Speaker 1: Yes, I have two sisters, one in California, Floriene; and Vivienne, she's in a nursing home, Crestwood nursing home [Symphony of Crestwood, Chicago, Illinois]. That's the one I come every year to see, she's ninety-one; and myself, there are three of us left out of eleven. Speaker 2: Did either of your siblings pursue any singing career? Speaker 1: All of were musically inclined. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Daddy, he bought two pianos, one for upstairs and one for downstairs at our resident, and we would practice and we would sing. During the hot summers, we would raise the windows and we'd rehearse and folk would stand outside the house listening to us singing and whatnot and that's how, that's how we met Albertina Walker. She and Woodrow Walker, no relationship, no relation. They would come by our house and they wanted to come in and sing with us. Story_ID: 633200 Speaker 1: What was it like growing up with your family and--in Chicago [Illinois] and what neighborhood were you in? Did your family-- Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Earliest memory. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Earliest memory. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We--on the South Side of Chicago, 42nd and South Park [South Parkway] it was called at that time, it is now Martin Luther King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], 430 East 42nd Street, and Daddy [Amos Watson] was a laborer. And-- Speaker 1: And what kind of work did he do now? You said laborer? Speaker 2: He was a laborer doing the--building the bridges over the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive], he helped to put that up and some of the buildings downtown and he helped to--well he worked on those too. Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories? I know you mentioned at three years old you were singing. What are--did you remember anything before that? If not, tell about your earliest memories, whether that was singing or playing or with your mother [Laura Watson]? Speaker 2: Well we all played piano and Daddy got the instruments for us too. We had our own little Watson band so to speak, saxophone, trumpet, drums, and piano. And (clears throat) then the rest of the singers, my sister, Floriene [Floriene Watson Willis], Vivienne [Vivienne Watson Vaughn], Sylvia [Sylvia Watson] was our pianist, Alice [Alice Watson], Irvin [Irvin Watson], Daddy and myself, we were the Watson Singers and we would travel around to various churches singing and whatnot and we met all the greats. Speaker 1: How old were you when you started doing that? Speaker 2: Four? Yes, I was four. Speaker 1: You remember singing? Speaker 2: I remember singing at four. Yes. Now, the way I remember singing that we, we were the start of the Sallie Martin/Thomas A. Dorsey singing group when he lived, Sallie Martin lived on 40th Street in the 400 block of East 40th Street. My sisters would take us over there and Sallie Martin and he would rehearse us. He would come out with his accordion, and he would trick us a lot of times and he would bellow that, that accordion behind us (makes sound) and scare us and we'd all laugh and what not, but that was the beginning of when I remember really singing. Wanting to travel and sing, wanting to be with Sallie Martin and Thomas A. Dorsey. But our minister, our pastor, Elder Lucy Smith [Lucy Madden Smith] did not want us to, to travel. She wanted us to be there in her church [All Nations Pentecostal Church, Chicago, Illinois], in her aggregation. So, we stayed--we did not stay too long with them. I think it was about a year that--nine months to a year that we stayed with Sallie Martin and Thomas A. Dorsey. Speaker 1: And how old were you during this period? Speaker 2: At that time I was f- I was four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And yes, I was four years old at that time. Story_ID: 633201 Speaker 1: What were the sounds or the smells of your childhood in your neighborhood and the churches at your home? Any remembrances about that, or was it--music (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sounds? Musical sounds, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I grew up with music. I knew nothing but music at that time, and then I started, started school, Felsenthal [Herman Felsenthal Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was my first school, kindergarten through fifth, fifth grade and then they built a new school, Fuller [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and they transferred us out of Felsenthal into Fuller. And during that time I was entertaining even then the kids in school and the teachers would have us go to assembly and I would sing the national anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] and maybe play a little something on the piano and sing. Speaker 1: Did you take piano lessons, or? Speaker 2: I didn't take piano lessons until I became twelve, and there was a music teacher across the street from us, a Mr. Stewart [ph.], and he was giving lessons for twenty-five cents an hour. Can you imagine twenty-five cents an hour for music lessons (laughter)? And (clears throat) and I didn't--now, Mr. Mr. Stewart moved out of the neighborhood. I did not want to go all the way out to where his house was and I think he moved out to 63rd Street somewhere, and Daddy [Amos Watson] would give me a dime to put in the bus, or give me a dime for carfare, a nickel going and a nickel coming back. I would spend that dime saying I took my lessons and whatnot, and I did not take the lessons. So, Daddy found out I was not going to music lessons so he stopped the music lessons. So, everything after that was playing by ear. And I remember entertain- (clears throat) one day my sister brought Nat King Cole by the house and he lived in the next block (simultaneous). Story_ID: 633202 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Let's go back to age four, and let's go back to what Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment] was asking are sights, smells and sounds. So, which, what is the address you're at, at age four? Speaker 2: 430 East 42nd Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Four- okay, and this is where we have--around you are who? You mentioned--who are some of the neighbors on the block? You mentioned? Speaker 2: Mr. Stewart [ph.], who was across the street, he was a schoolteacher and a music teacher. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, and then who is, is Mrs. Martin [Roberta Martin] behind you? Speaker 2: She's behind me on Bowen Avenue. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, she's behind you. And then there's someone else, it's--who's also there. Who are some of the other neighbors? Are those the two most critical neighbors? Speaker 2: The Fryes [ph.] who were next door to us at 432--I can remember Bill, Bill Frye [ph.], he complained to my father [Amos Watson] that we called him Bill and named our dog Mr. Rover, and he said (laughter), "They're calling me Bill and call the dog Mr. Rover." And up in the next block, not up in the next block but further up on--in our block, in the 400 block were the, were the Barretts, Delois Barrett Campbell and her sisters [Billie Barrett GreenBey and Rodessa Barrett Porter] and their family. And in the 500 block, Nat King Cole and his family were staying on 42nd Street. He went to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], graduated from there with my sister and--my sister Alice [Alice Watson] and that's, that's about the most prominent of neighbors that we had. Story_ID: 633203 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): But there's a lot of music around, so I want (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh (unclear). Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): A lot of music, so I wanna ask you: sights, smells and sounds growing up? So, I--let's go to sights first. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So tell me what are the sights that you remember? Speaker 2: Sights. On the corner of South Park and 42nd Street is the Morris Cleaners [ph.]. My brother Isaac [Isaac Watson] was a presser and then my brother Wardell [Wardell A. Watson] worked in the, in the cleaners also with him. Diagonally across the street was the Pekin Cleaners [Chicago, Illinois], another cleaner. Al Benson, oh lord, Al Benson was on radio back in those days: "Bring you clothes to Leo Rose [ph.]." (Laughter) I remember we use to make fun of his accent at that time. On the next corner, down, 41st [Street] and South Park, was the Metropolitan Church [Metropolitan Community Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Oh, lord the 400 Liquors [ph.] at 43rd [Street] and South Parkway [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. The Tyson Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]--bringing back memories, (unclear) bringing back memories--and the Star Theater, which was the 400 block of 43rd Street where the--as kids we would sneak in the movies, one would pay ten cents to get in and then at the exit (laughter) we'd open up the door and we'd go in. Oh, we'd sit up in the balcony there. It's a church now [God's House of All Nations, Chicago, Illinois], and I had the fortune of meeting one of my dear friends who's a music teacher, Omega Dubose [ph.] is her name and her church is in where the Star Theater used to be and I had the opportunity to go up in that balcony and sit with--on a bench where there--they have replaced it of course, and it just brought back such memories, such flooding memories back in those days. I can remember also the Indiana Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] between Prairie [Avenue] and Indiana [Avenue]. I can remember the Rock [ph.]--oh, no, that's not there. I can't think of the other theater that was there. Sights, sights, I can't think of too many more sights that I would-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): That's, that's good. What, now let's go to smells? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. The smells of the stockyards, that would permeate the neighborhoods back in those days. Smells of coal because everybody was burning, burning coal at that time. Smells. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds. Musical sounds in the neighborhood; sounds of helicopters going over the, the houses and we would, we would be awestruck to see one going over. Not too many other sounds that I can recall, just, just the everyday, everyday sounds: the buses, the cabs, the horns, the milkman going by in the morning. The horse drawn milk--the Bowman milk company [Bowman Dairy Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Oh, my goodness, there are trucks going by, the coal trucks and the, the sounds that they would make because of the engines that they had in there. Oh, we used to dance to the four cylinder engines that would puff by. They would keep rhythm. Story_ID: 633204 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So in your household, can you describe it to me? Like what is happening that you know you have a relatively large family, but I'm sure there are other large families, you know in the neighborhood, but describe an average day for me, sir? Speaker 2: An average day? Oh. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): What time are you waking up? Speaker 2: At--to get, go to school of course I had to wake up around seven, seven o'clock in the morning, go down and have breakfast, grits and eggs, toast, milk, cornflakes. Get up and go to school. And during the wintertime here in Chicago [Illinois] it was something, the snowdrifts. And talking about how they're closing schools for a couples of inches of snow? When we had to trudge to school when the snowdrifts were over the cars, and that, that would, that was a big memory that stuck in my mind. The (clears throat) the winters that we had here in Chicago, meeting my friends over on Bowen Avenue. They couldn't keep me off of Bowen Avenue. Staying around there and playing, we would play out in the back, in the back alleys. We'd play baseball. And during the time when I was coming up there weren't too many boys on the street, so I had to pay the girls games. I was proficient at jacks, hop scotch, Double Dutch, rock school. Oh, those, those were my, those were memories, those were pleasant memories back in the day. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, did you have a nickname in the family. Did--was your family one of nicknames? Speaker 2: Yes I was, my nick- my nickname was Ro. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): And-- Speaker 2: R-O, and then when I went into the [U.S. military] service and I saw some guy's name who was Boudreaux [ph.] and saw how that last--Reaux was spelled R-E-A-U-X, then I adopted that as Reaux for my nickname, yeah. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, what were you like as a young, a young boy? Were you? Speaker 2: Mischievous. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So how did that--how, how, how did you? Speaker 2: Always getting into trouble (unclear). At that time, I wasn't a leader; I was a follower. And I would just, oh they would get me to do many things, climbing trees, getting stuck up in the trees, having to call for my family to come get me out of the tree. Oh, geez. I'm going over to the lake [Lake Michigan], we'd walk over to the lake and to swim, get in the water, oh lord, we'd (unclear)--get together and get a couple of pennies together and we'd go and buy ten cents worth of bologna and get some, some crackers and a big bottle of pop (laughter). And we'd make a day of it going over--ditching school with three of my best friends. Two, two were next door and one had lived over on Bowen Avenue, and we just did the, the mischie- mischievous things that we thought we were, were getting away with, but it wasn't as much as the kids today are just, are getting into but we just loved going over to 31st--39th Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois] is where we would go, crossing the railroad tracks, daring one another, run across the tracks and the trains are coming and--oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, now what age are we talking about now? Speaker 2: We're talking about twelve-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, twelve. Speaker 2: --to-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay you--so at twelve, so I--what, your birth year is--I don't (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen thirty [1930]. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So 1930 so we're talking about 1942 in the early 1940s, okay. Story_ID: 633205 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Where do you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I started at Felsenthal [Herman Felsenthal Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was at Calumet [Avenue], between 41st [Street] and 42nd and then at the, the fifth grade they transferred us over to Fuller [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was at St. Lawrence [Avenue] and 42nd Street. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): And now the schools that you're going to, so I know academics are not your thing really, you know, but I want--and I know that music is around you all the time, so what, what is your sort of memory? Was there a teacher that you liked or do you remember anything about elementary school that you'd like to sort of share? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember I used to--(clears throat) what was her name? My favorite teacher, Mrs. Schottenfeld [ph.] was her name. Daddy [Amos Watson] would go a lot of times--we had a garden out at 100--110th [Street] and Halsted [Avenue] before it was built up. We had a victory garden so to speak and I use to take her to- (laughter), I use to take her tomatoes from the garden and whatnot. Daddy would buy apples by the bushels. I would take her apples, oh. And one of my real mischiefs, my sister had a like a peacock pen and I wrapped that peacock pen in some tissue paper and took that and gave it to Mrs. Schottenfeld (laughter) and she called, she called my house, my family and whatnot and told them what I had done so naturally my mother [Laura Watson] sent my sister to retrieve the pen and me and go back home and I, I did get a whipping. Now we didn't call it spankings in those--we got a whipping, and then more than a whipping was a, was beating, and more than a beating was the killing, and you talk about child abuse, now that was, that was child abuse back in those days, but I, I'm so thankful for the upbringing that I had, really I am. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So would they tell you to go get your own switches? Speaker 2: Ah! Off the tree. I'd bring a little skimpy one back, Daddy'd say, "No, get me another." He also had a razor strap that was built and it had a ball on the end of it and that's what he would hold onto to whip us with and Daddy would put, put your head between his knees and clamp onto your head and whip you. Oh, those were the days. Mother on the other hand would pick up something, whatever was handy if you were doing something and whatnot and (gesture) throw it, throw it at you or hit you with it. I can remember one time Floriene [Floriene Watson Willis], my sister, was showing her oats, talking back at Mother, and Mother picked up a spoon, the long handle ladle spoon that she use to make cakes with and she threw that and hit Floriene in the head with it and whatnot. Oh, those were the days. You're talking--oh, I tell you. But growing up in that house, growing up in 430 [430 East 42nd Street, Chicago, Illinois] was, was wonderful. Story_ID: 633206 Speaker 1: I would play the piano, I would pick out tunes, Irvin [Irvin Watson], my younger brother, we would play duets on the piano. Sometimes Floriene [Floriene Watson Willis] would come in and we'd be a threesome on the, on the piano and whatnot, picking out tunes and whatnot. My brother Wardell [Wardell A. Watson], he would--he was the, the one that was more proficient in musical instruments. He played the pi- he played the piano, he played the drums at church too. He played the trumpet and the trombone and the saxophone. That's when I started playing the saxophone. I loved the saxophone. Daddy [Amos Watson] would come home from work, we'd all be singing. Daddy'd come up and he'd sing along with us and we would have a joyous time. Mother [Laura Watson] could sing, Mother had a voice out of this world and she was on the, on the radio choir and the senior choir at, at church. I can remember her singing and I used to love just, just sit and look at her while she was singing up in the choir. I met--during that time I met James Cleveland. He was playing for-- Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): At what time, you're at twelve (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is--I'm at twe- I'm at twelve, I'm at twelve now. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): You're twelve when you meet James Cleveland? Speaker 1: When I meet James Cleveland, he was playing for--her last name was, was Butts, B-U-T-T-S [Magnolia Lewis Butts]; he was playing for her group. And I was envious of James Cleveland because he could really riff, he could play the piano and I was picking tunes out on the piano and what not. They came, they had a pro- (clears throat) pardon me, they had a program at our church, at All Nations and he, he was playing for her group. Later on--well, I'm not gonna jump too far ahead. But-- Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): No, let's, let's--okay, I don't wanna jump too far ahead. So, you meet him then. But now the church name is All Nations-- Speaker 1: All Nations Pentecostal Church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): --Pentecostal Church, okay. And had your parents always been Pentecostal? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): They have? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So-- Speaker 1: When we had the church over on Eberhart [Avenue], my sister Ophelia [Ophelia Watson] was the first one to go to her revivals and she was telling how wonderful the, how wonderful the services were. She's-- Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, so if Ophelia was the first one to go to the revivals, Ophelia's--how old, which--where did she fit in the chain? Speaker 1: Canary [ph.], Isaac [Isaac Watson], Wardell, Ophelia, she was the fourth child. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): She was the fourth, so who--but you're Pentecostal but no one had been to the Pentecostal revivals? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Or are you Baptist? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, you're Pentecostal? Speaker 1: I'm Pentecostal. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. Okay so can we, I wanna ask you, there are several questions I have because-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): --you have a lot of instruments and you had two pianos. That's a lot, that's a lot of money to buy all those things right? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Yes. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So who else in the neighborhood has two pianos? Speaker 1: Nobody that I could think of other, other than Mr. Stewart [ph.], he had a piano. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Mr. Stewart was next-- Speaker 1: That--the teacher that lived across the street. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): That teacher across the street? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. So how were you getting the--all these instruments? Speaker 1: Daddy, from, from Daddy working and Wardell working and my brother Isaac, they all worked down at the cleaners [Morris Cleaners (ph.)], and he saw that we were interested in music and my older brothers also saw, you know they were interested in music. So, that's why we got the--well, they were all secondhand of course, secondhand instruments and all. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): But even secondhand, that's a lot you know 'cause even just the piano in the household. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): You know, a lot of households--. So what was your relationship, or your father's relationship with the, the piano teacher? Mr. is it Watson? Mr.-- Speaker 1: Mr. Stewart? Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): --Stewart, across the street. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): What is his relationship with him? Speaker 1: Just neighbors. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Just neighbors, okay. So they didn't collaborate or anything like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. No. Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. Story_ID: 633207 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): What song, if you could tell me what song reminds you of your family getting together and you know and singing? What song if you could think of, a song that was a favorite? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, 'Over in Glory,' (makes sounds) I can't remember the words. (Makes sounds) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): (Simultaneous) I was gonna ask you to sing it for me. Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember that-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. Speaker 2: --to do it. Another was 'I'll Fly Away' of course that was a favorite of ours. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Can you sing a little bit of that for me? Speaker 2: (Clears throat) (singing) "Some glad morning when this life is o'er, I'll fly away; To a home on God's celestial shore, I'll fly away, children, I'll fly away. Children, I'll fly away. (Background noise) Oh Glory I'll fly away; When I die, Hallelujah, by and by, I'll fly away." And this time of morning my voice isn't as clear as it should be. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): No, no it's fine 'cause that reminds me of growing up. So, so the thing is that you're, you get together, is it singing almost every day or is it singing at rehearsals at church [All Nations Pentecostal Church, Chicago, Illinois], or--when are we singing? Speaker 2: Singing whenever, but whenever the moment strikes you. We were just surrounded by music. What more can I tell you? They used to stand me up a, on a, on a chair or a stool in front of the microphone to sing. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, this--you're, you're younger then. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm younger (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): (Simultaneous) Is this age four that you're talking? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Five, age four or five? Speaker 2: Grow- growing on up in the church and whatnot. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. Story_ID: 633208 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, what was an average church service? Can you talk about--now who was the minister [of All Nations Pentecostal Church, Chicago, Illinois] again? Speaker 2: Mother Lucy Smith [Lucy Madden Smith]. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Mother Lucy Smith, so you have you know 'cause churches that have female ministers a lot of times that's not always happens, but she was a well known minister I think as I remember here in Chicago [Illinois], so how were her services? Speaker 2: Spirit filled and whatnot and getting happing clapping and whatnot and filled with the spirit, shouting, (unclear) preaching was--I wasn't up on preaching that much but, it's, it's--services were great, were great. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): By laying on her--speaking in tongues? Speaker 2: Speaking--yes ma'am, yes ma'am. And there was Mother Dixon [ph.] I can remember. She would speak in tongues and Elder Lucy Smith would interpret what she, what she was saying. What she would go back and from what I remember. Mother Dixon was (makes sounds). And Mother Lucy Smith would interpret what the--what she had just said. "My people, oh my people, you're this and you're that and you should do this and oh." And we would be awe struck when she would do that. Story_ID: 633209 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, on one hand, so really you know when I hear you speaking I almost hear the gospel version of, of--well I mean I could say the gospel version of doo wop, I could say the gospel version of Motown [Motown Records]; it's that there's music all around and it's within blocks and people you're singing, you're going around. So, so the Watson Singers you are from age four to what age are you performing around, and are there competitions? You know like churches? You know do you get asked by ministers-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): --to come in? Yes: St. Luke's [St. Luke Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]; 44th Street Baptist Church [New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]; and, oh lord, Liberty, Liberty Baptist Church [Liberty Baptist Church of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Now, Lucy, who was in the Roberta Martin Singers, who was our pianist after Roberta stopped playing for us--she was running the music store [Roberta Martin Studio of Music, Chicago, Illinois]. She had a music store on 43rd Street between Michigan [Avenue] and Washington--Wabash [Avenue] and she was taking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): (Simultaneous) You're talking about Mother Lucy [Lucy Madden Smith]? No, a different Lucy? Speaker 2: No, her granddaughter. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Her granddaughter. Speaker 2: Little Lucy they'd call her, Lucy Matthews [Lucy Smith Collier] was her name, and she--I don't want to get too far ahead of myself since we are in a--the younger box here. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): I'm fine in the twelve year old period. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, that's where I am. Speaker 2: All righty, twelve year old period was singing with the--with my, my family group. We would travel to Detroit [Michigan]; we'd go to St. Louis [Missouri] and whatnot. There was a reverend--I can't think of his name now. He was our sponsor and he would take us various places to sing and we would make a little change. Sometimes only twenty dollars you know, but that was, oh, that was some money back in the day, that was some money back in the day. What can I remember more about? Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, so what are the groups and organizations, I mean the other musical groups that you're looking up to, 'cause you know you talked about seeing James Cleveland and you know he had better command on the piano-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): --than you, but you know, but what are the groups that are like the real groups? You know happening and are you hearing about groups like you know like The Drinkards [The Drinkard Singers]--is it, was it The Drink-? Speaker 2: Yeah, The Drinkards. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): The Drinkards. Speaker 2: Out of Newark, New Jersey. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): New Jersey. Speaker 2: Yes, we collaborated with them also, that's the group of which--who was the girl that just passed away? Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Whitney Houston (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whitney Houston; that was her family. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): And that was Dionne Warwick's family. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick, yes, yes. And the Willie Webb Singers, the Robert Anderson Singers, Mahalia Jackson, the Ward Singers, The Davis Sisters out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the Wards and The Davis Sisters out of Philadelphia, and we would collaborate with them on some concerts and whatnot at various times, but this was with the Roberta Martin Singers. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay, but so you became affiliated with Roberta Martin then what year? How old are you then? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-nine [1949], nineteen years old. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): You're nineteen years old (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Okay. Story_ID: 633210 Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Let's go into the period between twelve and nineteen. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So how, so in that period of time I wanna know also what high school because I knew, you know I heard the elementary school and then you went to? Speaker 2: To Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Wen- oh, yes, that's right you went to Wen- so, Wendell Phillips starts in ninth or tenth grade? Back then it was tenth grade I bet. Speaker 2: Eighth, after eighth grade then you would go to-- Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Wendell Phillips? Speaker 2: --high school; go to Wendell Phillips. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): I see, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So, when you're at Wendell Phillips, what is Wendell--oh, what is Wendell Phillips known for? Speaker 2: They were known for football at that time, Buddy Young, he was on the football team, one of the fastest running backs that (unclear), that Wendell Phillips had at that time. And I was in the music class, Mrs., Ms. Burke. Ms. Burke was her--in the music room 313 at Wendell Phillips. I was always in the music room, never in my class (laughter), singing and playing and entertaining, oh, gosh. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): So was sh- were you, were you a favorite of hers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON): Because by this time you're pretty--I mean you're experienced? Speaker 2: Well they had--when they would have assemblies and whatnot I was always called upon you know to sing the national anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] and to "Do something, Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson]. Do something. Sing, sing something, sing--," and I would sing whatever was popular back in the day and whatnot. Story_ID: 633211 Speaker 1: So, we're talking about your high school years when you mentioned what was going on at, at Wendell Phillips at the time. Did you enjoy your years at Wendell Phillips? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes. Girl crazy then, and being known for singing over the radio, over the broadcasts at Mother Lucy Smith's [Lucy Madden Smith] church [All Nations Pentecostal Church, Chicago, Illinois], and also being musically inclined, being asked you know to participate in the, in the festivals that we had there and the assemblies. And I was a favorite of Ms. Burke who was the music, who was the music director, music teacher there at Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and everybody remarked, "Oh, what a voice he's got on him. Oh, let's use him for this and let's use him for that." Forgetting my academic studies and all like that you know and then I became a cheerleader for the football team and for the basketball team. I just loved the limelight, loved being, loved being seen (laughter). Speaker 1: Was it considered unusual for a young man to be a cheerleader and obviously, you were a star at your school? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: 'Cause it was all girls at that time, but Ms. Laws [ph.] who was the gym teacher for the, here for the girls and whatnot, I talked her into letting me be a cheerleader and whatnot to help with the pyramids and flipping the girls, and I was very athletic at the time anyhow. I could do flips without, without my hands; I could flip in the air and back flip and all that. But. Speaker 1: But had there been any male cheerleaders at Wendell Phillips (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no ma'am. Speaker 1: You were the first? Speaker 2: I was the first. Speaker 1: And you volunteered? You offered your services? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Do you remember a girlfriend back during that time? Speaker 2: How many (laughter)? Yes, I can remember it back during the day, yeah. God bless, god bless (unclear), oh lord. Speaker 1: And you were still performing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And with your family? Speaker 2: With my family group [Watson Singers], yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. At that time-- Speaker 2: And still singing over the broadcasts-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and whatnot, yes. Speaker 1: And were they weekly broadcasts? Speaker 2: Weekly broadcasts, yes ma'am every Sunday night. Story_ID: 633212 Speaker 1: This period at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], can you recall any other of your classmates during that time? Maybe they weren't in the same grade with you, but any other well known people that might have come out of that, that school during your period? Speaker 2: The, the one that out- the outstanding one of course was Buddy Young. They had a, they had a few others that came out of Wendell Phillips, I can't recall who they were at the time. Speaker 1: Who was your best friend at that time? Speaker 2: Clarence [ph.]--oh, I can't think of Clarence's last name now. Speaker 1: Was he in music or? Speaker 2: No, he was just, he was just a running buddy through high school, yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about your--the music classes and you mentioned your music teacher. You had a good relationship? Speaker 2: Yes, we had a good relationship and she---a lot of times she would-- Speaker 1: First, what was her name, and then tell us-- Speaker 2: Ms. Burke. Speaker 1: Ms. Burke. Speaker 2: B-U-R-K-E. And a lot of times she would send someone to bring me out of class so I could show some of the kids in the class how to sing a certain song or whatnot and how to enunciate instead of running your words together and whatnot and somebody ask you, "Well what do you--that sounded nice, but what did you sing, what did you say?" You know, but Ms. Burke--I, I tried drama. I tried drama and, and I didn't know--I couldn't go through with that because that was interfering a lot with my other activities in school. Mr. Bengley [ph.], Mr. Bengley he was a gym teacher and a favorite of mine also, and he, he taught me a lot of things in, you know athletically and, and in school and I would just mess up. I messed up a whole lot in high school. I was supposed to have graduated in 1947, but not doing what I was supposed to do I was suspended, and Mr. Dorner [ph.], who was the dean of the boys, don't mess with Mr. Dorner. Speaker 1: Why were you suspended? Speaker 2: For not going to class and whatnot; bringing a snake to school in a glass that I'd found out in Robbins, Illinois. It was just a garden snake and one of the boys in the class let the snake out, and it snuck up behind me. Well, I had it sitting on the floor and all the girls were screaming and going on. So, naturally I was suspended. So, did not go back to school. Poor Daddy [Amos Watson] didn't know that I had, I was suspended, so I got a job. I would get up every morning, isn't that something, get up and like I'm going to school and I was a stock boy at National Tea food chain [National Tea Company, Chicago, Illinois], 43rd Street, and I was also a grocery boy down at the corner grocery store from the house and I was bringing in a little bit--a couple of dollars of you know and whatnot. So, I told them that I did not want to go back to school just yet. Speaker 1: That's what you told your father? Speaker 2: That's what I told my father. Speaker 1: When he found out? Speaker 2: Yes, he said, "No, you're going to school, you have to get your education." So I talked him into letting me stay you know out of school for a while and then what--I did, I graduated in '50 [1950], 1950, three years behind. Speaker 1: You were able to go back to school though? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: They let you come back? Speaker 2: Yes they let me come back (unclear). Speaker 1: Now what, what year were you suspended, in your senior year? Speaker 2: No, no in my, in my junior year. Speaker 1: In your junior year. Speaker 2: In my junior year. Speaker 1: And you were out for about a year, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was out for three years. Speaker 1: For three years. Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: And the school would let you come back-- Speaker 2: And they let me--yes. Speaker 1: --and just pick up where you left off? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 633213 Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel being older than some of the other students? Speaker 2: A lot of the kids still knew me and whatnot and we did have a couple of older ladies in the class. I can't remember their names, but they there coming back to school also to get their diploma, and I graduated in January of 1950, and during that time though I was traveling, still traveling with the Martin Singers [Roberta Martin Singers]. I could only travel to places like Gary, Indiana or, or St. Louis, Missouri; East St. Louis [Illinois]; someplace close you know, Wisconsin and whatnot. But it was quite an experience and during that time I, I was going with a young lady at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and come to find out she was Sam Cooke's girlfriend also. Speaker 1: Sam Cooke's girlfriend? Speaker 2: Sam Cooke's girlfriend, yes. [HistoryMaker] Romance Watson's girlfriend and Sam Cooke's girlfriend. Well, back in those days it was nothing but like going to the movies you know and you know whatnot and asking the parents, "Can I take her to the movie? Can I take her to dance?" Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois], Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. Oh, those were the days, those were the days. Speaker 1: Did you know Sam Cooke? Speaker 2: Yes, I did; we traveled together on various occasions when he was singing with The Soul Stirrers. Speaker 1: Okay, was he your age or? Speaker 2: We were the same age. Speaker 1: You were the same age. Did he live in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: No, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay, but you knew him? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And did you all have a confrontation over the young lady? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not at all. Story_ID: 633214 Speaker 1: Can you remember, recall what other musical people that you might have met who weren't in your neighborhood or weren't in your, your school area, but during your high school years [at Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause you had mentioned something about Nat King Cole? Speaker 2: Nat King Cole did, they were, you know he was much older than I was at the time and it was just the recognition of being a neighbor and knowing that he was in, in the musical field and whatnot and we marveled at his going off being and becoming famous. Speaker 1: You said he lived in your neighborhood or? Speaker 2: He lived a block away from us. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, Nat King Cole, he grew up with? Speaker 2: With my sister? Speaker 1: In that area, with your sister? Speaker 2: Yes with my sister. Speaker 1: So he was just a few years older than you? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you knew him at that time. Any, any other figures like that, that come to mind? Sam Cooke, Nat King Cole, just in case? Speaker 2: No, that's, that's about all. Speaker 1: Okay, now again how did-- Speaker 2: Oh, please forgive me, Joe Williams. Speaker 1: Ah! Speaker 2: Joe Williams, he stayed at the S&S Hotel [ph.] there at 42nd [Street] and South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. He was a very good friend of my older brother Wardell [Wardell A. Watson]--not Wardell but Isaac [Isaac Watson] who use to clean his clothes and press his clothes and whatnot, and I remember him just starting out and he was singing at Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] and a couple of times he, when he joined, when he joined Duke's band. Speaker 1: Duke Ellington? Speaker 2: Duke Ellington and he was, he would come to the, the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. We'd go and pay fifty cents and see a movie and we'd see a stage show, good days. Good days back in the--oh, that's wonderful days. Speaker 1: Was your family considered you know, kind of well to do? Speaker 2: No, not all. Speaker 1: But you lived in a two story house, you mentioned upstairs piano? Speaker 2: Three, three story. Speaker 1: Oh, three story house? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes. Well, Daddy worked hard for us and whatnot and with the help of the older boys, my brother Wardell and I you know helping to contribute toward the welfare of the family, you know we--a little-- Story_ID: 633215 Speaker 1: Let's talk again about your interacting with Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] and Rom- Roberta (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sallie Martin and Roberta Martin. Speaker 1: While you were growing up and into your becoming a pro- you know working with Roberta Martin Singers? Speaker 2: Yes, well after I--during the time, during the interim of high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and whatnot, now when I graduated from high school I was twenty years old and still, you know still traveling and singing with them and whatnot, and after I'd graduated from high school I started traveling exclusively with the Roberta Martin Singers and we would, we would travel coast to coast, driving sometime and sometimes go by train. Speaker 1: First, tell me how did you end up with her? I know you met her when you were younger, tell me about how you ended up going from someone she knew in the neighborhood to actually being with the Roberta Martin Singers? Speaker 2: Well during the interim, during the time that we were singing together on the various venues, sometimes we'd be with the Roberta Martin Singers, the Watson Singers, the Roberta Martin Singers, the--oh, what's that group's name, the father played the guitar and the girls would sing. The girls would sing, oh, I can't think of their name, but they were quite famous and we were, a lot of times we'd have programs at the 44th Street Baptist Church [New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Willie Webb would, would present the various groups, and I can't think of that group's name, but they became quite famous. And Willie Webb, Robert Anderson, who else? Well, when I started traveling with, with Roberta, and as I said we were traveling all over. We would go to New York [New York], we'd stay at the Theresa hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] while we were singing and Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York, we sang there and I can't think of the church that we--Reverend Childs [ph.] was his name, El- Elder Childs was his name and we'd have programs there. He would book us to come to his church and to do a program for him, and back in those days to come to a concert, we, they charged an admission, one dollar. One dollar to get into the concert, and (laughter) one thing that sticks in my mind (laughter) that the, the auditorium was filled. It had to be a thousand or more people in the audience and whatnot and, there they absconded with the money. So, he was--we were left high and dry but then I told, I told Roberta Martin that, I said, "Well I can at least get us train fare back home and whatnot. Let's go to my intended father--my, my intended father in law [D.W. Hoggard] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and we can do a couple of programs there," which we did. Speaker 1: So you were with Roberta Martin? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah at that time. Speaker 1: At that time, time you were one of her-- Speaker 2: I was, I was a member-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from 1949 up until 1968. And we did, we left New York and never could find the minister and his assistant and whatnot so we went to Philadelphia and we had a couple of, a couple of nights there in Philadelphia, and we raised enough money to, to get back home. Speaker 1: So, in cases like that and back in that day did you stay in a hotel? Speaker 2: We stayed at the Theresa hotel-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in New York, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, but, and you went back and forth to Philadelphia? When you got to Philadelphia where did you stay? Speaker 2: We'd go back, come back to Chicago [Illinois], back to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't spend the night in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We spent, we spent a couple of nights in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Well, where did you stay in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: I stayed with one of the members of the church. Speaker 1: That's what I was-- Speaker 2: Yes, they'd put you up with a member of the church. Speaker 1: And put all the singers up? Speaker 2: All, put all the singers up, yes. The girls would stay at Sister So and So and the men would stay with Brother or Sister So and So as the case may be, yes. Speaker 1: And what did your future father in law think about that? You all coming through under those circumstances, was he open armed? Speaker 2: He was open armed. Speaker 1: Was he skeptical? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, no, he was open armed and whatnot and knowing that I was interested in his daughter [Phyllis Hoggard Watson] too he, he helped us along. Story_ID: 633216 Speaker 1: So what was Roberta Martin like during that period? And what was it like for you that first year working with her? Speaker 2: Wonderful. I adored the woman, she was, she was a second mother and she took very good care of us and she would always tell us you know, "Don't shame the name." You know so many singers get out there and they do this and they do that and they go this place and they go that place, but we were strict, we--because of the strict upbringing that we all had and the church backgrounds that we had you know we were very respectful of Roberta Martin, singer- we held her in highest, to the highest esteem, esteem and during that time she was working in the, her music store [Roberta Martin Studio of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and she wanted to devote more time to her business, so Little Lucy [Lucy Smith Collier] started playing for us and, and we would travel with her and we'd sing. Also, James Cleveland at that time was one of our members. He'd played for us on various occasions. Albertina Walker was a member of the Roberta Martin Singers; Gloria Griffin; what's her name? Oh, I can't think of her name right off the bat, but we had a lot of famous people that were Roberta Martin Singers. Speaker 1: And, and during the time you were there these are the people that you actually worked with? Speaker 2: I actually worked with them, yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Now, when you went in at age nineteen, how old was Roberta Martin, was she still like a mother figure (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was in her thirties. Speaker 1: Oh, in her thirties. Speaker 2: She was in her thirties at that time, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, she's about ten, eleven years older than you? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: And were you the youngest in the group at that time? Speaker 2: At that time I was the youngest in the group. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there people older than Roberta Martin or was she--ev- was everyone a little younger than her? Speaker 2: Everyone was--there was Sadie, Sadie Durham, she was around the same age as Roberta Martin. So there was Roberta, Sadie Durham, and Eugene Smith and Norsalus McKissick, Little Lucy and myself. Speaker 1: Now from what I understand, Roberta Martin was the first to really integrate men and women into the same group? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you run across any others after you joined her? Were other groups beginning to do that or were they still mostly female gospel groups and male gospel groups? I know she integrated almost from the beginning, men and women together (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes she did, yes she did, but I can't think of--I can think of other groups that, that had integrated, the groups and family groups, but I just can't, I can't place the names at, at this particular time. Speaker 1: Now, were The Staple Singers-- Speaker 2: Staple--thank you, thank you (laughter), that's who I was thinking of. Yes, we were on a couple of venues together with The Staples Singers at 44th Street Baptist Church [New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], also at Mother Lucy Smith's [Lucy Madden Smith] church [All Nations Pentecostal Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Yes, we did a couple of--we ran, ran into each other dow- on the road a lot of times. Story_ID: 633217 Speaker 1: And when you--did you travel to the South? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay, and in the South, you couldn't stay in hotels or during that period? Were you--were there hotels, or you stayed with (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we couldn't stay, we stayed at family homes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And whatnot, yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific incidences of discrimination you might have experienced? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. Wanting to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about some of those perhaps? Speaker 2: The discrimination on, on the trains going. We had to stay, we had to ride in the car that was just behind the engine. Well, back in those days it was choo choo trains we were riding on and we would be all sooty and whatnot by the time we got to our destinations, and I wanted to go to--I, I remember in Atlanta [Georgia] I wanted to go to, to the movies and I went to the teller's window to purchase my ticket you know and I was getting ready to go into the auditorium on the first floor and she, "Unh-uh, no, no, you can't go there," she said, "you have, have to go in the balcony." Outside, around up some steps on the outside and then into the balcony. And then-- Speaker 1: How did you feel, 'cause you had not experienced that before? Speaker 2: I had never experienced prejudice before, but it didn't bother me at that time. It, it did not bother me. I just said, oh, okay, if that's where I've got to go, I got to go. Speaker 1: And we're talking about the '40s [1940s] now? Speaker 2: We're speaking of the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay, the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s], yes, yes. Speaker 1: You, do you recall any incidents when you were in the South of taunting, and name calling? Speaker 2: No, we didn't run into that. Oh, we did run into when we were driving to Birmingham, Alabama, a state trooper--we were driving in her, in her '50 Cadillac [1950 Cadillac], and we were stopped by the state police, and I was driving, and I don't know, we didn't do anything, we--you know we didn't anything. So, he came up to the car and he wanted to know, "Whose car is this, boy?" So, I--she piped in, I didn't say anything. She said, she said, "This is my car officer." Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Roberta [Roberta Martin]. Speaker 1: Roberta. Speaker 2: "This is, this is my car, officer." "Where are you going?" She said, "We're on our way to church, and we're giving a concert we having revival services at such and such a church." And he said, "All righty, all right, be on your way." Well, naturally, after her checking her registration and all like that to see whether or not that was her car. Well, at that time driving a big Cadillac and everything you know. So (makes sound), that's one of the incidents and a lot of times I, I--you know I just like to put it behind me really. Story_ID: 633218 Speaker 1: What songs come to mind that, from those, let's start with the early years though, Roberta Martin, your experiences with her, and everyone in the group it seems sang solo at some point? Speaker 2: Yeah, would lead a song, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, would lead a song. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: What songs did you lead? Speaker 2: I led, lord have mercy, Jesus have mercy--(pause) you see in the old, and, and you're mind drifts and as often as I have sung these songs (laughter) and whatnot. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: 'My Friend,' 'Jesus is the Name of My Friend' ['Jesus is My Friend'] I led, (singing) "One day I was walking, one day I was talking, one day I was living deep in sin," 'Everybody Ought to Been There When He Set Me Free' ['When He Set Me Free']. And-- Speaker 1: Is there anything that you might could sing a little bit of from that era? Speaker 2: Oh, (singing) "One day I was walking, one day I was talking, one day I was living deep in sin. Oh, Lord I didn't believe him and I would not receive him. I never knew I needed such a friend. (Makes sounds) I started believing I did not believe him. I wondered what I should do then. Well, I started walking and then I started talking. I never knew I needed such a friend. Well, he put a running in my feet, shouting in heart, clapping in my hands, clapping in my hands. I was walking, talking, I was singing, shouting and then I said, thank you, Jesus, I said, thank you, Jesus. I said, thank you, Jesus all day long. Everybody ought to been there when he set me free. When he set me free." Speaker 1: Beautifully done. Speaker 2: God bless y'all, I wish my voice was-- Speaker 1: Just as good today as you did then. Speaker 2: God bless you (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm sure, and that a song that you led. Speaker 2: That was a song that I led. Speaker 1: When you were performing with the Roberta Martin Singers? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Did she write that song? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And that's what I was gonna ask 'cause obviously she was an incredible songwriter. Speaker 2: Oh, yes she was, very much so. Speaker 1: Those are beautiful lyrics. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What lessons did you learn from working with her? About life? About music? Speaker 2: About learning how, learning how to be true to yourself and how to respect one another. How to bring yourself, you know closer to the Lord. 'Course you know she was very religious, likewise my family, so you couldn't venture too far away from you know, from your upbringing. Yeah. Story_ID: 633219 Speaker 1: Again, we were talking about Roberta Martin and your relationship with her and working from her and lessons-- Speaker 2: Indeed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you learned from her. Speaker 2: I had started smoking when, puffing I should say, on a cigarette. I hadn't learned how to inhale. Now, this, this is something that during the time of going you know from high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and whatnot, how the kids were smoking all and whatnot. But I did--I just didn't, I hadn't tried it but being on a grown man now, I was in New York [New York]. We were staying at the Theresa hotel [Hotel Theresa] in New York, and Lucy [Lucy Smith Collier] and Gloria [Gloria Griffin], Norsalus McKissick and myself, we were sitting on the side of the bed, we were playing cards, Old Maid, and there was a knock at the door. Well, we had been away for about a week because we had traveled to Newark, New Jersey, Metropolitan Church [Metropolitan Baptist Church] in Newark, New Jersey and we'd had a week's revival there and then we went over to New York to--can't think of the church, but we were having a week's revival there. And it just so happens that--we were staying at the Teresa hotel and Lucy, Gloria and Norsalus and myself, sitting on the side of the bed playing cars and whatnot, and there was a knock at the door. So, Eugene got up, Eugene Smith, he got up and he opened the door and I'm sitting, you know I'm puffing you know on a cigarette and playing cards and whatnot and puffing and going on, and who should be at the door but Roberta Martin. I ate that cigarette. Yes, I did (laughter), yes I did. I ate that cigarette I tell you, that--I just said that to say the amount, the respect that we had for her that she would--well that Norsalus and Eugene smoked and whatnot but she didn't know that I had smoked and all, and being the youngest in the group at that time, but that was, that was just something that stuck in my mind you know. Speaker 1: How old were you at that point, about? Speaker 2: Twenty-one, two (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you did not want her to see you? Speaker 2: Did not want her to see me smoking. Speaker 1: And she didn't know (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well she, she did find out that, that's what I (laughter), what I had done. Speaker 1: Did it make you sick? Speaker 2: "Dummy," she called me (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 1: Did it make you sick? Speaker 2: Did it make me sick? My goodness, yes. Well, god bless. Story_ID: 633220 Speaker 1: Is it while you were traveling with Roberta Martin Singers that you met your future wife? Speaker 2: Ye- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or were you still traveling with your--it was with the Roberta Martin Singers? Speaker 2: No, it was with the Roberta Martin Singers. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: Because from Mon- from Easter, no from Palm Sunday to Easter Monday night we would have a, a singing fest and preaching, and we'd have it--well it was a revival at the Mount Carmel Baptist Church in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and we would, we would sing and Reverend Hoggard would preach. Speaker 1: Hunter? Speaker 2: Hoggard, H-O, double G, A-R-D. Speaker 1: And what's his first name? Speaker 2: I can't think of it. Oh, my goodness gracious, but--Denny, Denny W. Hoggard [D.W. Hoggard] was his name. Wanted to get that all together. And we would sing and he would preach. I was singing 'Come, Ye Disconsolate' and I noticed a young lady sitting, she was rapt--enrapt, and come to find out it was the minister's daughter, and I was staying at Mrs. Katina's [ph.] house in the (unclear) hundred block of 58th Street with Eugene Smith and we were, we were playing cards and whatnot and Ms. Katina from downstairs said, "Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson]! Romance, Phyllis Hoggard's just walking by." Well, Phyllis Hoggard [Phyllis Hoggard Watson] ran the daycare center there at, at Mount Carmel Baptist Church, so I jumped up and whatnot and I--she was on her way to F.W. Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] in Philadelphia on 60th Street and Market [Street]. So, I walked behind them and went over to Woolworth's and, and just made like I was just there you know shopping (laughter) and whatnot, and I walked her back to the church after she had a couple of the children with her. So, I walked her back to the church and we chatted and whatnot and I asked her for her phone number and she, she gave it to me and we corresponded from 1950, from 1951 until 1955. I went into the [U.S. military] service and we communicated back and forth; she wrote me letters, I wrote her letters. We became engaged in nineteen fifty- '53 [1953] when I got out. Speaker 1: When you got out of the service? Speaker 2: When I got out of service, and we married June 25, 1955. Story_ID: 633221 Speaker 1: Now, I was asking her [Watson's wife, Phyllis Hoggard Watson] whether or not she would like to come to Chicago [Illinois] and live in Chicago. She did not want to leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, I was used to traveling and whatnot, so I said, what the devil. I want this woman so I'll move to Philadelphia, and I did. I moved to Philadelphia in November of 1954. Speaker 2: And you were still with the Roberta Martin-- Speaker 1: I was still with the Roberta Martin Singers, yes. And we married as I said in June of '55 [1955]. Speaker 2: Tell me about the wedding. Was it a big wedding? Speaker 1: Oh, it was fabulous. It was one of the biggest weddings that they had there at Mount Carmel Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. The church seats about two thousand people and it was, it was jammed, it was packed. And started raising a family right away, and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Within the first year? Speaker 1: Within the--yes, ma'am, within the first year. Speaker 2: Now you had twins? Speaker 1: That's when I had, that's when we had the twins [Cherisse Watson and Romance Watson, Jr.], yes. Speaker 2: Okay, then the twins in, in your side of the family's or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, ma'am; not on, not on either side as far back as we could go. Speaker 2: Were you surprised-- Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness yes. Speaker 2: --when you found out she was gonna have twins? Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, yes, yes. And I started working, of course, in fact they found me a job, with him [Watson's father in law, D.W. Hoggard] being the minister that he was, of course he had a lot of connections in Philadelphia. So, I became, I became a milkman. Speaker 2: So had you left the Singers by that time? Speaker 1: No, no, no I'm still-- Speaker 2: Okay so this is a day job and then you still had your-- Speaker 1: I'm still, I'm still-- Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted-- Speaker 1: And the only time though I would, I would sing with them was when they were, would be in New York [New York] or New Jersey, someplace close where she would let me go and be with them you know, but I wanted--she wanted me to be a husband and a father, you know. Go to work, no more traveling, so that's the only reason, that's the only way I could sing with the Martin Singers then was to travel somewhere close by. Story_ID: 633222 Speaker 1: What was it like being a milkman? I mean how did you adjust to that (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was something else getting up early in the morning. Getting up at four o'clock in the morning to walk that, to deliver milk--Sealtest [Sealtest Dairy]. I can remember Sealtest milk company, and it was quite an experience, quite an experience. And I can--a lot of the people I got to know, they were members of the church [Mount Carmel Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I got a lot of customers for Sealtest because of the--my being affiliated with the church. Speaker 1: So you delivered in areas that you knew and people knew you was how it ended up? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: How long did you work for Sealtest? Speaker 2: For four years, four years, and then I started---I, I--there was a--my in laws were friends with a, a club owner in Bound Brook, New Jersey--Plainfield, Plainfield, New Jersey and I would go, we would go over sometimes on the weekend and whatnot and it was called Rocco's Supper Club [ph.], and they found out I could sing and whatnot and they had me to come up. It was an organist there and I went up and I sang and they contracted me to come every weekend to come to sing in the club. While at the club I met a woman, her name was Yolanda Gregory [ph.] and she was a promoter and she had asked me if I would like to record and I told her yes, my goodness yes, yes indeed. So, she introduced me to Decca Records and I went over and I auditioned for Decca Records and an affiliate of Decca Records was Coral, Coral Records and I recorded on the Coral Label, 1959 I did. I, I recorded 'Come A Little Closer,' and on the reverse side was 'Until the Real Thing Comes Along.' Speaker 1: You remember that song, I mean 'Come a Little Closer'? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes. (Makes sounds) (singing) "Come a little closer, I want to whisper. How I love you in your ear, dear, come a little closer, oh! How you thrill me when you whisper in my ear, dear. Come a little closer," and they had Coral background behind that. Oh, those were the days. She got me mixed up in the payola scandal back in the '50s [1950s]. Decca Records wanted twe- 20 percent? No, ten, twe- 15 percent, they wanted 15 percent of me, and she did not want to--well, she was getting 50 percent of me. So, she did not want to get up off of 10 percent of her 50, and me, 5 percent of my 50. So, she--instead of her telling them emphatically, "No, I'm not going to give you a piece of Romance." During that time the senate investigating committee [House Subcommittee on Legislative Oversight] was investigating payola in the music field, and instead of her just saying, "No, I'm not gonna give you a piece of Romance," she squealed on them. So, naturally I was blacklisted. So no- it's not the Yolanda Gregory you know let's, let--blacklist her, they blacklisted me, [HistoryMaker] Romance Watson. So, when the record came out, I, I went on 'Bandstand' ['American Bandstand'] I was on 'Bandstand' and I did a lot of record promotion (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With Dick Clark? Speaker 2: With Dick Clark, yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: You went on and performed your song? Speaker 2: Yes, I did 1959 it was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, what do you recall about that and meeting him and that experience performing on TV? Speaker 2: Oh, that experience was wonderful. Just, oh it was, it was wonderful. I enjoyed being on TV (laughter) and, and whatnot and the kids loved me, they loved, they loved dancing to my song and whatnot. I traveled to Florida promoting the record. Ohio, I went someplace in Ohio, one of the (unclear)--television stations, Bob Horn. Oh, I can remember that name. It just popped up all these years, my goodness, and then she told me that Decca, Decca Records will not put the record out. Well, they did put it out for a while, but they stopped using the record after a while, after she squealed on them and whatnot. Story_ID: 633223 Speaker 1: So now here I am, I had quit being a milkman because I just knew that I was gonna make it in the rock and roll field. So, I'm out of a job. Speaker 2: You had left the Roberta Martin Singers? Speaker 1: No, I'm still with the Roberta Martin Singers, still singing with them; I didn't leave them until 1968. And so now I'm out of a job. I didn't have a job so I was--I became a cab driver. A Yellow Cab [Yellow Cab Company] driver in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So, I drove cabs for oh, I guess a year and a half. Then I wanted--I was doing club work around Philadelphia also and in the meanwhile when the Roberta Martin Singers would come back through Philadelphia with, during Palm Sunday to Easter Monday night I would sing with them there at the church [Mount Carmel Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and whatnot doing one and the other, you know club work and church work. And as I said I, I became a Yellow Cab driver so I didn't need--I needed money so I was doing everything that I possibly could to get some money. So, there was another gentleman, a Dr., Dr. Newland [ph.] who wanted to take over my contract. Speaker 2: From the record company [Coral Records]? Speaker 1: From the record--well, from Yolanda Gregory [ph.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, from Yolanda Gregory. Speaker 1: Personal management, personal management contract, and she would not, she would relinquish. So, they said, "Well, look, we'll just wait until your five years with her is up, and then we'll, we'll take--we'll, we'll sign you up." By that time, I had become disgruntled and whatnot and I did find another job with Abbotts milk company [Abbotts Dairies, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So I was a milkman for another company. Speaker 2: Let's, let's go back go Yolanda. Speaker 1: Yolanda Gregory? Speaker 2: (Unclear) were you--what was your relationship like with her once you were blacklisted? Were you still friendly or were you all at odds? Speaker 1: We were at odds. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were at odds. Speaker 2: And she would not release you? Speaker 1: She would not release me, no and there were a couple of--she wanted, she booked me at a couple of--Club Riviera in Florida I think it was that she had booked me. Speaker 2: But she was booking-- Speaker 1: She was-- Speaker 2: --was she booking around Philadelphia too? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I just did not want to--I just didn't want to work with her anymore. So, she said that she was going to sue me for breach of contract and all that. So, I said, "Do, do what you want to do," you know. I'm working now and I'm making a decent penny. So, I don't need to go back into that anymore. Speaker 2: Did you feel any conflict from singing in the clubs and recording secular music with your, and doing the church music? Speaker 1: No, ma'am. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had to do what I had to do. Thus, came that it is what it is. So, and that was my sister [Vivienne Watson Vaughn], the one that's ninety-one years old, that was her saying all the time: it is what it is. Story_ID: 633224 Speaker 1: But--and it was a learning experience for me and whatnot and during the time raising a family. Every two years and a child would come along (laughter). Speaker 2: So at this point, how many children? You had the twins? Speaker 1: I had the twins. Speaker 2: And, and that's-- Speaker 1: They were born in '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: Okay, and let's get the names of your children? The twins' names, then who came and who came and what years and their names? Speaker 1: All right the twins, Romance Leonard Watson, Jr. [Romance Watson, Jr.]. Well, naturally you know I had to have a junior, and Cherisse, C-H-E-R-I-S-S-E, Cherisse Yolanda [Cherisse Watson]; those are the twins. And then in 1958 Keith came along, Keith Hoggard [Keith Watson] and two more year- no, well let stop. After Keith, I got a job with the transportation company in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it was called PTC at the time, Philadelphia Transportation Company. Speaker 2: And what were you doing with them? Speaker 1: I was a--I became a bus driver, and I worked with them until Elizabeth [Elizabeth Watson] came in 1960, in July of '60 [1960]. And I stayed with PTC until they became SEPTA, the Southeastern Trans- Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, and I worked with them for--I gave them thirty-four years of my life. I retired from them in 1993. Story_ID: 633225 Speaker 1: At what point did you leave the Roberta Martin Singers? 'Cause while you were with the record company [Coral Records], you were still with them and then you went and started working for the milk companies-- Speaker 2: The milk company [Abbotts Dairies, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: You were still with them? Speaker 2: Still with them. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. So at what point did you say I'm--did you step away from the group? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]? Speaker 2: When we disbanded, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And the entire group disbanded? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: You didn't just leave; the group disbanded? Speaker 2: No, the group disbanded, yes. Because-- Speaker 1: And how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Oh, I missed it of course, you know but it is what it is, yeah, (unclear). Speaker 1: Why did the group disband? Do you-- Speaker 2: The group was getting older, Norsalus [Norsalus McKissick] was losing his voice, he could not perform like he used to. Eugene [Eugene Smith] and--well Albertina Walker started her group and she left. Norsalus did, Norsalus left and went with her, so that left me, oh I'm not gonna put myself first. That left Lucy [Lucy Smith Collier], and there was another young fellow, Harold Johnson came in. Roberta's niece stepped in. Gloria Griffin, she became part of the group and it just wasn't gelling like it was in the earlier years and whatnot so I, I think she just, she just disbanded the group. Speaker 1: Now was she still performing? Speaker 2: Roberta? Speaker 1: Roberta Martin? Speaker 2: No she was--she had taken over her music business [Roberta Martin Studio of Music, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, and she was not actually out-- Speaker 2: No, she was not performing. Speaker 1: --performing with everyone. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I know you had mentioned that she was with her music business, but I didn't know if she would join the group. Speaker 2: No, no she didn't rejoin the group, she just took care of her, her business, yeah. Speaker 1: And were you--what job were you in, were you with the milk company? Were you with the transportation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was with the transportation company [Philadelphia Transportation Company; Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 1: The first transportation company? Speaker 2: --when we disbanded. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 633226 Speaker 1: Tell me about your job with the, the Southeastern transporta- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trans- Southeastern Pennsylvania transportation company [Philadelphia Transportation Company; Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? I-- Speaker 1: How did you, how did you start with them? Speaker 2: Well, I put in for--I put an application in and I went and they called me within the, the next week because they needed drivers. And I went to Germantown Depot [Germantown Brakes Maintenance Facility, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] it was. Now, there was a depot just around the corner from my house, Callowhill Depot [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I did not--I didn't want to work out you know that close to home and whatnot, so when I went to Germantown depot, I was driving the bus routes out of there and I met a lot of, a lot of wonderful people out of you know becoming, meeting more people and the bus drivers on the various routes and whatnot and, and meeting other people, meeting customers on the bus. Getting to know people on a daily basis, taking them to school, taking the kids to the school, taking folk to work and whatnot. Speaker 1: Did you enjoy that experience? Speaker 2: I loved it. I loved it. Speaker 1: What did you like about it? Speaker 2: Now I'm becoming a day person, getting up early in the morning. Getting a breakfast before I go to my job, driving--it was about twelve miles I had to drive to that Germantown depot from my house, and we would sit around a lot of times when we didn't have a run. When you did not have a run, you would sit and wait until maybe somebody was late for their run, you'd get their run. Or somebody would turn in sick, you'd get their run. So, it was, it was, it was various routes. You know we had a lot of, a lot of diversification you know. Speaker 1: It, it seems that you enjoyed being around people then? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I--well, love being around people, love being around people. Story_ID: 633227 Speaker 1: What was life like at home for you at that point? Home life-- Speaker 2: Home life? Speaker 1: --and church life? Speaker 2: Home life was wishy washy. I hate to say it, but the wife [Phyllis Hoggard Watson] and I separated after, after a while. Speaker 1: After-- Speaker 2: After-- Speaker 1: --how many years? Speaker 2: Thirteen, after thirteen. Let's see thirteen--fourteen. No, I'm sorry, please forgive me, please forgive me after twenty, after twenty years and then that--because I don't, I don't, I'm not going to go into the intricacies of what was happening back in, back in the day, but just, just didn't get along, just didn't get along, and I did not want that to happen, so we separated and I moved out, moved over into West Oak Lane, that's a section of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], north of Philadelphia and I was still working, naturally for the transportation company [Philadelphia Transportation Company; Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we had--I'd still you know see my family every now and then, every now and then. Speaker 1: I was gonna ask about your relationship with your children. Speaker 2: Oh, yes the relationship was all right, you know, after a while. Speaker 1: And what about the church and the father in law [D.W. Hoggard]? 'Cause I assume that was a major part of your whole life? Speaker 2: Yes, well, I did not join Mount Carmel [Mount Carmel Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there--that was a Baptist church, and there was Holy Temple Church of God in Christ, which is of the Pentecostal faith that was just around the corner from my house in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I joined, I joined there. Yeah. Speaker 1: So when you said you and your wife separated, you didn't get back together? Speaker 2: No, we did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 633228 Speaker 1: Tell me about your children, did they go to college and what kind of careers, professions, just give me the order again and, and what kind of life did they end up having just so we won't over-- Speaker 2: Yes, well, Romance, Jr. [Romance Watson, Jr.] went to college and Cherisse [Cherisse Watson] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did he go? Speaker 2: University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Cherisse went to--oh, I can't think. West, West Chester University [West Chester, Pennsylvania], Cherisse went to Westchester University. Keith [Keith Watson] went to Drexel [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I think, I'm not sure. I can't--please forgive me. And Elizabeth [Elizabeth Watson] didn't, she didn't want to, she didn't want to further her education. She got a job and whatnot, and was working-- Speaker 1: And what are they doing now? Speaker 2: Well, Keith-- Speaker 1: What kind of careers do they have, or jobs? Speaker 2: Romance, he's, he's into public relations. Cherisse, she's in the hospital doing medical work. Speaker 1: Administration? Speaker 2: Administration, yes ma'am. And Keith, he's in Boston [Massachusetts]. He's working with a computer company there. Elizabeth, she's working with Temple Hospital [Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Any grandchildren now? Speaker 2: I have eight grands, eight grandchildren and one great-grand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Are you in touch with your children? You close to them now? Speaker 2: No, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 633229 Speaker 1: So, Mr. Watson [HistoryMaker Romance Watson] we were talking about your family and the breakup and you moving on with your life. Do you have any regrets or reflections or advice for other people in regards to that, or in your relationship with your children? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. I wish that the relationship between my children and myself were, was better than it is or has been. And my, my advice to younger folk would be: stay true to your betrothed, stay true to your betrothed, and put in as much time as you possibly can to make your marriage better. Do everything--spend time with your children. Did you hear what I said? Spend some time with your children. God bless you. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Story_ID: 633230 Speaker 1: And before we go further with your life in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I want to backtrack to your mili- [U.S.] military experience. I understand that you joined the military while you were still with the Roberta Martin Singers. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me about that? Did you volunteer? How did that come about? Speaker 2: No, I was drafted. Speaker 1: In what year? Speaker 2: They sent--1951. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was drafted June of 1951, coincidentally it was when I was with the Roberta Martin Singers during, during a revival that we had at Mount, Mount Carmel Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and my sister called me to let me know that, "You have a letter from your uncle." And, doggone it I had to go into service. I was inducted and my basic training was at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri (cough) pardon me. And speaking of segregation and inst- instances like that. That was a, that was a bad experience. Speaker 1: At Fort? Speaker 2: At Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, but (cough) pardon me, I immediately went over to the USO [United Service Organizations]. (Cough) Pardon me my goodness gracious, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: No, take your time. Speaker 2: Went over to the service club, Special Services club and there was a piano there and I was sitting down tinkering at the piano and going on and the fellow that was the CO [commanding officer] of the club asked me whether or not I would you know, "While you're here you know, would you come on over and entertain us," and whatnot, and I readily agreed and met a lot of nice young men there who were talented also, and we--by, by my playing the piano and singing whatnot, he s- (cough) please forgive me. Knowing that I was on my way to Japan, he suggested that I take a letter with me to the command- the commander of the Japan, Japan logistics--didn't get that all right, but and you can get into Special Services and you can be with one of the special--what the traveling troops in, in Japan and Korea which I am, I'm so thankful that, that happened. When I got to Japan, went into Special Services. Speaker 1: And what does that mean, Special Services? Speaker 2: Special Services is you're either an entertainer or a dramatic--a lot of these movie stars went into Special Services also where they did shows for the troops and whatnot. So, I went in the first platoon, Moving on Up [ph.] was the first show that we did and I was the scat singer for the, for the show and we traveled all over Korea up to the 30th parallel [sic. 38th parallel north], up to the front lines and whatnot entertaining the troops over there. And on my second go around Step Right Up [ph.] was the number, was the theme. It was the circus theme and we did sho- show tunes and whatnot and I did a little scatting and playing the piano and having a ball, and just having a good time in Korea. Speaker 1: And this was an integrated performing group? Speaker 2: Yes it was. Yes, it was, yes. Speaker 1: And during which war was it? Speaker 2: That was during the Korean conflict [Korean War]. Speaker 1: Korean conflict? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were in the military for how long? Speaker 2: I was in the military for two years. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 633231 Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned a bit earlier that this was a racially tense situation, so can you give me any examples of some of the things you experience as far as race-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --relations. Speaker 2: Some of the tech sergeants and, and what not were not too friendly. One instance that comes to mind in Rolla, Missouri, just, that's a little town just outside of Fort Leonard Wood, and a bunch of the guys, we all got together to go over to have some, you know have some, some eats. Go get a couple of hamburgers and a bottle of beer or something, you know some pop and we went to this little restaurant in Rolla. I was the only blacks, black with the group and we sat at a table and the waiter came up and said, "I'm sorry, but I can't serve you." So I said, "Beg your pardon?" He said, "I, I can't serve you here." I said, "Well okay, I'll just, I'll just sit here with the guys you know and you can serve them." He said, "No, you can't even, you can't even stay here." So, the rest of the group, they became incensed, "Let's get out of here, blah, blah, let's go, let's go," because we were all, we were all from Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York]; you know back, back, back east. So, I said, "No, you guys--," I said, "look, I'll meet you back at, at camp." They said, "No, we're leaving here." So, I, I was grateful for their, for that support that they, that they gave me then. But-- Speaker 1: And you were in North Carolina? Speaker 2: No, Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. Speaker 1: Missouri. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there any other incidents actually on base or there, did things go better there? Speaker 2: Well one of the fellows--now, I went in for leadership school, I wanted to become an officer. I said well while I'm in here, let me do what I can do, and then go as far as I possibly can, you know. So, at that time going through leadership school, they--it was a yellow and gold, a gold and blue star that they would sew onto your uniform. All the guys would go, "Oh, gold star mothers and all that, you--," blah, blah you know. Nobody wanted to, they didn't like the officers and so on and when I was in officer training and whatnot they didn't like me either (laughter), so there was a special--you would go and learn how to lead the troops. You'd have to put on a, a play showing how you would master a situation in the [U.S.] Army, whether it be discipline, morale and whatever, and one of the guys in the, in the group had said to me, he said, "You know you're not gonna pass this, this part of the course, don't you?" I said, "No, I don't." He said, "Yes, it--the sergeants, the sergeants are not too particular about blacks. And you're" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was a black guy saying this? Speaker 2: No, this was a white fellow. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He said to me, he said, "You're not going to pass this course." So--and I didn't but I, you know I did what I was supposed to do in there you know. That was just another instance where segregation, not segregation, but prejudice had, had showed its ugly head. Story_ID: 633232 Speaker 1: You were not married at this time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And you married [Phyllis Hoggard Watson] after (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After I had-- Speaker 1: And you were in the service two years? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Two years, and then you returned to Chicago [Illinois] after that experience? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And overall though, how do you feel about your [U.S.] military experience? Speaker 2: Now, that was really a, that was really a learning experience which taught me how to--there you go again, respect your fellow man, and how to become a leader. You didn't have to follow all the time, you could be a leader. And they asked me af- indoctrination, mustering out indoctrination, whether or not I would like to stay in the [U.S.] Army for some more years and I told 'em no. So, I came out and went back to doing what I loved to do: start singing with the, the group. Traveling with the Roberta Martin Singers, having a wonderful time with my family and by the grace of God, I'm still here because there were many times when, in Korea where we could've been gone. There was a Korean that--a North Korean that they called Bedcheck Charlie when we were in service. And he would wait until night time to come and harass the troops. He would drop hand grenades and whatnot on camp sites and all and there was one experience where, where by you know the Lord kept me safe you know. Speaker 1: He dropped from an airplane? Speaker 2: Dropped from the airplane. Yeah, yeah, yes indeed. Speaker 1: And you, did you ever feel like you were in true danger and a close call? Speaker 2: I did not really, because I prayed constantly, and I, I didn't, I didn't worry because I knew the Lord was gonna take care of me. Story_ID: 633233 Speaker 1: So let's go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], when you're working for the Southeast-? Speaker 2: Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority [Philadelphia Transporation Company; Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority], SEPTA. Speaker 1: SEPTA. And so in 1964 you were thirty-four, where were you working at that point? Speaker 2: I was driving with SEPTA. Speaker 1: With SEPTA. Speaker 2: With SEPTA. Speaker 1: And that is the year that the Odessa Bradford incident--do you recall that at all when violence and looting erupted after this woman, a black woman, Odessa Bradford, was stopped by the police and her--her car stopped, the police came up and said move your car. She couldn't move it because it wouldn't move and some kind of argument erupted, someone came up to help her and then it erupted into a fight and there were rumors that she had been killed as she and the person who was trying to help her you know when they were taken away to jail. They were arrested and she had been killed and there was a lot of violence that erupted? Speaker 2: I didn't hear about that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay well you were rather young. Okay I just wondered if you remembered that. Now, do you recall the incident with, with MOVE? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: So that was something that you were very much aware of? Speaker 2: I was very much aware of MOVE. Speaker 1: So, what were you doing during that, you were still driving the bus. I know they had an earlier incident, one incident in 1978 and you would've been about forty-eight maybe. Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was a supervisor at that time. Speaker 1: You were a supervisor? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what were your roles as a supervisor? Speaker 2: Keeping the lines moving smoothly, trolley lines and the bus lines, making sure that they stayed on time and whatnot and helping in any situation where there was vandalism or something on the buses and whatnot and-- Speaker 1: It seems like in August of 1978 there was a gun battle between police and MOVE and Delbert Africa, one of the leaders was beaten. Do you remember that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember it vividly. Speaker 1: When a police officer was killed? Speaker 2: I remember it vividly. Speaker 1: Can you just tell me what you recall of that time? Speaker 2: Well, I remember that they were down in the area of 34th [Street] and Baring Streets in Philadelphia in that area and they wanted them to, to move out of that area and they sent in the police, sent in the fire department and whatnot and they put the hoses on them and what--and a lot of them were running and a gun battle ensued between MOVE, the MOVE members and the police. Speaker 1: Were you familiar with this neighborhood? Speaker 2: Oh, yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Is this an area that you had driven your bus to? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am that I supervised the bus area through there too, yes, ma'am; I was familiar with that area. Speaker 1: How did you feel during that time? Speaker 2: Very, very angry because a person's civil rights being messed over and whatnot as we said back in the day and not knowing (clears throat) excuse me, not knowing their purpose of what they were trying to get across to the public as to their being there. And when they moved out of that area into West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], how the police had dropped a bomb on the top of the, the house in the area where they were staying and all the houses in that area caught fire, one right from the other, and they did nothing to try to put out the fires, and it just spread and there was a whole area, streets, a couple of streets that was inundated by fire. Speaker 1: Right. That was the second incident-- Speaker 2: Incident, yes. Speaker 1: --with, with MOVE. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that's when Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] was, was the mayor-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. He was the mayor at that time. Speaker 1: --at that point. And, and you're working, I guess you didn't work for the city exactly, but you were involved in the whole thing, so how did you feel about it when he was elected at Philadelphia's first black mayor? Speaker 2: We, we were elated that we finally had, finally had a black mayor, yes, we were all-- Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to meet him ever? Speaker 2: Yes, on various occasions, yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And him being a minister and whatnot, yes I, I met him a couple of times. Speaker 1: Okay and at churches, or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At various churches, yes ma'am. Speaker 1: He was a minister? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 633234 Speaker 1: And how do you feel that he handled the MOVE incident? Speaker 2: We didn't think that he handled it right. We didn't think that he handled it like it should have been handled. So, everybody has their own, own opinion about it. You know it was a cause for concern and everybody talked about it back and forth, giving their own opinions of course. Speaker 1: What was the mood in the neighborhood, with the black community? Do you remember people being angry and-- Speaker 2: Very, very angry and not wanting to support the police and everybody wanted to--see, a lot of them taking action on their own you know. Speaker 1: A lot of individuals (unclear)? Speaker 2: A lot of individuals taking action on their own. Speaker 1: And doing what kind of things, what do you mean? Speaker 2: Vandalism and whatnot, breaking into stores and just showing their, their anger in a very, very bad way, in a very bad way because it did not help the situation whatsoever. Speaker 1: So you did not necessarily agree with that course of action? Speaker 2: No, ma'am. Speaker 1: So, in that MOVE incident in which so many of the, the members were killed, the children and the women as well. How do you feel--that America could've done more? That the fire department should've more or just? Speaker 2: Well, it was the city, city leadership that was guiding the, the incident between the police and MOVE members and whatnot and I think a lot should've been done, a lot more should've been done more positive than it was because we didn't think that it would come, it would result in, in all that--all those deaths. The kids and, and whatnot you know you--we didn't like it. We didn't, we didn't like it all. Speaker 1: Now, leading up to that tragic incident, was there a lot of talk in the city, in the black neighborhood or in the press about MOVE period between those two incidents? Was that a topic of conversation all the time (unclear). Speaker 2: It was constantly on the news, the newspapers and the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] and The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer] on the afternoon news, on the evening news. It was a big topic of discussion. Speaker 1: And that was leading up to that tragic incident? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you know on the national level, we didn't hear. Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't? Speaker 1: About--we heard about the major incident, and that's what I was just wondering, but between those two incidents, it was still a major topic of conversation-- Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: --in the news, right there in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. How about, how would, how did the community view the police department in general? Were they thought to be okay except for those incidents, or was--in general did people feel that the police department was the enemy? Speaker 2: They felt, they, they, they felt let down. They really did and they voiced it on many occasions, in many ways, adverse ways and whatnot. They didn't particularly--we (unclear), we, I'll put myself into it. We didn't particularly care for the way it was handled and we thought that the mayor should have stepped in earlier and put a stop to, to what was going on. We thought that they should have brought the fire department in when that first house caught on, but--you know was bombarded, that they should've done something about it but, but they didn't and we were sorely, you know sorely afraid that something else was going to break out after that. Speaker 1: Did it? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and--sporadically. Speaker 1: Is there still like a cloud over Philadelphia or you think now the city has truly moved on from that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes they've moved on from that. Speaker 1: Did you ever encounter Mayor Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] after the, the last big MOVE incident? Did you ever run into him at church or anywhere else after that? Speaker 2: At a Masons--they were honoring somebody for the Masons and they contracted me to sing for the affair, and he was the speaker and I met him then. I met him again there you know I went. Speaker 1: Had your feelings changed? Speaker 2: I gave him my card and whatnot and then if ever, you know if ever you need a singer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let me know, if anything. Speaker 1: So you were still cordial and you didn't hold a grudge against him? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no ma'am. Speaker 1: And how about people in general in Philadelphia? Do you feel like in general the black community held a grudge against him or (unclear)? Speaker 2: I would say, I would say it was split down the middle, a lot of them didn't like him, don't like him now, you know but he's moved on, he's moved on. Story_ID: 633235 Speaker 1: Over the years that you worked for SEPTA [Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you continued to sing? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of the things that you did in regards to singing during that period, I mean over the years. You mentioned this event for the Masons. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, those are the kinds of things you would do? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. And I-- Speaker 1: You would get paid for that? Speaker 2: Oh, yes and I'd sing at funerals. I worked for two funeral homes in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] playing and singing for, for their funerals. And moved on from there and I'm not getting too far ahead of the game, but in 1994 Bill [Bill Gaither] and Gloria Gaither asked me to come and sing with them in Anderson, Indiana, and we got together. They brought together all the gospel singers, all the old timers and some of the newer ones and we had four nights of just gospel get together and had a wonderful time, and this can be seen on YouTube. You can see me on YouTube too (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I saw you on YouTube. Speaker 2: Oh, indeed. Speaker 1: And enjoyed it. Speaker 2: God bless you. Speaker 1: And that was my next question to ask about the Gaithers and how you got involved in that? So, they just reached out to you? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Had you been, had you met them? Speaker 2: I had not. Speaker 1: So they pretty much looked you up? Speaker 2: They, they knew about me and they sent me a letter wanting to know whether or not if I would want to be a part of it and I told them yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And who else was a part of that you said four days, do you recall any of the other groups or performers? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness gracious, the Soul Stirrers and Albertina Walker and her group, Billy Preston and Jennifer Hudson, oh so many of the old gospel singers. Speaker 1: What do you mean by Jennifer Hudson now? Speaker 2: Jennifer Hudson, she was the heavy, heavy set girl that played-- Speaker 1: She sang--you're talking about '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And--Jennifer Holliday. Speaker 1: Holliday. Speaker 2: Please forgive me, Jennifer Holliday. It was so many, so many groups from all over. Gospel groups and we just, we just had a wonderful time singing, rehearsing, recording and it was wonderful. It was just wonderful (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did the recording evolve from that? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 633236 Speaker 1: Can you recall a particular song that you did during that four day celebration? Speaker 2: 'Old Ship of Zion' ['Tis the Old Ship of Zion'] and-- Speaker 1: Do you recall--you still have that song close to your heart? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. The--I did twice, I think I did it twice. Once when he had me to come to Atlanta [Georgia]. I did 'The Old Ship of Zion' on one (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Who had you come? Speaker 2: Bill Gaither. Speaker 1: The Gaithers [Gloria Gaither and Bill Gaither]. Speaker 2: Bill and--the Gaithers. Yes. Speaker 1: You did another event with them in it? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Yep. Speaker 1: Can you sing a little of that? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. (Singing) "'Tis the old ship of Zion, 'Tis is the old ship of Zion, 'Tis the old ship of Zion, Get on board, Get on board. For it has landed many, many a thousand, It has landed many a thousand, Lord it has landed a many a thousand. Get on board, Get on board." Speaker 1: Thank you, beautifully done. Speaker 2: God bless. Story_ID: 633237 Speaker 1: Now you've mentioned a number of well known people you've met and encountered from your childhood on through, are there some we haven't discussed, haven't mentioned other than the Gaithers [Gloria Gaither and Bill Gaither] and other encounters like that and opportunities you may have had? Speaker 2: Other than the Willie Webb Singers and the Robert Anderson Singers and Mahalia. Mahalia use to when she'd see me, she'd say, (Singing) "My Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson]." And I'd say, "That's my baby." Oh. Speaker 1: And your, you met Mahalia Jackson when you--? Speaker 2: Oh, when I was a youngster. Speaker 1: When you were a youngster. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: She, when she was singing at St. Luke's [St. Luke Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] down on Indiana Avenue there, and we all went over to hear her sing, she had a concert. And that's when I, I first met her and consequently after that we ran into each other in later years when I was with the Roberta Martin Singers. She would come to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania or to New York [New York], when she would travel to New York. She would come to Philadelphia to stay with one of The Argo Singers, Vera Sloan Tillman and I would go over, they would let me--Vera would call me to let me know that Mahalia was here, "Mahalia's here," and I would go over and we would have dinner and we would sit down and chat, talk about old times and what not and oh it was just a wonderful, wonderful friendship that we had. As I said she called me her Romance. Story_ID: 633238 Speaker 1: Now I know that you talked about Thomas Dorsey and your early years and, and Sallie Martin and your relationship with them. So, did you encounter them or see them later in your life in your career? Speaker 2: Oh, many, many occasions when they would come to Philadelphia, he and she would travel together. And Edwin Newberry of the Newberry Singers of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, he had a group that he would put together, and when they would have anniversary celebrations they would bring Sallie Martin and sometimes Thomas A. Dorsey to Philade- (clears throat) to Phila- pardon me to Philadelphia to sing and after--one, one particular incident at the church, not incident but an occurrence at the church they--when she got up to sing and whatnot, she saw me in the audience and because naturally you know I was gonna sit right down front and she said, "I know you," said, "I taught you to sing." (Laughter) And I was just so, so, so elated and so happy that she recognized me in my grown years you know. Yes. Speaker 1: And you talked to her? Speaker 2: Oh, I talked to her, we talked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she recognized you during-- Speaker 2: During the service. Speaker 1: --during the program? Speaker 2: Yes, yes during the program. Yes, and we talked of old times, we talked about younger days and whatnot, and yes, Lord we had, had a good conversation but she was getting up in age at that time and dementia was setting in. A lot times they would have to sit her down because she would, you know she'd start rambling you know. Story_ID: 633239 Speaker 1: Give me your reflections on the influence of, of Sallie Martin and Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] on the world of music. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's start with Thomas Dorsey, 'cause he was a-- Speaker 2: He's a father of gospel, very much so. He'd come to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Tindley Temple [Tindley Temple United Methodist Church] down there on Broad Street and they were crazy about him there, and he'd give his concerts and what--a lot of times I would not go because at some--because a lot of times I was working when he would come. But oh, he definitely made a big impact on gospel. That--the good news, that's what gospel is. Gospel is the good news and because of him and, and Reverend Tindley [Charles Albert Tindley] that a lot of the old songs, the hymns and whatnot a lot, you know a lot, a lot of churches have forgotten, not forgot, but just don't do hymns anymore. Hymns and anthems, and that's what, that's what we were raised on. That's our heritage, that's, that, that's where we, that's where we came from, and a lot of the choirs that I used to direct in Philadelphia, a lot of the younger choirs that I had started directing, they don't want to sing hymns or anthems. They want to do the modern s- the, the, what do they call it? The contemporary, contemporary music. And the three of the churches that I used to play for there wasn't heavy want to do. You know I wanted to teach them gospel. I wanted to teach them some anthems and let's, let's do some hymns. Let's go back, let's go back and do some good old soul stirring hymns. They wanted to sing the--what's his called? I can't think of his name now that is doing all the good? Speaker 1: Kirk Franklin? Speaker 2: Kirk Franklin and the other, the other two that are out there. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they wanted to do their songs. Speaker 1: So you mentioned that you have helped put together choirs, have organized choirs--choir director at various churches-- Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: --in the Philadelphia area? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about some of those and the names of the churches? Speaker 2: Genesis Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], good lord. Well, Holy Temple [Holy Temple Church of God in Christ, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my church that I you know I'm playing, playing for the choirs there. I'm not directing the choirs, I'm playing along with the choir now. I don't direct anymore. Speaker 1: But you did direct in your home church? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I directed, and at Mount Airy Church of God in Christ [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when I moved over into West Oak Lane [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I was just in the drama ministry there and we did 'Man of Gal-'--'Man from Galilee' ['The Man From Galilee'], 'Walk in His Footsteps' [ph.], and two other plays that I did, that I did with them, but. Speaker 1: At the church? Speaker 2: At the church, yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am. I didn't sing on the choirs. A couple of times I did come back and they asked me to lead a couple of songs and whatnot and I did that, but since I moved back into my home in Phil- West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], since Holy Temple is just right around the corner from where I'm at. I can walk and since my, my bout with prostate cancer I, I just I--it was easier for me to go around the corner instead of across town. Story_ID: 633240 Speaker 1: And your, your bout with cancer, do you have any reflections on that or lessons learned or advice to men about that? Speaker 2: Oh, take care of your body. Go, when you have the warning, the warning signs, go and so something about it. The Lord put the doctors down here to, to keep you in good health. My sister, my mother [Laura Watson] and, and a few of my sisters you know they believed in divine healing, and when they became ill and whatnot, they, "Oh, the Lord's gonna heal me, I, I have, I believe in the power of prayer," and whatnot. I said, "Yes, Mother, but the doctor--the Lord put the doctors down here to take care of your ills and to keep you healthy." My sister Loretta [Loretta Watson], she had pancreatic cancer. My sister Ophelia [Ophelia Watson], she died of a heart attack. My sister, Canary [ph.], from a heart attack. My brother, Isaac [Isaac Watson] died from a heart attack. Oh, my goodness, Mother died from pan- from multiple myeloma. Daddy [Amos Watson], he, he was gored by a calf down south when he was living down south and it left a big scar on his, on his leg and it soon after over the years became cancerous so they had to take his leg and whatnot, but he died at ninety-eight. Dad indeed--mother died at sixty-four, but I tried to tell them you know, "You don't have to, you don't have to--go, go to the doctors." "Oh, well--." Speaker 1: And you, you do, you take care of yourself? Speaker 2: I take care of myself. Any little thing that happens, I go to the doctor and the doctor told me that my PSA [prostate specific antigen] was high, so he said you--my internist he said, "Get yourself to a urologist." And by that time he took twelve samples on the prostate and ten of them were cancerous of the test, tests that he took and for two years I went through the radiation treatment, and then after the radiation treatment I started taking the chemo [chemotherapy] shots every six months and from that I would develop hot flashes. I would have hot flashes, and they would come unbidden sometimes; just any time they'd wanted to come they'd come. Standing up singing, sitting there playing the piano, just--oh, god. So. Speaker 1: So where do you stand with that now? This is how many years later? Speaker 2: Right now I'm remission, in remission one, going on a year, going on a year now. Speaker 1: In remission? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: That's (unclear). Speaker 2: Thank the Lord. Speaker 1: Now you have--several of your siblings have passed but you have two siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, I have a sister in California, that's Floriene [Floriene Watson Harris], she's in good health, doing good. Speaker 1: And how old is she now? Speaker 2: She's eighty-five. And Vivienne [Vivienne Watson Vaughn], that's the one that's in the nursing home. That's the one that's ninety-one. She's not-- Speaker 1: In a nursing home where? Speaker 2: At Crestwood, Crestwood Care [Symphony of Crestwood, Chicago, Illinois], 143rd [Street] and Cicero, South Cicero [Avenue] and she's not doing too well. She's losing weight, they weighed her the other day and she was down to 111 pounds, and she was a robust woman, you know. But I go to see her every day. She's sometimes, she's in good spirits and other times she's not. Sits there in that chair from morning until the evening until they put her to bed. Speaker 1: What is your age now? Speaker 2: My age? I'm eighty-two. Speaker 1: Eighty-two. Do you feel eighty-two? Do you feel sixty-two? Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't feel it; I don't feel eighty-two. These old bones don't act like they used to (laughter), but I keep on trumping--keep on, keep on trucking. Story_ID: 633241 Speaker 1: Were you able to attend Roberta Martin's services? Speaker 2: No, I was working, I had to work in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: How about Thomas Dorsey? Speaker 2: Thomas A. Dorsey, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sallie Martin? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Just, just checking, just wanted to make sure I didn't overlook that. And what do you think about Roberta Martin getting a stamp when she got her stamp in 1997. No, not 1997, 1998-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], right. Speaker 1: --when they issued it? Speaker 2: Yes, and I have-- Speaker 1: In fact for several, wonderful gospel artists at the time Mahalia Jackson, Clara Ward, Sister Rosetta Thorpe and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Thorpe, yes. I have Mahalia Jackson's stamp, I have Roberta Martin's. There's one other that I have. I can't think, but I do have Roberta Martin's and Mahalia's. Speaker 1: Were you--did you attend Delois Barrett Campbell's? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You were there? Speaker 2: I was there and I sang. Speaker 1: And you sang, that's (unclear) what I wanted to hear. What did you sing then? Speaker 2: 'He Looked Beyond My Faults' and Delois and I were the last two. Now that she's gone, I'm the last Roberta Martin Singer. Speaker 1: And how do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Oh, I miss the others, I, you know I miss the camaraderie. I miss the fellowship. I miss the brotherly and sisterly stages that we had gone through. We were, because we were just like brothers and sisters and I tell you that we ate together, some slept together. Not men, but the women, of course, but you know it was just, just a wonderful, a wonderful get together. A wonderful experience in life. A life experience that I'm so thankful to god that I was able to participate in, and I'll, I'll hold it in my memory until, until I leave here. Story_ID: 633242 Speaker 1: Any other reflections on life that we may not have touched upon that you would like to share? Speaker 2: Well, you know a lot of folk are not church minded and it's just nice to go back to the old time ways. It's nice to touch upon--first of all to get Christ in your life because these, these are the last days. I used to hear my mother [Laura Watson] say back in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and what not, "Oh, children, these, these are the last days." And I said, "What, what do you mean, 'These are the last days'?" and whatnot. The time is winding up, but I surmise that time is winding down, and first of all giving honor to God who is first in my life, whose kept me here for eighty-two years. And I'm just so thankful to the Lord. I didn't give him all the praise and all the glory and all the honor that was due him during my younger days and whatnot, trying to do this and trying to do that and all you know, but it was in my later years that I realized that God is good all the time, and all the time He's good and you ask a person, "How you doing?" "Oh, I woke up this morning." And, "What time--you woke up--?" "Yeah, that old alarm clock went off or the radio went off." No, it was not the alarm clock or the radio that went off that awakened you this morning. The Lord sent his angel of mercy to come down and touch you gently with his finger of love to awaken you to a brand new day that you've never seen before, and that you'll never, ever see again. Give God the praise, give Him all the honor and all the glory that's due Him, and I hope to meet you in glory one of these days. God bless you real good. Story_ID: 633243 Speaker 1: How do you feel about how you have lived your life? Speaker 2: I could have lived a better life, and I know I could have. There were a lot of things that I should have done that I did not do. Family for one of the things that I should have done better with to keep my family together. And I'm gonna tell on myself. I am, I'm gonna tell on myself: it was my womanizing that broke up the family. You know you go out on these concerts and whatnot and the women are just all over you, just praising you, "Oh, oh, Romance [HistoryMaker Romance Watson], that name, oh Romance." (Laughter) And at one time, at one time or another my head was as big as a watermelon, but I learned how to, I learned how to take that with a grain of salt, you know. Story_ID: 633244 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: How do I want to be remembered? First of all as a child of God, and as a caring human being who cares for his fellow man. And that's it, that's about the size of it. Oh, get your house in order (laughter). Story_ID: 633245 Speaker 1: Do you ever ponder or think what your life would be if you had chosen a different career path? Speaker 2: I have thought about that sometime and wondered if I had taken the other path. A lot of my buddies, a lot of my school chums, a lot of the neighborhood boys got mixed up in dope and all that and I could have been among the number, but because of the upbringing that I'd gone through I shied away from all of that, and it's just I, I keep in touch with a couple of the old school chums, Barbara Wright [HistoryMaker Barbara Wright-Pryor], you probably know her; and Katherine McGruder [ph.], she was a neighborhood school chum and we keep in touch. We try to find out all the old ones that have--where they are and what they're doing. Story_ID: 633246 Speaker 1: What do you think about us having our first black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in your lifetime? Speaker 2: In my lifetime (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever imagine that it would happen? Speaker 2: I never did, but I'm truly elated and I'm pr- and I pray for him all, all the time. Pray that the Lord will lead him and guide him in all of his endeavors, and to keep his family safe from dangers, seen and unseen, and to lead him in, in this world situation, and I'm wishing, wishing him the best, all the best. Speaker 1: Did you vote? Speaker 2: Ah, did I, am I (laughter)? Am I going to? Yes. Story_ID: 633247 Speaker 1: And what do you think is the importance of history to all of us, to our young people? The importance of history in our lives? Speaker 2: To, to remember where you've come from. To remember your heritage, remember your history. To remember where the Lord has brought you from you know. Every day is a new day that the Lord gives you, and be a good human being. God bless you, just do the right thing because it is what it is. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Speaker 2: God bless you. It's been such a pleasure. Speaker 1: It has been, we truly appreciate this. I feel like I have had just a valuable history lesson here for myself like I have read several books. Speaker 2: And I'm just honored that you thought enough of me to want to interview me, and I thank you and I pray for you constantly. God bless you, God bless you...