 Story_ID: 239230 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am could you please state your name and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ma'am (laughter)? Speaker 1: --could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name Terrie Michelle Williams, T-E-R-R-I-E, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: That's part of our training. Can you give us your date of birth and place of birth please? Speaker 2: May 12, 1954, Mount Vernon, New York. Speaker 1: Alright and ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Stop the ma'am Larry. Okay my occupation--okay I have a couple of hyphens, I am an author, I am a speaker and entrepreneur, I am the founder and president of the Stay Strong Foundation, okay I guess that's it. Speaker 1: The founder of The Terrie Williams Agency. Speaker 2: Oh yeah well I said entrepreneur, yes owner and founder of the Stay Strong Foundation and also vice chair of PGP Communications. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: Do you want all of this, there's one more Recycling Inspiration, co-founder of Recycling Inspiration. Speaker 1: Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Is this a test? Okay it's September 17, 2004. Speaker 1: Right this is because it is a historical document and we always start out like this. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at my home. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Story_ID: 239231 Speaker 1: The first series of questions are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: What's my favorite food, microwaved lemon pound cake with vanilla ice cream. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: You know what I love black, oh you know what I love what do they call it, my convertible is called, I can't remember what it's called but it's a very distinctive quartz blue so I'm going to say quartz blue 'cause it's the most incredible color, I love it. Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Autumn Speaker 1: And a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Just anywhere near water. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, stay strong. Story_ID: 239232 Speaker 1: Okay now I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Williams] side. I'm going to start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Marie, M-A-R-I-E Kearney, K-E-A-R-N-E-Y Williams. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 18, 1932, Warrenton, W-A-R-R-E-N-T-O-N, North Carolina Speaker 1: Okay now what do you know about the ancestors on that side of the family? How far back can you trace her side of the family? Speaker 2: My mother was--you know what I feel like I should have done more of my homework before I sat down for this. Speaker 1: Oh it's just whatever you know about her, that's fine. Speaker 2: Well my mom was one of nine children born to Laura Basket Kearney Davis and Early Bird Kearney. Speaker 1: Early Bird Kearney? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Is that a nickname or (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a nickname and I don't remember his (unclear). Speaker 1: Is there a story about how he got the name Early Bird? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And she was also the only one of the nine children to--it was a sharecroppers' family--she was the only one of the nine children to graduate from high school and then go on to college and graduate school. She didn't do those things until my sister and I graduated from high school and college. Speaker 1: Are there stories from your family about sharecropping and stories that go back to slavery or any of that kind of thing in the family? Speaker 2: Well I know that it was very, very difficult making ends meet. That you would work day in and day out for mere pennies--that they work day in and day out for mere pennies and it was always, always, always the plantation owner always owing him. It's like you could never, ever make ends meet. You were always in debt to him, always and I remember that and it was I think one of the things that makes me admire my mother so was because what was it that enabled her because they had to walk five miles to school when they were able to go to because each one of them had to work the fields. So what was it in her that gave the determination to get to school as often as she did 'cause it was a little one room schoolhouse. But I do know that there was something in her. The steely kind of resolve in her that made her go to school as often as she did and enabled her to graduate from school. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about how she felt about that? Speaker 2: Well just that it was--she always thought that there was something more out there for her, that's all just always thought that there was something more. My mother had a twin brother but she always just felt that there was something more out there for her and so that's what she did. She did her job in the fields but she also went to school and I don't know there was just always something very unique and special about her. So what I do recall was just the fact that you would work so hard and you appreciate whatever little bit you got and that there was a great appreciation for what my grandmother did to hold the family together because my grandfather abandoned the family very early on. So my grandmother was left to hold the family together and she was able to do it, some kind of way she was able to hold the family together. Story_ID: 239233 Speaker 1: Now this is during the Great Depression, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --Your mother [Marie Kearney Williams] is growing up '32 [1932]-- Speaker 2: Abso--yes. Speaker 1: --and the beginnings of World War II [WWII], I mean that's a tough time. Speaker 2: Yes. Very, very tough time, somehow my grandmother [Laura Basket Kearney Davis] was able to make a way out of no way. It was just the belief in God that when there was nothing, God helped her and them to make a way. Speaker 1: Did she have a specific church affiliation that she was involved in? Speaker 2: There was, I don't know the name of the church but I do know that was an important part of their foundation. Speaker 1: Do you think it was the church or just her own inner (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was her own inner strength and it was her own belief in God. There were days that they did go without but whatever little she had, she put something together so that they would have something to eat and I think that was one of the things that instilled something very strong in my mother because she watched what my grandmother was able to do that she never gave up even when this man [Williams' maternal grandfather, Early Bird Kearney] walked out of the house and I know that we'll get later to my father's [Charles Williams] side of the family but my grandfather on my father's side left his family as well. So it's just sometimes when you have an example or you see what's someone is able to do to hold it together, it strengthens you to do your part to hold it together. Speaker 1: Now did your mother tell you about how she left North Carolina? I don't know where she was but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well she and my dad met in--but my dad was born in Norlina, North Carolina. Story_ID: 239234 Speaker 1: Let's just get your dad's name now I guess. Speaker 2: My dad is Charles Williams-- Speaker 1: Charles Williams. Speaker 2: --and he was born May 13th, 1928 in Norlina, N-O-R-L-I-N-A, North Carolina and he was one of five children. Speaker 1: You had started to tell the story of how they met so before I ask you about his ancestors and/or his family just tell us how they met. Speaker 2: It was just a kind of communities kind of coming together and they just--it was just kind of a community kind of thing. There was really nothing too extraordinary about it, they just kind of met and kind of clicked. It wasn't really anything special as I hear it told and then my dad went into the [U.S. military] service but they just kind of came together and just kind of liked each other and started dating. It was really kind of unremarkable as I hear. But they just met and decided to--they got married down there and decided to move up north and make a life for themselves. Speaker 1: How old were they when they got married? Speaker 2: Like twenty-one, yeah, twenty-one years old of age. Speaker 1: Did they come immediately north or (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they came immediately north. Speaker 1: Where did they move to? Speaker 2: Actually moved to Mount Vernon, New York because two of my mother's [Marie Kearney Williams] sisters had migrated to Mount Vernon and so they just kind of moved that way and two of my dad's sisters had moved to New Jersey. But it was really my mom--my mother and her sisters were very close and so because they moved to Mount Vernon that's where my parents moved. My dad found a trucking company to--my dad had to drop out of high school--he dropped out of seventh grade. He had to drop out of school to really take care of the family. There were two brothers and three sisters so because he had been abandoned by his father--the family had been abandoned by his father, it was really--him being the oldest he dropped out of school to help his mother to care for the family because it was a bit much for her to do by herself. Story_ID: 239235 Speaker 1: So he [Williams' father, Charles Williams] had to become the man of the-- Speaker 2: He really did, and so when he came north he went to work for a trucking company. He worked there for a number of years, upstate New York and then the company went into bankruptcy, and my father decided that he was going to go into business for himself. I remember very, very vividly when the company was going out of business and my parents didn't share with me what exactly was going on but I knew something was wrong and I remember feeling afraid that--I knew he had lost his job and I just didn't know what was going to come of us. I just--because they weren't really saying anything to my sister and to me but I didn't know what was going to happen to us. But there was never an interruption of anything, we didn't hurt for anything, we didn't want for anything. I know that they were very worried but it wasn't really communicated to my sister and me and the next thing that I knew my father had started a business with one of the guys who had worked at the company with him. So he started this business, Westchester New York Express [ph.] and it became a very successful business and so I had an example early on in my life of successful entrepreneurship. Speaker 1: So Westchester New York Express was a trucking company? Speaker 2: It was a trucking company and they had several manufacturing companies and would pick up deliveries from these companies and then deliver them to department stores throughout the tri-state area and so that was the business and my mom [Marie Kearney Williams] remained at home. She was a homemaker, they felt that was important for her to do that and she became very, very involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and also worked as a teacher's aide so that was the mix. My sister and I went to a Jewish nursery school in the community. They really wanted us to--that was really like the YWHA [Young Men's Hebrew Association] and there were so many advantages that they did not have educationally and that they wanted to instill in us. They wanted us to have certain types of experiences so we went to a little Jewish nursery school. It was a nice diversity mix and we had little carpools and so-- Speaker 1: Okay the YWHA? Speaker 2: It was the Young Women's [Hebrew Association (YWHA)] and Men's Hebrew Association. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 239236 Speaker 1: --Before we leave your mother and father's history what do you know about the ancestors on his side, do you know very much about them or do they have any stories that they passed down (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just know that my grandmother's mother was of Indian [Native American] heritage. That's all that I really know and I do know that my grandmother was sitting with her on a porch when there was a major thunderstorm and she was sitting by her side and she was struck by lightning and was instantaneously killed. So I know of that trauma but I don't really know a great deal about her. My grandmother was a very quiet, very gentle kind of spirit, didn't say a lot at all but very again strong, steely kind of resolve but that was a very, very traumatizing experience. She was sitting right by her side; she was in a rocking chair and the lightning just-- Speaker 1: Did she--I mean, did the family talk about, you know, that at all much? Speaker 2: No I just knew that it happened. Story_ID: 239237 Speaker 1: But it wasn't really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That almost sounds like a Toni Morrison novel. Speaker 1: --talked about. Yes, yes, yes-- Speaker 2: That's horrible. Okay. All right. Well, we try and stay in a chronology here so tell us about--do you have a first childhood memory or an earliest memory that you can share with us? Speaker 1: Well you know one thing that's kind of--that stands out in my mind is I remember when my sister was born and I remember just feeling a little twang of jealousy, just remembering when she was born and the attention that she was getting and hovering over her bassinet and kind of making scary faces trying to make her cry, that's one thing that comes to mind. I do remember going to nursery school and because I was the [Young Women's] Hebrew Association [YWHA] I'm very, very attuned to all the Jewish holidays. One because I went to a Jewish nursery school and then too jumping ahead, I went to a Jewish university. I went to Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] so I feel like I'm part Jewish. So I know all the Jewish holidays but I remember very clearly and I have in my bathroom we used to have to dress up as Queen Esther when in nursery school. So I just remember very vividly at certain Jewish holidays that we would play a particular character or come dressed up and so I just remember dressing up as Queen Esther. But I remember--I just have kind of fond memories about the nursery school experience and it was probably--I know that there were other nursery schools, the daycare centers but it was a very diverse class. There were--that's why I can say it was a very diverse kind of experience there but I just remember having fun there. Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: And just learning at an early age to kind of get along with people, just at an early age. Mount Vernon [New York] is a city that's divided by a train track. The north side of Mount Vernon is predominantly white and the south side of Mount Vernon back then is predominantly black but early on got that experience of diversity. I lived on the south side of the Mount Vernon and most of the black people who were in the class--black kids who were in the class lived on the south side. But early on that was an experience that my parents wanted us--my sister and I to have, one of diversity so I got that early on. Story_ID: 239238 Speaker 1: Now did the Jewish community live on the south side or on the north side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it was really very black, the south side of Mount Vernon [New York] was very black and the north side of Mount Vernon again divided by that train track was very white, Jewish, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay the reason why I asked because in those days the Jewish community was very close to the black community in terms of a lot of the businesses and stores within the black community would be owned and operated by Jewish people and as a closer contact day to day that it is today. So I just wondered if--and sometimes the Jewish community is a community that as the Jewish community vacates the black community move in that happens in a lot of places. Speaker 2: No not in terms of residentially and I'm sure that they were the ones who owned stores on the south side but that's not a real strong recollection but yeah I'm sure that they owned the stores on the south side. There wasn't much in the way of black entrepreneurship at that time and then these schools--I think maybe around the time that I was in the schools there were white kids on the south side but it was predominantly black on the south side and then when I was in fourth grade [at Robert Fulton Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York] there was a mandate handed down by the state that schools needed to be integrated. I and Denzel Washington and maybe about twenty other young people--black kids our parents decided to have us go to schools on the north side of Mount Vernon. So there were in our school experience was enriched once again in terms of going to schools on the north side where they were just better equipped. The quality of your education was better on the north side of Mount Vernon, better schools, better equipment and just all around better education. So that was a very interesting experience. So from kindergarten to fourth grade, I was on the south side of Mount Vernon in my neighborhood school--that was in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's like 1963-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --you were about nine in fourth grade? Speaker 2: That's correct. Story_ID: 239239 Speaker 1: So you went to school with Denzel Washington? Speaker 2: Yeah we were--fifth and sixth grade we were both at Pennington [Elementary] School in Mount Vernon [New York] and then seventh and eighth grade we ended up in different junior high schools. I went to Nichols Junior High School [Mount Vernon, New York] and he went to Traphagen [School, Mount Vernon, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay I'm sorry can you give the name of the grade school you started at first? Speaker 2: I started out in Robert Fulton [Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York] that was K [kindergarten] through fourth grade and that was on the south side of Mount Vernon and then I went to Pennington, P-E-N-N-I-N-G-T-O-N and that was on the north side of Mount Vernon and I went there for fifth and sixth grade and that was part of this mandate for integrated schools. Any parent on the north side--south side of Mount Vernon had the option to have their child educated on the north side of Mount Vernon. Your child could be bussed or you could do a carpool and have your child--you could take your child over to the north side. My parents [Marie Kearney Williams and Charles Williams] and another child's parent did a carpool so we were driven every day. Denzel and most of the kids were bussed. Speaker 1: Okay so integration in this case was optional and say if no one decided to do it on the south side there wouldn't have been any integration. Was there--did they have a limit on how many could go to school on the north side? Speaker 2: No there was no limit but there were about, I would say maybe about twenty-five of us that first year and then it, you know, began to increase. Story_ID: 239240 Speaker 1: Now did you notice a profound difference when you moved from a south side school to a north side school [in Mount Vernon, New York]? Speaker 2: Well you know probably in that, you know, higher expectations, just higher expectations and the physical surroundings, the buildings everything was cleaner, neater, nicer than the schools on the south side and I would just say that people just--teachers just expected more, they just expected more that was the sense. I always for some reason had a very good relationship with my teachers. Early on my mom [Marie Kearney Williams] seemed to have established a pattern where we had teachers over for lunch and so I had a very good relationship with all of my teachers even when I was going to Robert Fulton [Elementary] School [Mount Vernon, New York], at some point a teacher came to our home for lunch. So there was a personal kind of rapport that was established that maybe some of the other students might not have had. So generally I think that the teachers when I was on the south side of school knew that there was something a little different, a little special that my parents took a special interest. A lot of times you'll find that kids are out there--it's really very, very sad because so many kids are out there parenting themselves. Their parents are actually in a lot of pain themselves; they can't parent themselves so they certainly are not parenting their children. So my parents always demonstrated that they cared about what was happening in my sister's life and my life. So that always made a bit of a difference. But I think it was always very clear that there is just a difference in expectations and certainly the accommodations and what you had. Speaker 1: And better facilities. Speaker 2: Definitely better facilities. Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that stand out on the south side before you moved? Speaker 2: Mary Smalls [ph.] who was my social studies teacher at Robert Fulton School. She was just--I just loved her. She was very, very special and Camille Datero [ph.] who was my third grade teacher, we're still in touch. She ended up being an advisor to one of the--an organization called the Keyette Club. It was a service organization in high school [at Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York]. She became an advisor to that organization so she and I have maintained a relationship over the years. [Elizabeth P.] Betty Patel who was a fourth grade teacher, she's someone with whom I stayed in touch with over the years. Those are three who--I had a teacher who was an art teacher, it's really funny because she's the first teacher and I don't know how it became known to me but she was gay or is gay and I don't think--I'm not sure that we knew it when we were taking her art class but she was always just different. You knew that she was different but I don't think we knew while we were taking her class but maybe years after it was clear that Katty [ph.] was gay or is gay. But I just--it was just kind of funny kind of getting that clarity afterwards; just getting to know teachers as an adult-- Story_ID: 239241 Speaker 1: It's interesting that the whole issue about teachers--should we talk now? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh, no but, you know, you hit on something kind of interesting because my teachers actually really did play a very important part of my life because I've maintained relationships with my teachers for a long time even my kindergarten teacher [at Robert Fulton Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York]. I was in her very first class, Vicky Klein [ph.]. She passed away, died of cancer maybe about twenty years ago. I was at her funeral, was acknowledged at her funeral. I don't know somehow or other my teachers and I had a rapport there were key teachers in my life that really made an indelible impression and we made an indelible impression on each other and we've stayed in touch somehow or another. Bob Kettler [ph.] my English teacher who was always a little like offbeat just a very, very special person. Yeah I've been very blessed in my life to have had some very special people. Speaker 2: Can you describe yourself as a little girl? What kind of little girl were you and what did you like to do? Speaker 1: You know what, I was a little miss goody two shoes and I think that on a lot of levels because my parents [Marie Kearney Williams and Charles Williams] didn't have the very best educationally, they really, really wanted my sister and I to do well, to excel and I think that was passed on--I know that it was passed on to me consciously and subconsciously. That I knew that I had to succeed by any means necessary and sometimes I think I was robot like in that pursuit. Sometimes that costs to me in terms of really just kind of developing as a whole person. It was always focused on--I was class president in eighth grade [at Nichols Junior High School, Mount Vernon, New York], was always holding some kind of office, the extracurricular activities, getting the good grades, maintaining relationships with everybody across the board which started when I was very young. I was always on this quest to be the very best that I could be and because my parents always instilled in my sister and me the importance of giving back, to whom much is given much is required, that was always in the back of my mind as well. So its drive to succeed, its drive to give back because we've been very, very blessed so that was like my primary focus in everything. So it was like I was born and bred to succeed and to give back. So it's like that's all I know how to do (laugh). So now at fifty I want to branch out and start to have more fun and just think about like really, really fun things and hobbies. Those other things are important and I do think that life is about service and I really do feel as if I'm here on this earth to do God's work but I also want to add like another dimension. But as a young person growing up those were my--that was the focus. Little miss goody two shoes, always got to do the right thing, damn it (laughter). Speaker 2: That's a wonderful thing--you know it can be a wonderful thing to really get more people to think that way-- Story_ID: 239242 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Got exposed to a lot, museums. I remember meeting--going to the Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York] plays. We would go as I said to museums and I remember going to the [Solomon R.] Guggenheim [Museum, New York, New York] and meeting Mike Wallace, I didn't know who Mike Wallace was but my mom [Marie Kearney Williams] was like '60 Minutes,' that's Mike Wallace, I just remember that. I remember the Guggenheim and meeting Mike Wallace. Speaker 1: Was it a formal meeting of him or was he just there? Speaker 2: He was just there, he was just hanging out at the museum like we were and I started being intrigued early on for some reason when I met celebrities, I started kind of collecting autographs even when we would go to the NEC productions--the Negro Ensemble Company productions being rather excited about meeting performers afterwards and getting their autographs or in Mount Vernon [New York] if city hall was having some kind of production or a concert, I would want to meet people afterwards who performed and kind of get their autographs or something like that. I was kind of intrigued by those things early on and I guess I mentioned that because my life became as an adult representing some of the biggest names in the business but it was just funny to me that early on I just had a little bit of intrigue about that but very early on. It was interesting the way you posed that question the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Just early on my parents wanted to expose my sister and me to just as many things as possible and there was a girl that I'd met, her name was Judy Singer--Judith Singer who had five brothers. She lived on the north side of Mt. Vernon and very, very cultured family, they were always very, very interesting people coming in and out of her house all of the time and hung out with her and her family a lot. Her brothers would sometimes take her to the city and so we would do lots of different kinds of things with her and her brothers. So just venturing out to see the world and always being exposed to culture, art, poetry, photography, that's what my life was like--our life was like. Speaker 1: So a lot of what happened outside of Mount Vernon impressed you in terms of culture and learning. Speaker 2: And also my dad [Charles Williams] was really in to horses so we used to go to a ranch every summer and hang out and we'd meet people there. I would ride the horses but I was really scared of them, really scared. I think horses are absolutely exquisite animals, I love looking at horses but I was scared to ride those things, but we used to do that, too-- Story_ID: 239243 Speaker 1: Now did the family ever go back to North Carolina for any reason? Speaker 2: Yes we did, and yeah, I forgot about that. But yes we did go back to North Carolina at least like once a year, a couple of times a year to visit grandma [Laura Basket Kearney Davis] before my grandmother moved north to live with us we would definitely go back there and that was always kind of weird to me because when I say weird 'cause there was an outhouse. There was no bathroom (laugh) in that house and so that was a drag that when we had to go to the bathroom, we had to go to that outhouse. See I just blanked that out because I hated going to the bathroom in the outhouse and so at night because it was dark outside, you had to go to the bathroom in a little pot in the house and then in the morning then you would take it to the outhouse and empty it. But that's probably why I like to blank out the trips to North Carolina 'cause that just wasn't cool for me. I hated going to the bathroom in the outhouse. But yeah my grandmother--there was no bathroom facilities so yes we used to do that. Speaker 1: Okay so did you take note of some of the segregation in North Carolina when you were down there? Speaker 2: Well you know what, that wasn't really an issue by then when we were going there. No that's not what I took note of--I just took note of the outhouse (laughter). I did enjoy visiting relatives and stuff and you know the back roads. It was fun visiting folks but no I didn't really have any face to face interaction with segregation. Speaker 1: Did they still have the signs up or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No not when I was--I didn't have any (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I was thinking I don't know when you went but it wasn't until after '62 [1962] that they started really trying to change any of that. Signs were up in the '60s [1960s] that's when they had the sit-ins and so forth. Speaker 2: I didn't witness but I certainly--it's something that I remember just stories from my mother [Marie Kearney Williams] are very vivid about what that was like and just the unequal treatment. Those stories are very, very etched very strongly in my mother's mind and memory and get passed on to me, my sister just the unequal treatment. Very painful memories and my mother goes back and she speaks to young children. Just about two months ago she spoke to a couple of old--well they are primarily old white schools in New Jersey, a friend of hers had invited her to speak and there were like two black kids in the class and she was just talking about what her life was like and the picking cotton. She would bring actual raw cotton to the classroom and talk about what her life was like and what segregation was like. It's a very powerful thing to share that with young white kids and have them hear what your life was like. It's just interesting to open up other people to what your world is like. I spoke at Lock Haven University at Lock Haven, Pennsylvania earlier this week. There were 2,000, 1,500 was a freshmen convocation and it's between like Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and New York and it was just a fascinating experience because people were coming up talking to me about how really wonderful and uplifting my message was. They don't get to see really real life African American role models speaking. They have very stereotypical images of black people and people were really blown away by what I had to say. It was really kind of life changing for me because I just didn't expect--I was just coming in there just doing [HistoryMaker] Terrie [Williams] but to know that I really made a difference and touched them and made them see people of color in a different kind of way was very interesting to me. Story_ID: 239244 Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in grade school? Speaker 2: Hm. Probably--boy is that a good question--probably literature. You know what I don't think--did I have a favorite subject--maybe it was literature, maybe it was social studies. I don't know. Speaker 1: Had to do with writing and reading? Speaker 2: Yeah I would say definitely wasn't math or anything like that so it was probably English or literature or something like that. I really did enjoy, I will say this that I really did enjoy my extracurricular work like when I was president of the Keyette Club or when I was--when I held those class offices. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell Keyette Club? Speaker 2: K-E-Y-E-T-T-E and that was the girls' service organization and the one for the boys was the Key Club. But I enjoyed that work. I have to say that was the work that really stimulated me and I guess that goes to the core of really who I am with my service work now, with my foundation work and that's the kind of stuff that just--I'll tell you it just really doesn't get much better than that. To really use your gift and your intellectual capacity and your resources to make a difference in the lives of other people, I love that. Speaker 1: So you were president in the Keyette Club at Pennington [Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York] or at (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that was in high school. Speaker 1: In high school, okay. Speaker 2: I was president of the Keyette Club in high school. I was--all of my service work began really in junior high school when I was president of the graduating class that started in eighth grade then in ninth and tenth and eleventh grade I held office. Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: Nichols, N-I-C-H-O-L-S Junior High School [Mount Vernon, New York] and then I went to Mount Vernon High School [Mount Vernon, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And I was just there for three years and I went to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: So did you graduate in three years? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: So they allowed you to do that in a lot of places they don't allow you to graduate in three years. You must have been really (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just you know again this was a relationship with the vice principal there who just--and see there was that thing about that quest to succeed. I didn't have to leave after three years but I did and so went on to Brandeis and, you know, did that in four years and whatever, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, what, 1971? Speaker 2: I was the class of '72 [1972] but I left in '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]. Okay. Story_ID: 239245 Speaker 1: Well you were the Keyette Club president and--? Speaker 2: And I held class office for the three years that I was there at the high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York]. I was president and then I was vice president and then I was something else, I don't remember. Then I also was chosen to spend--in my junior year I was chosen to spend a summer in Colombia, South America, I was an exchange student and right after that I then went to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Now how was that? Speaker 2: That was an amazing experience; that was really amazing. I lived with a family; there was a set of twins and a son and a daughter--an older son and a daughter. The parents spoke English but the kids did not. They didn't speak English with me so that I would learn to speak Spanish, the mother and father and it was just a really wonderful experience. I'm still in touch with the older children. They're living in the states now well Velesca [ph.] moved back to South America. What was really funny was the very first time Velesca the daughter moved to--she became an exchange student in Kentucky and the very first time I heard her speak English was with a southern accent. It was the funniest thing to hear her speak English with a southern accent but it was just a wonderful experience. I got to meet because there were about ten other Americans there from different parts of the country but just an extraordinary experience. Just getting to meet the other Americans and to learn to be away from home for it was like six/eight weeks. It was both scary and exhilarating, emotional. That was a very big step come to think about it, very big step to leave home like that. I don't know what made me do that. Speaker 1: Have you ever been any further away than North Carolina (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really hadn't. I don't know but I'm feeling just a little emotional right now just thinking about that. Speaker 1: Did it scare your mother [Marie Kearney Williams] to send you away that far? Speaker 2: I don't know and I don't know why I feel very emotional about that right now, just thinking back on it and I just think that was a very big step to take. I don't know what made me think I could do it or why I wanted to do it but that was just a very big step to take. I don't know there was an exchange club and I just wanted to go. I wonder what that's about, I have to examine what made me get emotional as I'm sharing that with you, I have no idea what that's about. Speaker 1: Well it is a big step. Speaker 2: It really is but I just (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A sixteen year old going to Colombia, South America with--I mean you had a lot of great educational experiences I'm sure but to go that far away you hadn't been that far away before. Speaker 2: I know but I'm trying to figure out why I'm emotional talking about it that's what I'm trying to figure out (laugh). Speaker 1: Well it's a big deal. As you mentioned it and kind of flew past it, I said wait a minute let's go back to this-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --this doesn't happen to everybody (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: Yeah, and fewer times to black teenagers, you know. Speaker 2: Right, interesting (laughter). All right Barbara Walters over there making people cry. Story_ID: 239246 Speaker 1: I suppose then from everything you're saying you must have been in the National Honor Society and a whole lot of other things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't, you know what's interesting, that's very interesting--excuse me for one moment. I was not a National Honor Society student that's not who I am. I was a good student but I was not National Honor Society. I wasn't even--I didn't take fifty million AP [advanced placement] courses that's not who I was. I was a good student but not National Honor Society student. I graduated with honors from Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] but I was cum laude but wasn't magna [cum laude], a good student. So I don't know what all that means. I know that I'm a very special person but it's not like I was ever one of those really intellectual people. Like in Mount Vernon High School [Mount Vernon, New York] they had level one APs, level ones, level threes and level fives. Most of my classes were level threes which were just average classes. I took maybe level-a couple of level ones but I was a good student. Speaker 1: Now what was your social life like in high school? Did you have a chance to have any fun in high school? Speaker 2: I guess a little bit, I'm telling you I was a drag. I was little Miss Goody two shoes. I really kind of regret--it was this (gestures) that's why I'm trying to live out--I had a boyfriend--two boyfriends that I remember. One was a track star, Steve Groom [ph.] and another guy but I--my social life was fairly unremarkable because those other dimensions were not really that encouraged. I had friends but it was really the focus on achieving so that's what I did and so as I said as I mature my focus is really--I want to just really develop more as a person. I want to really have more fun and that's my focus now 'cause those were things that I kind of feel like I missed out on. Story_ID: 239247 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do you know what I mean (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you feel at the time that you were missing out on anything? Speaker 2: I don't think I knew any better, I was like programmed. It was my sister who said something to me that made me kind of think about it some years ago because she was the one who kind of identified--she said sometimes you're kind of robot like and I think that a lot of people because of my background I majored in psychology and sociology, I have a Master of Science Degree in social work and my training has been--I mean I study people and I've been very gifted in being able to listen to what you don't say to me. I read--I look behind people's game faces and I think that a lot of people who are successful in life they have a very hollow kind of success and it's because they have just been programmed to succeed and all they know is this (gestures). They've got those blinders on, that's all they know and that's all they do and I think it's sad on a lot of levels and I'm right there. But I'm recognizing it and I--it's not too late as long as there is breath in your body and God gives you the ability and the wisdom to open your eyes, you can do something but I think there are a lot of people who were just on automatic pilot, just didn't know any better. There was an interesting piece in the Sunday Time that speaks about the alarming number of people in the trading business who were just committing suicide because when that doesn't work out they have no idea what to do so they just take themselves out and the high number of suicides--six or seven suicides in one year at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. Why 'cause they are on automatic pilot and because people are suffering in silence, can't take that mask off. They think that they're standing on that ledge by themselves so they take themselves out. Why because they are on automatic pilot. Speaker 1: I read something in the packet of information about you about that. Speaker 2: You mean my depression? Speaker 1: Yeah you said you were depressed for a certain period of time. Speaker 2: Right on automatic pilot and it's something I've started speaking about. I wrote about it in my last book ['A Plentiful Harvest: Creating Balance and Harmony Through the Seven Living Virtues,' Terrie Williams] but if you didn't read the book you really didn't really know because I was still kind of hiding from it and then God just really put it on my heart to start speaking about it about five months ago because I do a lot of speaking around the country. No matter what I'm asked to speak about, I will usually mention it at some point and it's amazing how much it resonates with people. People come up to me will say thank you for having the courage to speak about your depression 'cause people don't always know what it looks like 'cause nobody wants to talk about it. Everybody is walking around with that game face on that says that everything is fine when sometimes underneath that you are like dying inside. People don't want to talk about it but it's like just take--maybe don't take the whole mask off but just take a layer of it off. You will find out that you are not standing on that ledge by yourself. Speaker 1: That reminds me of a Paul Laurence Dunbar poem we wear the mask where he describes I guess how black folks in specific has to have a face for white people in these jobs and positions. Speaker 2: Everybody is walking--everybody bar none is walking around challenged, everybody and it's been very eye opening to me. People will come up to me and say nobody in my community knows but I had a nervous breakdown or I suffer from clinical depression and it's amazing to me, just amazing. This guy at Lock Haven [University, Lock Haven, Pennsylvania] came up to me, he was a white guy and just before he finished what he was saying he hugged me, okay? He hugged me, and I knew that he suffered from depression. Story_ID: 239248 Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] of all the schools? Speaker 2: It was, you know what, it was just a matter of destiny. I--The reason that I ended up at Brandeis my vice principal at my [Mount Vernon] High School [Mount Vernon, New York] was connected with someone there and thought that it would be a good choice for me and there was a program there and I entered into that program for a year and that served as my freshman year and then I matriculated as a full time student in my sophomore year that was it. I was just the only--he was like this is what you should do so that's what I did and it was just the right thing to do, I guess. It was a blessing; very prestigious university and I didn't even have to think about it. Speaker 1: Where is Brandeis? Speaker 2: It's in Waltham, Massachusetts, it's about a half hour from Boston [Massachusetts] and it's been really a great experience. It was a great experience being there. I wish that I had--I speak at a lot of universities now and I always share with young people that it's important to step outside your comfort zone, step outside your normal circle of friends and really get to know other people, just expand your universe of people that you're in touch with. Speaker 1: Was high school graduation eventful or anything? Speaker 2: I didn't graduate (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't--so you didn't have a graduation. Speaker 2: I participated in Brandeis' graduation but I didn't participate in my master's [degree] graduation. I'm not a big one for like pomp and circumstance. Speaker 1: Were your parents [Marie Kearney Williams and Charles Williams] and okay with the high school thing, getting out of high school early? Speaker 2: They didn't sweat it at all it was like--that's interesting that you asked that but it didn't seem to be an issue. I did the college one and that was fine and great, and that was it. Story_ID: 239249 Speaker 1: Well what was Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] like for you? I mean did you, I mean--and what was your major first of all? What did you-- Speaker 2: I majored in psychology and sociology. It was a very interesting experience, you know, just coming into your own. I was coming into my own. It was there that I began to take off the blinders a little bit because I didn't have that twenty-four-hour parental thing going on. I could branch out and be a little bit more of a person, have a little bit more fun, had a boyfriend, had sex for the first time (laughter) protected sex for the first time (laughter) and--what else--learned that you have to find out for yourself what people are about. I remember there were a couple of courses in particular that some people had said that professor is like that, you won't get a fair shot and I took the course and did very well. I was like okay you just have to take what people say with a grain of salt and find out for yourself 'cause I never did understand what they were talking about. And I learned the hard way that you have to--that sometimes people are just afraid of your light and there's nothing that you can do about that. That people were just--sometimes they can dislike you or be afraid of you for no reason other than your light is bright and you just have to be okay with that and that you have to choose your friends wisely because people's spirits are transferable and I learned that we can't compare yourself with anybody else because you'll never win. Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by people's spirits are transferable, it's an interesting way to phrase? Speaker 2: Because who you hang out with impacts on how you think and what you do, in a nutshell. Speaker 1: Things they do and their habits are going to impact you because if you're around them you're going to be doing them too or around whatever they're doing. Speaker 2: Right and I learned to not compare myself with other people because those were things that began to crystallize in my mind but they are things that I still struggle with and that I still have to think about every day. But I have to compare myself to who I was last year, five years ago because if you compare yourself to other people you never win. And that thing about butterflies, I think that was the thing about the trip to [Colombia] South America is that those butterflies in your stomach they feel horrible, worst feeling in the world but you want to thank God every day if you have them because if you don't it means that you're really just going through life being pathetic or you're flat lining. When you have those butterflies in your stomach it means that you're challenging yourself. You're taking your game to the next level. There are people who literally go through an entire lifetime and never have butterflies in their stomach. That is the most pathetic thing I can think of. So those are some of the things that I learned when I was there and how you have to treat everybody with respect and kindness because you never know where--I always say that you never know what disguise God is going to come to you because he comes in all kinds of shapes and sizes and forms in people and the minute you think about being unkind or disrespectful to somebody or some situation, it's him. I learned it again things that were kind of instilled in me when I was younger but there were just things that came to me when I was--they became crystallized when I was in college. And some of these things are fresh to me now only because I spoke at this freshmen convocation and I was reminded of a lot of those things when I was speaking to them. So that's why it's kind of fresh, you know, in my mind right now. Story_ID: 239250 Speaker 1: Were you involved in extra activities in college [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: You know the only thing that I really did--I worked at a state mental institution 'cause I wanted to get something on resume for social work school, that was a horrible experience just because it was--oh boy the place smelled, just smelled horribly and just to see the way in which some of the patients--they were children. To see how some of them were treated was just painful, I hated it. But-- Speaker 1: Are there any stories that you can tell us about that situation that you remember? Speaker 2: No I was fairly detached because it was just very difficult because it made me sad. It just made me sad that people had to live in conditions like that and I wanted to have it on my resume. That was one experience where I just was really detached. Most of the time I'm unable to detach myself and it's one of the reasons that I had made an attempt to get out of social work because I have a natural inclination to absorb other people's pain and because of my predisposition to depression and then taking in absorbing other people's pain, oh not a good combination. But when you work in the field of social work and there are so many--I worked with a lot of young people who were in foster care and group homes and I speak to a lot of young people in prisons--our kids are in a lot of pain. There are so many things that are just not their fault, its society's conditions. There are so many things that are--I just don't believe there are any bad kids. Anybody with the right kind of environment, love and encouragement, guidance and direction, it will be alright. So it's just difficult sometimes when you see what kids have to live with, what they go home to. Sometimes it's really hard to like detach yourself from it but that situation at that particular institution, I just was like just detached from it. I just needed to have something on my resume. Speaker 1: Did it seem that the problems there were so big that you didn't know where to start? Speaker 2: They were--yes they were big and I just had to detach myself from it. I have a friend who tells me because he knows I have a tendency to when I hear something on the news, some kid is--foster kid is whatever and he's like you've got to let it go, you can't take in everything 'cause you just won't be here if you take in everything personally, you can't possibly stand strong, you just can't. There's a certain amount of having to distance yourself a little bit. So that was just one of those situations that I just had to just straight up just detach myself from. You need this on your resume so just go in there and do what you've got to do. Speaker 1: And you were only assigned there for a brief period of time anyway, right? Speaker 2: Yes, one semester. Story_ID: 239251 Speaker 1: People now in VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA], you know, and some of these other service oriented volunteer programs find themselves in the position where they're only gonna be someplace for a year or a brief period of time and they really can't--and their goal when they got involved in it was to change the world but you can't do that in a year. Makes it--who were some of your teachers at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] and who were some of the personalities around there that you (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rabbi [Albert] Al Axelrad is somebody I absolutely loved and adored. How he and I became connected I don't remember. He was probably the most special person there to me. I don't remember how we met but he was the chaplain for the university and we just developed a very special closeness and I was very surprised when I graduated I received the David Aranow, A-R-A-N-O-W award for an outstanding student pursuing social work studies. So I got a little cash prize but he nominated me for that. I was so surprised. So I graduated with honors and then got that which was very wonderful. It was such a pleasant surprise. You just never know how you impact on someone that's why you've got to just try your very best every day to just be the best that you can be. You just never know when you're touching someone or making an impact on someone. But I just don't remember how and when we first connected but he was a very important thread in my life throughout my time at Brandeis. And then a guy named Jim Moore [ph.] who was the assistant director of financial aid was very special to me. He passed away last year, he and I stayed in touch over the years but he was an older black man. I say he was older meaning he taught me a lot--he just taught me a lot about just male/female relationships. He was just a good man, a good black male figure and there were other people like in that financial aid office, a woman named Terri Orr [ph.] and a woman named Vesta [ph.]. They were kind of like a core family there that I just really became very attached to and a guy named Clarence [ph.], I can't remember his name. Speaker 1: So they provided like black people on the campus that you could touch base with--they provided like an extended family on campus for you. Was there a black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: Yes there was. Speaker 1: Was it working pretty good? Speaker 2: You know--yes I guess if it was--the people that I mentioned were the rock for me, they were a solid foundation for me. I guess if it was that outstanding for me, yes it was a good social support. I guess if it was more I would have said it, you know. I had good strong friendships, my roommates over the years that I've maintained--one that I've maintained close contact with, Charlotte [ph.], but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 239252 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] cum laude, right and majored in psychology? Speaker 2: Psychology and sociology. Speaker 1: Okay. And is there anything else about Brandeis you want to tell us before we leave Brandeis? Speaker 2: You know what, I took a course there called--I can't remember the--it was a sociology course with a guy named Maury Stein [Maurice R. Stein] which heightened my awareness to--I would later take a course called Life's Spring but the significance of that course taught me a lot about human nature. Again, about how we're all alike underneath this face because it was a class of about maybe sixteen people, we got to know each other up close and personal. I might have been the only black person in the class there might have been one other I don't remember. But it helped me to get to know really well some white colleagues on campus that I still feel very warmly toward and strongly toward. There are maybe three or four of them that I have very--that if I saw them today we would have a very strong rapport that I would not have had if I had not taken this class. We really got to know each other. I remember them very warmly, very fondly but it has to do with just knowing that underneath that face that all of us--that armor that we walk around with every day, we're all the same. We all have the same basic wants and needs, we all fear--have fear of being abandoned, we all just want to be loved and held and nurtured and cared for and that's what that class taught me and has contributed to who I am today. I can't remember the name of the class but a guy named Maury Stein taught the class and it's one of the most significant classes I ever took in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now you came out of Brandeis, it was in seventy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: --five [1975]-- Story_ID: 239253 Speaker 1: --Where did you decide to go next and why? Speaker 2: I went to Columbia [University] School of Social Work [New York, New York]. I actually wanted to initially get a Ph.D. in clinical psychology but I took statistics twice and it kicked my ass twice and you had to get--in order to get this Ph.D. we had to really master statistics, I could barely pronounce it. So I just said let me just try to find an alternative and it was a five year program and did some research and I saw that getting a Master's of Science Degree in social work was a feasible alternative, two year program so that's what I decided to do. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: And it would allow me the same opportunity to really get up close and personal in terms of studying human behavior and that's what it did. Speaker 1: Well tell us what you did; what was your thesis in? Speaker 2: Well it was--I did a year of training at the psychiatric department at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] which was kind of brutal, yeah (laughter) and then I did a year of training at what was then New York Hospital [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] counseling terminally ill patients and their families. I worked at an outpatient clinic which was kind of interesting. I remember one patient in particular who really used abortion for birth control and worked with some patients who were on dialysis. But working there was really a turning point in my life. I met Miles Davis there; Miles was a patient at the hospital. He was not on my floor but I heard that he was there and was intrigued by him and went in and introduced myself to him and he and I just clicked and went to visit him every day. We just established a rapport and when he left the hospital we stayed in touch and he really just turned my life around. He just kind of saw something in me and knew that I wasn't really supposed to be working in that hospital and kind of challenged me on that. Speaker 1: Now why would you say that, you seem to agree with it but why do you think that was not a good place for you to be? Speaker 2: Well one because social work wasn't a good place for me to be because I was so absorbing all the other people's pain. That was just a difficult place for me to be and while I was in graduate school is when I started to realize the depression and I was in therapy and that was when I first was on medication. I just started recognizing the signs of depression then. So that just wasn't a good place for me to be and I also I wanted to make a lot of money in this lifetime legally and it wasn't going to happen in social work, I knew that. Story_ID: 239254 Speaker 1: And so I picked up a newspaper, [New York] Amsterdam News and there was an article about public relations being taught. So I took a course and took another course and it kind of wet my appetite and I decided that that was something that I wanted to do but I had to--I started to do a lot of volunteer work in addition to my job at New York Hospital so that I could get some hands on experience. I knew that I wanted to do that buy my resume was all social work so I had to begin to have it reflect public relations kinds of activity. So that's what I started to do and then I remember the first time I took what was really a risk, you don't gain anything in life unless you take a risk but I got a job. I remember very clearly leaving the safety of New York Hospital where I had all kinds of benefits, could see a doctor at any time and I left there to work in my apartment for the newly formed [Black] Filmmaker Foundation [BFF] that had been formed by Warrington Hudlin and that was my new job and I had to find an office for them and I didn't know for sure that I was going to get my paycheck. But that's what I did and I worked for them a year and then I finally got--then I worked for another organization called The Black Owned Communications Alliance [BOCA] which was founded by the heads of Essence and Black Enterprise. Then I got the job--full time job at Essence as their director of public relations. I was there five years and then I started my own company [Terrie Williams Agency] with Eddie Murphy as my first client and Miles Davis as my second client. But I--then Essence became a client and I just built this really phenomenal business from there. Story_ID: 239255 Speaker 1: Did you have any prior experience in public relations? Speaker 2: Just those two classes that I had taken and it was an amazing--the two classes that I had taken, the volunteer work and then Essence was really my training ground and it was there that I built the foundation of my business at Essence. They knew that I had a strong entrepreneurial spirit. I gave them 110 percent and then some. I honored my position there, I never shirked my responsibility but at the same time I always knew I was going to have my own. I had a very fiercely independent streak. There's that entrepreneurial thing in me. So they always knew that I was going to have my own thing and then during the time I was there, Cicely Tyson who was then married to Miles Davis had a birthday party for him and because Miles and I had stayed in touch, I was invited to the birthday party. Eddie Murphy was there with a friend and his cousin and so I established a rapport with them. Everybody always wants something from the celebrity. I would say to hey to Eddie but I was connected with those two guys and at the end of the night--it was on a boat and everybody was there. Those two guys invited me to come to a club where Eddie was going to be performing. So I went and took really good care of me and my guests and that was it. Sent them a thank you note and then I stayed in touch with them for the next year. Sent them articles that I thought they would find interesting 'cause I was reading five newspapers a day and several magazines and then I started to be invited to parties at Eddie's house. If he was shooting a movie, I'd be invited to the movie set and it just unfolded. I knew they weren't reading everything I was reading and then one day I went to a function that I didn't want to go to, dragged myself out of the bed to go and I get there and this woman who's kind of nosey 'cause I was like the only black person there and she wanted to know why I was there. We started talking and I realize that we had spoken on the phone before and she casually mentions oh I heard Eddie Murphy is looking for a PR [Public Relations] person. It was the third time I had heard it and I knew at that moment that I was supposed to represent Eddie. I got a little bit nervous 'cause I was like this is the third time I'm hearing it. I know that somebody else is on this too. So I went home, wrote a letter to Eddie. I had the home address and the home number because I had been closely in touch with those guys. I sent a note to the home and to the office. I said Eddie we've seen each other from time to time but you don't really know who I am and what I can do, this is what I've been doing at Essence, these are people who can vouch for me and my work and I just said I'd like to represent you. I sent it off, called the house one day a month later to talk to one of the guys, Eddie heard I was on the phone and he said I got your package and I would love to have you represent me just like that. Then I started crying, I was like oh what am I going to do now. You've got to be careful what you ask for, I didn't have any money, I didn't know how to run a business and certainly had never represented anybody of that magnitude, and I was still at Essence. He was the number one box office draw in the world. So I just have a strong belief in God, I should be able to launch a business with Eddie Murphy as your first client. That was a sign from the creator that that was what I supposed to do and even though I didn't know how I was going to do it, I just knew I was supposed to, and that's how it started. Story_ID: 239256 Speaker 1: All right. Well tell us about representing Eddie Murphy. I think we were saying off camera that he seemed to at least have some nominal understanding of what show business was about he used to lampoon it on Saturday Night Live [SNL] in some ways. But, what did he really know about what he needed from a PR [Public Relations] person (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think, I think that, you know, I mean Eddie had been in the business for about eight years when I started to represent him and I think that he knew that he needed to have someone to represent his particular interest. Obviously, the studio Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] to whom he was signed at the time their specific responsibility was to promote him and the movies but there needed to be someone who really cared about shaping him and what he was about, what his personal interests and endeavors were, what he was trying to accomplish separate and apart from the movies, his recording industry. He was always very, very quiet about his charitable efforts that was not ever anything that he really wanted to bring attention to. There might have been some things at the time that had to do with his personal life that required being addressed and that's not something that the studio would get into or somebody might want remarks from him or a quote from him, an autographed item for an auction or something. Those would be things that I would handle; requests for money, all those kinds of things would be things that I would handle for him. So it was an interesting experience kind of trial by error. But it was a really, really extraordinary opportunity and I will forever be grateful to Eddie for giving me that opportunity because I was even though I had established a really, really fine reputation for myself in the industry, across the country for my work with Essence for five years. I had really come to be well known within the corporate world and also within the public relations field. I was still a rather unknown entity in terms of representing someone of that magnitude but he put his confidence in me and that really said a great deal, really put me on the map. Story_ID: 239257 Speaker 1: In terms of chronology, you were at Essence for five years but what years were those from? Speaker 2: I started my business [Terrie Williams Agency] with Eddie [Murphy] in '88 [1988] so-- Speaker 1: Go back to '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983] at Essence? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Then Eddie Murphy--you represented Miles Davis early on too, right? Speaker 2: He was maybe about--it was really funny too because Miles wanted to be on just 'cause I had signed Eddie (laughter). That was just very funny and Cicely [Tyson] encouraged him to sign with me but once he found out that Eddie was my client he wanted on board that was funny. It was about three months afterwards. Speaker 1: That is (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I represented Eddie for about eight years. Speaker 1: That was during the time he was the hottest commodity in Hollywood. Speaker 2: He was the number one box office draw in the world. Speaker 1: He's playing Axel Foley the cop in those movies ['Beverly Hills Cop'] that was like the top. There are others too--lots of other people. There's--I had a partial list somewhere of a whole lot of people that you represented. Speaker 2: Anita Baker, what was kind of significant at the time that it was written about was that it was rather unusual for a list celebrities like Miles and Eddie and Anita Baker to be represented by a person of color because previously they would be with white publicists. So that was fairly significant but we went on to really represent everybody. Jackie Joyner-Kersee, a group called Take 6 which was really a phenomenal group that won a number of--two, three Grammys [Grammy Awards] their first year out, Boyz II Men, Janet Jackson, Wesley Snipes, Martin Lawrence. I can't even remember everybody. Speaker 1: Sounds like about everybody who was big then. Janet Jackson (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We even represented Sally Jessy Raphael and Stephen King. I really can't even remember and there were a number of corporations and several NBA [National Basketball Association] players. Speaker 1: Now what did you have to do in terms of personnel? How many people did you have to employ to do all of this? Speaker 2: I had thirteen people at one time--thirteen staff people. Speaker 1: AT&T gee whiz (unclear). Speaker 2: The Disney Channel, we handled a lot of movies. We represented the Hudlin Brothers [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin], Robert Townsend (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker Reverend] Al Sharpton Speaker 2: Yes Sharpton, Johnnie Cochran it's been an amazing ride and I look back on it sometimes and it's really--Dave Winfield, Willie Stargell--it's been a real blessing and the agency case story has been recounted in several college public relations and journalism text books and it's just really been a blessing, really has been. I sometimes look back on it and it's hard to believe that occurred but (laughter)-- Story_ID: 239258 Speaker 1: Did you ever have a tough situation with a celebrity where you--where they would do something, for instance like when Janet Jackson just got in trouble for the television thing, I mean--is there--are you called upon to spin that kind of stuff or is it just straight up promotion of the person? Speaker 2: There had been challenges, yes I'm trying to remember--there have been a lot of challenges along the way and you just cope with them and recognize that people are human beings and they have their challenges and you just work with them, you go with them and you just have to keep things just to remain--to have grace under pressure and to tell the truth, really to not lie. If you can't tell the truth is then to just not say anything 'cause your reputation is all that you have. So you've got to really be careful about that because the client can fire you tomorrow and then you still have your reputation that you have to maintain with members of the press so that's what's most important 'cause this a very, very tricky business. People are very, very fickle, with you one day and gone tomorrow, that's what you have to keep in mind. Speaker 1: The way you develop this list of clients is--speaks to--correct me if I'm wrong but it seems to speak to a desire on the part of the African American entertainers and celebrities to give some business to someone black that can really do a good job. I think it seems as though once you've demonstrated what you can do to a couple the rest of them seem to just tumble in. Speaker 2: Well I think that there's a growing trend in the area. I think we still have a ways to go. My business partner Xavier [Artis] always says that when I say that the white man's ice is colder that's doing his marketing for him--it's doing the white man's marketing for him. Speaker 1: For those who are not familiar with that expression of black community but black folks always think that white business people are more professional or have better product. Speaker 2: We still have this I'm sad to say but we really do still--many of us really still do have that mindset and it's very, very sad to say but we will oftentimes give our white counterparts much more leeway than we will give our own. They will have an opportunity to make mistakes or screw over us over and over again and will only give one of our own one opportunity to screw up and that's it. But I have seen I would say over the years a greater willingness to give a person of color an opportunity that has proven that he or she can do the job, that opportunity to do that. But I was really just very blessed and I was just really trying to pay attention to detail and to be professional at all times and to be up front and truthful with clients. Those were the things that I aimed for. You can never be on the mark all the time but I think what would separate us from everybody else is how you handle your mistakes 'cause you are going to make mistakes but it's how you handle them. It's like the difference between say a five star restaurant and like a one that's not rated and if they spill something on your clothing the five star restaurant will have it cleaned for you and the other restaurant will maybe give you some club soda or you might have to ask for it but it's the difference in how you handle the mistake. I had a client once who--we had sent something out with a typo on it that they had not even recognized but when we did we have a short note that we send happily we don't have to send letters like this often. Story_ID: 239259 Speaker 1: You were telling us some stories about, you know, representing people and I think I had a--you know, I know Miles Davis is a person who had a rough kind of media presence. I mean in terms of--a lot of things happened to him, and was it-- Speaker 2: Well, you know what though, during the time that I was representing Miles there weren't any real issues that I had to deal with in terms of Miles. I mean yeah during the time that I was representing him there weren't any real issues. Miles is Miles, nobody like him. I have to say that there really were no real issues during the time I was representing him. At the time that (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was kind of recuperating--a re-emerging. Speaker 2: Yes re-emerging. It was the hip surgery there was nothing there and at the time that he passed away there were some issues--I wasn't representing him at that time when he passed away. We made very close friends but there were issues surrounding his death and whatever but I didn't have anything to do with any of that. There was nothing during the time that I represented him that was really challenging to deal with. There were time when he was supposed to do something an interview or whatever and he spaced on me but that's again--that's Miles so it didn't make it any easier to have to explain to people but you could say that's Miles, I'm really sorry but. Speaker 1: Did this happen a lot when you represented entertainers and people (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were a lot of challenges and I really couldn't divulge the particulars but yeah you get in some very awkward situations when said talent is supposed to be someplace at a day and time for an interview and you know very well that the person has just flat out blown it off and you have to cover for them because you don't want them to appear as the rude and disrespectful person that they are being at that particular time. That's just-and the best thing that you can do is just--I've always tried to make a practice of just sharing with people you know I may have had to cover for you but you can't treat people like that and that when you--nobody stays on top forever and that the way that you treat people when you're on top is the way that you're going to be treated when the lights go down. That's always what I tried to do whenever I dealt with my clients. I always--that was just because of who I am as a person and because I just believe that you can't just let people get away with things. That's what I always tried to integrate in whatever I did with people. Speaker 1: Okay 'cause your credibility is also on the line too I guess when people don't show up or that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Well yes it is but I'll also say to the press people you know this is the nature of the beast, they were supposed to be there, they knew they were supposed to be there and they're not here and I'm sorry and implied in that is they just blew this off so it's the nature of the game and they know that--the press people know that and you know that and an entertainer knows that and they don't care oftentimes and sometimes they just don't like the way somebody looks and just decide that they don't want to do it. Don't want to get in a limousine 'cause it's the wrong color. It's just I've seen and heard it all (laughter). Story_ID: 239260 Speaker 1: Are there any other issues involved in doing this business [public relations] that you think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know, I just think that, you know, one of the things that and this is where my training has been very helpful is that you understand that if you could go back to when each of us was maybe three or four years old, it would tell the story. It just does, it just tells the story and then what happens to people when you have yes people around you 24/7 who depend on you for a paycheck, they yes you to death, they kiss your behind 24/7. What that turns the personality into when you don't have people who tell you the truth. What that turns the personality into is scary. So you understand, you don't like it but you understand what you're dealing with. If you see a celebrity walking around with sunglasses on at night or in a interview with sunglasses okay well why is he sitting up there with sunglasses on, why are they wearing sunglasses at night well you know what sometimes you have to keep something for yourself or to yourself. Can you imagine what it must feel like to have somebody staring down your throat 24/7? You're walking down the street, you have not an ounce of privacy because of the way people put you up on a pedestal. They stare at every single move you make so you have nothing left for you and sometimes just to go outside the only thing you have is the sunglasses that gives you some semblance of something for you. So to the average person that's like you're being distance or whatever but sometimes you got to have a little something for you because the public will take everything ounce of everything you've got and when you pass out, they will step right over you. So I try to see both sides that is what I try to do. Speaker 1: It seems as though your training has helped you sort of understand the training and psychology and sociology. Speaker 2: Yeah that's what it has helped me with and I might not like what you do and I have had to compromise but I'm going to really try my best to tell you the truth 'cause, you know, there are not a lot of people around these folks who tell them the truth because they are dependent on them for their paycheck. Story_ID: 239261 Speaker 1: Do you still handle a large number of clients today? Speaker 2: I'm much more selective now, one because I'm trying to honor [HistoryMaker] Terrie [Williams] more and that means in my work I do a great deal of speaking around the country which is really my joy, my passion and it is what I feel God has called me to do so it's my speaking, my books; there are more books in me, my foundation work the Stay Strong Foundation and also my business partner Xavier Artis have established a really incredible movement called Recycling Inspiration. It's an international movement in which we have secured awards from celebrities and noted personalities and leaders that have--these awards have been bestowed to these individuals and we are at a later going to give these awards to young people to put wings under their dreams and to inspire them to pursue their goals. It's been an amazing response. We have awards from President [Nelson] Mandela, Denzel Washington, Eddie Murphy, Jonathan Tisch, Mary J. Blige, Jessica Simpson, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Walter [E.] Massey the president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton a host of people and they've been only too glad to give up these awards because many people have tons of awards just sitting in storage. They don't want to throw them away but imagine the beauty of giving an award to a young person who is pursuing say your particular field and it's just sitting in storage and you could give it to that young person and say you go ahead and pursue your dreams and you write stay strong on it. So we've been very, very blessed to begin kicking that off. So I want to spend more time with those and then some individuals whose work I just feel very passionate about and just want to tell the world about it. So I'm just very selective about the projects that I take on and if we can tie them into Recycling Inspiration or the Stay Strong Foundation that's the ideal match. Because as I said we're paying for it right now by not spending more time with our kids. If we don't give our kids time the system will, very clear cut that's our motto. Speaker 1: Now which came first the foundation or the books? Speaker 2: Well my first book came out in 1994, 'The Personal Touch: What You Really Need to Succeed in Today's Fast Paced Business' [Terrie Williams]. [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor was then the editor and chief of Essence magazine who was very struck by the way in which I worked and how I had made a difference at Essence and how they did things and asked me to write an article for the magazine. I did and years later people were still asking about the article and were saying that it kind of changed the way that they did business and it became the basis for my book which still sells very well. People say it's transformed the way they do business. It's not even revolutionary, it's not brain surgery. It's just that a hundred people who want what you want and can do what you do and have the exact same credentials, how do you stand out. It's the simple things that people no longer think are important. Ten people go for a job interview, one person sends a thank you note, one person sends a thank you note that's the one that's going to get the job. Or if you have noticed that it was my birthday or they send me a birthday card or there was a death in my family and you send me a sympathy card those are the things that make you stand out. It's an increasingly high tech, very fast paced business world so there is this need to connect with people on a human level. Those are the basis--that's the basis on which many times people make decisions because of those little things. You know, just--it's amazing to me sometimes how rude and disrespectful people are to the assistants, to the people that they want to be in touch with. The assistant is the gatekeeper, do you know? Those little things. Story_ID: 239262 Speaker 1: Yeah so, the personal touch that's what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're talking about and I've also read that your business is really built on association of friends and extended friends that made it possible for you to have the contacts that you need to be successful in the PR [public relations] business. Speaker 2: But it's also things that--someone told me that--who is working at Mercedes-Benz that she got her position because of the janitor. It wasn't a position that was posted but a janitor told her about it and it's like that kind of thing. And then okay so you got the position then she got a bottle of Cristal for the janitor to just say thank you. People don't say thank you, people don't do what they say they're going to do. So when you have said to someone I'm going to send you something and you send it, nobody does that. I get notes from people who say well you said you were going to send it but I didn't really think you were. So when you do what you say you're going to do, you stand out and if you said you were going to deliver something on a set day and you are not going to be able to do it, you pick up the phone and say I'm not going to meet that deadline, I'll get it to you on such and such date or if it's taking you longer than you expected and you just make a quick call and say you know a week has passed now, I didn't forget about you, I'm going to get it done. It's those little things that make people say oh this is somebody that's special. Or if you asked your colleague to do something for you but you know that it's the assistant who is going to execute it, you send a note to the assistant who is the one who really gets the job done that person is yours for the rest of your life. Those are the things, nothing revolutionary about it but that was the first book and then because I love, love young people, I wanted to do a book for them. So four years ago 'Stay Strong: Simple Life Lessons for Teens' [Terrie Williams] came out. That book has just been a blessing and that's when we launched the Stay Strong Foundation. But it's just things that young people need to know like the personal touch, it's just a young adult version and then 'A Plentiful Harvest[: Creating Balance and Harmony Through the Seven Living Virtues,' Terrie Williams] came out two years ago. Story_ID: 239263 Speaker 1: The Stay Strong [Foundation], let's go back there for a second, some of the projects in Stay Strong include Please Listen [ph.] which is a series of speak outs, right, it's a national speak out tour? Speaker 2: Yeah, just giving young people an opportunity really to talk about the things that are near and dear to their heart. Again, we had done one in Oakland [California] for about an hour and a half young people were just talking about the challenges that they have and how they stay strong and after a period of time this young lady who is sixteen years old got up and she was crying and she said you know what I'm never again going to judge anybody. She said because after everything I've heard it made me think about sometimes you walk down the hallway and you look at somebody and you think that they think that they're cute, you have no idea what that person's story is what it took for them to get to school that morning and it just said it all. It's that game face, it hides everything and the minute you want to start to get catty and think something, you just don't know. So it's really just--and amazing things have come out of young people's sexual abuse. So we give them that opportunity to talk and share and again you find out that you're not the only one standing out on that ledge and then create opportunities for them to get follow up guidance and assistance. Speaker 1: Speak outs are, for those who have never been to one, youth who get a chance to talk about a number of topics, issues, sometimes it's chosen by an agency and sometimes they choose it themselves but criminologist always talk about how most people in communities are afraid of young people. Speaker 2: Yes and what's--when there have been adults and when the adults talk about their fears or their issues or I spoke to four hundred young people a couple of months ago and something--there was a poem that I usually have read and young people were responding to it and I said something about my own--this young lady spoke about something and then I said you know I suffer from depression too and before she had been talking about her friend and then as soon as I said that I did, she said I do too in front of her classmates and suddenly it was okay for her to say this in front of everybody just because I did. That's the beauty of one person having the courage to speak about it 'cause then it's not such a bad thing for you to say well, you know, shoot, I'm screwed up, too, and you know, and it's just everybody's going through something. Story_ID: 239264 Speaker 1: So you meet a lot of interesting young people, I guess, in the process of doing this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah powerful young people that you know are going to change the world, you know. I have mentored a lot of young people; my life is enriched by them. It's a very, very dynamic young man Reggie Hatchett--I feel very blessed by these young people who I know are just going to change the course of the world. Speaker 1: Now there's another aspect it's Project Believe which is life skills and leadership training. Do you want to talk about that one? Speaker 2: It's just that our kids just need to be given the tools to move their lives forward and so it's just creating the opportunities for them. We did an eight week program at a school in Brooklyn [New York, New York] it was a test pilot based on the curriculum that was based on the 'Stay Strong: Simple Life Lessons for Teens' [Terrie Williams] book and it was--we didn't have as much time as we would have liked with them 'cause it was once a week but it was a great start and it was really just to begin to teach them leadership skills and socialization skills and how to interact with one and another and with adults on a stronger level. So that's what our immediate goal is to just to teach them how to survive and become productive citizens in their communities. Story_ID: 239265 Speaker 1: Now your third book is 'A Plentiful Harvest'-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --['A Plentiful Harvest:]Creating Balance and Harmony Through [the] Seven Living Virtues' [Terrie Williams]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It just came out 2002, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that one. Speaker 2: Well, I just know that so many of us are struggling. I felt actually before the book came out that, I guess I was feeling like a perpetrator 'cause I was like anybody who knows me knows that I don't really have this balance and harmony thing down but I think that it's something that we all strive for. The teacher teaches what the teacher needs to hear and these are things that we just have to strive for but I think that many of us are over extended, just trying to figure out how to get it right. Someone said something to me once that I have to remind myself of every day, several times a day and it's something that we hear often every time we get on a plane, just before takeoff the flight attendant will tell you that if there's a need for oxygen the mask comes down, you put the mask over your own mouth first and then if you have a small child sitting next to you or someone acting like a small child (laughter) then you put the mask over your own mouth first then you secure their mask. But so many of us do it backwards, we are so busy trying to secure other people's mask when we ourselves are literally choking. It's so symbolic about life that you really can't help anybody else unless you're putting the mask over your own mouth first and that's what we have to really learn how to do and I said it's something I really struggle with every day. I thought that because it was something that I was so challenged with my business, I was putting employees first, putting clients first, I would have appointments that were important to me but if a client said the only time of the day they could meet was when my therapy appointment was, I would cancel it only to have the client cancel the appointment and then I was out of luck. So I decided to look at the things that were most important that I thought we should devote time each one of these areas. First to figure out what it is that's really important in your life. Your real job is to figure out what your purpose is here on earth, what your calling is; divided it into seven different virtues and into fifty-two weeks and there is some journal exercises for you to think about. Sometimes people really don't know what it is that they're here for. I make some suggestions about going back to what it was that you enjoyed doing as a kid and/or what are some of the things that people come to you most often for as a way of trying to figure out what it is that you're here to do. What is it that you would for free? So it's calling and responsibility to self and having involvement in one's community, love. Not looking at it in the Hollywood--the typical Hollywood version. I made a decision early on that I don't think that I could have met the right man, had children and accomplished the things that I did professionally, I don't think that I could have. There are many people who do it, I don't know how but I don't think that I could have done that. So it's like you have to find a different way to make that work. I have a son who is twenty-six now, I met him when he was sixteen through a mentoring program and adopted him. So you find love in different kinds of ways not the traditional Hollywood way that they say and creativity and spirituality but trying to put time and energy into each one of those areas so that you have a more well balanced life. And then really just to--I just felt like I had completely and totally dropped out of my life that's how I really felt. I speak about my depression in that book; I speak about issues with not taking care of myself, my health and my weight and all of those things that you really, really do have to take a good hard look at. It was difficult to write but I think it's harder to not look at those things and to not speak about them. It's been a blessing because in speaking about them other people have opened up to me and again there is joy and there is rejuvenation in sharing. Not that all your problems go away but when you talk to somebody else you find out what they're going through, you just feel better knowing that you're not by yourself and since I started speaking about the depression many, many people have come up to me and said, "Girl, so what medication are you on?" or, "I'm on this." It's just been amazing and so when you're having one of those times when you feel really low you can call that other sister or brother who said that they're dealing with some of the same kinds of issues and you just don't feel so lonely. Story_ID: 239266 Speaker 1: There are seven living virtues in this book ['A Plentiful Harvest: Creating Balance and Harmony Through the Seven Living Virtues,' Terrie Williams]: calling, responsibility, thrift, community, love, spirituality and creativity. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Why seven? Speaker 2: Oh it was just a cute number to pick (laughter) and thrift I didn't actually speak about thrift but one of the things about thrift which I think is important is learning to conserve your energy not just finance and being more productive with your finance but just really learning to conserve your energy. If you are focused about what you're doing you'll be much more productive. It's kind of like if you have like a magnifying glass and if there's sunlight on that magnifying glass and there's like grass underneath it if that light is really shining through that magnifying glass it can light a fire on that grass underneath. That's what happens if you're really focused with your energy but if your energy is all over the place you're not going to be nearly as productive as you need to be. It's really taking a look at how you're spending your energy as well as your money. So I thought it was important to take a look at that 'cause all of those were issues that I was dealing with and I think that a lot of in terms of self-help books, a lot of us are dealing with the same kinds of issues. I think it's just important but we just say it in different ways and we say it in the way in which we're dealing with it. I tried to be as humble as I could to let people know that I'm very much a work in process. I still do not have it figured out, I'm day to day trying to figure things out and work things out and I think that that's, you know, the best example that I can be is to not act like I'm picture perfect but working on it. Story_ID: 239267 Speaker 1: What are your future plans for the [Stay Strong] Foundation and for the business [Terrie Williams Agency]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--I just think there's more to share, more to reveal. I feel like I want to help more people to get to what it is they want to do. Sometimes I think people need to hear other people's experiences. I want to bring other people together so that they can hear. What I want to do is bring to a larger audience my experience as well as other experiences. Say for instance, it's like [HistoryMaker] Terrie Williams and friends to come together 'cause I've done this at a number of places and each person kind of shares what their goals, aspirations are. How they got from point A to point B. What some of their challenges were and how they got through them. It's an amazingly empowering experience to just hear how people did it. That's what people need to hear 'cause people are struggling. They're trying to figure out how to do it. I recently did a workshop and I asked people--there were about two hundred people there and I asked if people were happy where they were in their present positions, two people raised their hands. So what's going on that you're not happy where you are? I said are you sitting on your gifts are you--what's happening and that's when most people raise their hands. They knew that they weren't happy where they were and that they were sitting on and/or wasting their gifts. So it's that their needing drive, their inspiration, their needing a bit of a push, they need to hear how somebody else did it. They're looking for guidance and inspiration and so to the extent that I can help provide that or put a group of people before them to help kind of spur that on, that's what I want to do because everybody is looking for that little push. I'm looking for a push, I need a push, you've got to surround yourself with people who will encourage you to go beyond yourself. But that was shocking to me to just kind of see how nobody--two people were where they wanted to be. Whoa what does that say? So that's why I know that there is a need for what it is that I want to do. So I want to do more of that, it's just everybody is like looking how to get to that next point, and what is it going to take to do that. Story_ID: 239268 Speaker 1: We always ask this question and you've answered a lot of it in the course of this interview but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well I think that we have to learn to lift each other up and be there for each other and to learn to work together. I just see too much of the, I guess because of our just really not lifting each other up the way that we should. When it's all said and done history is really not impressed with the superficial things, history is not impressed with how much we made what kind of car we drive, what kind of house we live in all the material things. All of that is completely and totally irrelevant. It's what you did with what you had; it's how many people you lifted as you climbed. [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Al] Sharpton said something once which I thought was very honest and very funny. He talked about the challenge of preaching a funeral for somebody who didn't do anything while they were on the planet they just took up oxygen and you have to make up stuff about them when they cross over. It's all about how many people you lift as you climb and I just wish that we were able to fight our demons, the jealousy and the insecurities that we have. We all have them I just wish that we could as humans and particularly as African Americans; I wish that we could take the high road and fight them. The jealousies and the insecurities that we have they tell you what your secret desires are. They tell you what you have to work harder to fight for so that you can become the person that you want to be. I can't become who I'm supposed to be until you become who you're supposed to be. Story_ID: 239269 Speaker 1: When you look back on all that you've done so far, you're still fairly young at all this what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Probably just that I did the best that I could with the gifts and the resources that God gave me to make a difference in the lives of other people especially young people. Just that I used what he gave me and really just tried to make a difference. So it's just recycling, recycling the inspiration. Speaker 1: Is there anything you would do differently, any major thing if you had it to do over again? Speaker 2: Well probably not be so afraid to listen to my inner voice, to not be so afraid to listen to my inner voice and to do the very thing that I'm afraid to do, to do more of the very thing that I'm afraid to do. Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you need to address that we haven't touched upon? Speaker 2: Let's see. I can't think of (pause) the only thing that I think (pause) the thing that I think about most is just my philosophy about doing for others that when you do something for someone else that you're the one that gets the gift that I think that it's important to persevere, that really the--I guess maybe just my philosophy about life that the only difference really between those who make it and those who don't is just staying in the race because when I spoke about kind of like inspiring people it's reminding people like the 'Chicken Soup [For the Soul'] book series giving examples of people who have overcome extraordinary odds. What came to mind just now were those guys who do the Chicken Soup books series that they were rejected like thirty-nine times by publishers across the country and their agent even fired them but they persevered. That's a multi, multimillion dollar industry now. So it's like you can't ever, ever give up on your dream. I can't imagine getting thirty-nine/forty rejections and still thinking there's a book here and now they've got Chicken Soup for your everything. For your pet, for your golf you know what I'm saying and it's like sometimes when you feel like giving up, you're always where you're supposed to be but somebody who's working on a dream or has a dream and when we put together this group of people who talk about the fact that they had something and thirty-nine times they were rejected and now look at the gold mine that they have now. You need to hear those stories. So I just--it's the perseverance, it's the significance of giving back that when your spirit is low that you have to step outside of yourself and do something for someone else you'll see joy in the morning and you'll see some of your dreams materialize and I think maybe that's the only other thing I would mention. Story_ID: 239270 Speaker 1: Now before we started rolling the tape, you put forward a list of people from Mount Vernon [New York] who accomplished all kinds of things and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those names again? Dick Clark was born and raised in Mount Vernon, E.B. White the author of 'Charlotte's Web,' Gus [Williams] and Ray Williams former NBA [National Basketball Association] stars. Gus I think retired from the Seattle SuperSonics [Oklahoma City Thunder], Ray Williams was with the New York Knicks and the New Jersey Nets [Brooklyn Nets], Scooter McCray--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rodney [McCray] Speaker 2: Rodney McCray played in the NBA, Heavy D, Puffy Combs [Sean Combs; P. Diddy], Jay Hoggard vibraphonist (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Denzel [Washington] of course. Speaker 2: Denzel of course, yeah how can we forget Denzel and--I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay but there's a lot in other words (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: That seems to be a place that generates a lot of talent. Speaker 2: Very much so, there are a couple of other rap/hip hop artists, CL Smooth or something like that who's also from Mount Vernon but yeah quite a few. Story_ID: 239271 Speaker 1: That leads into the last question which is similar to legacy but different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Just that I tried to make a difference, that's all. I just tried to make a difference that's all. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Story_ID: 239272 Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures of Gregory Hines and me. He's just one of the most special people on the planet, just really loved him. Speaker 2: Jaheim, I remember hearing this guy on the airwaves for a long time before I found out who he was; one of the most incredible voices, Jaheim. When he first came out on the scene a year or two ago and we finally met and I tried not to act like a groupie and his manager told me that he had been looking for me 'cause he wanted us to work together and Puffy [Sean Combs; P. Diddy] who I affectionately call my son and he calls me [HistoryMaker] Aunt Terrie [Williams] and my friend and one of my business partners Butch Lewis. Speaker 1: This is my heroine, my rock in my life, this is mom [Marie Kearney Williams] and what else can I say. This is at my son's wedding this year. Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite pictures taken in the Bahamas a hundred years ago, a hundred pounds ago, one of my favorite pictures. Speaker 1: This is a shot of Johnnie [Cochran] and Dale Cochran. Johnnie's a dear friend and a client. Speaker 2: This is a shot of Janet Jackson who was a client for a couple of years and this was way before the booby (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before the equipment malfunction. Speaker 2: The equipment malfunction, yes very sweet spirit. Oh no you did not (laugh). I can't even speak on this one. Back in the day my [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis afro actually at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] and Angela went to Brandeis. Speaker 1: This was at the book party for my very first book 'The Personal Touch[: What You Really Need to Succeed in Today's Fast Paced Business World,' Terrie Williams] and Montel Williams came to the party to help me celebrate. Speaker 2: Also at the book party this is David Stern the commissioner of the NBA [National Basketball Association] who's a good buddy, presented an award to me. Speaker 1: Was that in '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: This is in '94 [1994] that's correct. Okay this is also the celebration of the book party and Bill McCreary who's a noted anchorman in New York and my mom, Montel and Mark McEwen who was a weatherman on CBS News. Speaker 1: My best buddy--one of my best buddies [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and Joe Cooney who co-authored 'The Personal Touch' with me again at the book party. Speaker 2: Now we've got Sharon Pratt Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] who is the former mayor of Washington, D.C. who came out to help me celebrate. She and her then husband Jim Kelly [James R. Kelly III], he's one of my best friends and there's Joe Cooney over there. Speaker 1: Well this is two people who brought me into the world, my dad Charles [Williams] and my mom Marie. Samuel [L.] Jackson came out to help me celebrate the book party. Speaker 2: Camille Cosby, Camille and friend. Speaker 1: This is Terrie walking [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson down the red carpet probably one of those events. I think this was at the Essence Awards one year trying to do my thing. Speaker 2: This is definitely the Essence Awards and Muhammad Ali, would you say that's Muhammad Ali. Speaker 1: Yes that's him. Speaker 2: That's Muhammad Ali. This is one of the last events that I did for my dear friend Miles Davis. It's his sixty-fifth birthday party at Tavern on the Green [New York, New York] and right next to him with a piece of cake is his brother Vernon [Davis] who passed away and the brother in the white suit is Matty Rich who at nineteen years old produced and wrote and directed his first film. Speaker 1: A film about Brooklyn [New York, New York] or something? Speaker 2: Yes 'Straight Out of Brooklyn'. Speaker 1: That's me as a baby, nothing more to say about that. Speaker 2: This was the little Jewish nursery school that I went to and that's me on the far right dressed as Queen Esther one of the biblical figures. Speaker 1: That was the Young Men['s Hebrew Association (YWHA)] and [Young] Women's Hebrew [Association (YWHA)] (simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hebrew Association yes. Speaker 1: She shall remain nameless (laugh) okay I was probably like nine, fourth grade. This is Pennington [Elementary School, Mount Vernon, New York]; this is the integrated school that I went to. Am I even in there? Okay I'm not in there but there were two of us in this integrated--two people of color in this integrated class, I'm not even in there. Speaker 2: This is the junior high school [Nichols Junior High School, Mount Vernon, New York] newspaper staff. Speaker 1: That's my whole family in San Francisco [California] sometime in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: This is the announcement of me and Audrey Saw [ph.] both of us juniors being chosen to represent Mount Vernon High School [Mount Vernon, New York] while visiting South America. It says that we attended school, toured the country and explained the American way of life to South Americans during our visit. Speaker 1: This is my mother and me sitting on the steps of her five room elementary schoolhouse. This is where she walked five miles to school every day or whenever she could go. Speaker 2: That's me graduating from college, from Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts]. This is a family that I stayed with in Cali, California [sic.]--ooh, [Santiago de] Cali, Colombia. Speaker 1: What is this? Okay so this is me. I don't know, this is me. What does that say? My mother wrote that...