 Story_ID: 295411 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock. Now, ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Shirley J. Wilcher. That's S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, J middle initial, Wilcher, W-I-L-C-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Alright now, does, can you tell us what your middle name is? Speaker 2: Jean. Speaker 1: Okay, so J-- Speaker 2: J-E-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 28th, 1951, Erie, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am president of a consulting firm called Wilcher Global Diversity Consulting. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June the 29th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. at the law firm of Skadden Arps, et al. [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP & Affiliates] (laughter). Story_ID: 295412 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. My favorite food is chocolate cake, unfortunately (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is Spring. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is turquoise. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you he a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Hawaii. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. "No one will save us but us." Story_ID: 295413 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Wilcher] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Mother's name is Jeanne, J-E-A-N-N-E, Evans, her maiden name, and Cheatham, C-H-E-A-T-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June, I'm sorry, August the 14th, and she wouldn't want me to tell you the year. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Akron, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors? Speaker 2: Well, according to my mother's mother, our ancestors were brought on a slave ship to, off the coast of South Carolina. The story is that they, two brothers were lured onto the slave ship. Now they say from East Africa, there may be some debate about that, but were brought onto the coast, the Gichi Islands, I believe they're often called, and the brothers were brought onto the mainland where the strongest slaves were brought. They were taken to Alabama. One used to try to run away and eventually they sold him to a neighbor so the family has two last names, partly because they were split up because they sold the other, one brother to a neighbor. I also know that I have a, an ancestor who married an African/Indian woman. I believe that was in Georgia or Florida. And that's where part of the family has a lot of Indian heritage. But that's as much as I know. Speaker 1: Okay, are the names of the two brothers passed down at all? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) At least I haven't heard the names. I don't know the names. Speaker 1: That'd be interesting to know. And, so these two brothers would be your, would they be, what would be the relationship? I know some kind of great grandfather. Speaker 2: Yes. I don't even know how many greats. At least, and I knew my great grandmother so we should go back at least two, three more generations. Both my great grandmothers lived to be over a hundred. So, so I knew-- Speaker 1: Okay. And so these two would be to them their grandfathers? Speaker 2: Great, great, maybe great grandfathers or grandfathers. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause we really don't have to go back really that far for slavery to-in fact, on the, in South Carolina, there is an, you know, in south Georgia they were still bringing slaves over to Gichi country as late as 1856. At least we know that because there's a boat that a slave had wrecked out there--they, they have a part of in, at Jekyll Island, Georgia, the trough where they fed the slaves is on display in this one resort there, 1856, from the Traveler, a boat that-- Speaker 2: I have to go down there and see that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so it didn't have to be that far back, although it could be. Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so they know, any tradition about where they say east but I know a lot of times people mix East Africa up with West Africa. Speaker 2: They do. My grandfather specifically said Ethiopia, but as I said, I'm not so sure, that that's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think they were even slaving out of Ethiopia in those days, but yeah, when people read the Bible and they look at black people and they think it's a-yeah. So, that's interesting. Well, very few people have a story where they, there's a tradition that they come from Africa. It's amazing. You know. And this is an African American Project. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, you know, I've only heard a story like this maybe four times in six hundred interviews. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: So I just want to make that, you know, clear. Okay, so are there any stories that are passed down about them at all? You said they ran away a lot, and that they had to be split up. Speaker 2: Yes, in Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, what part of Alabama were they? Speaker 2: Oh my, I think around Montgomery, Alabama, but it's as much as I recall. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I should call grandma today and ask. Speaker 1: Okay, so is your family basically based in Alabama? I mean, before they moved north? Speaker 2: Yes, both sides, yes. Story_ID: 295414 Speaker 1: Now you had great-grandmothers that lived to be over a hundred? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did they have any stories that they passed down to you? Speaker 2: Frankly, none that I recall. My father's [James Wilcher] grandmother, by the time I came to know her, were a bit senile, so she would kind of go back as they say, in her life and think that she was on the farm, and she'd go walking and we'd have to go catch her. So she really wasn't able to discuss with me, you know, clearly, lucidly, about that history. So, I can't really tell you much about that. In terms of my mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] mother, similarly, I just knew her, I was very young, so I don't remember having a conversation with her directly. Speaker 1: Okay, so did your parents have, were they, so I guess they were all, they were farmers in Alabama? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Both sides were in agriculture. Speaker 1: Did they, did either side talk about why, how they, what inspired them to move north? I mean we could all pretty much guess, but what did they say? Speaker 2: Well, it was the opportunity to, for a better life and an income. They both came up to the rubber factories in Akron, Ohio. So, as many did. So they worked for Firestone [Tire and Rubber Company] and I guess Goodrich [B.F. Goodrich Company] and some of those companies. Speaker 1: Okay. About when did they come up? Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I would have to say, let me see, my father was a Depression baby, in the '20s [1920s], I guess, 'cause dad was born in 1921, and he was born in Cleveland [Ohio] so it had to be around that time. Speaker 1: Okay, so about the time he was a baby, the early '20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 295415 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] talk about growing up? Did she have any stories about growing up in Akron [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Let me see. Well what I can share with you is that both parents are musicians and they've been playing music all their lives, and so they played in a band together. That's how, they, of course, met each other. I haven't really talked with her much. I didn't really live with my mother, I lived with my, my dad's [James Wilcher] family. I have stories in terms of my dad and the conditions at the time that the blacks lived in, you now, the challenges. Speaker 1: Well, I'm gone ask about your father. I just specially wanted to know about your mother right now, then we'll move on to your father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I'll talk about how they met, you know, I'll ask about that too, but did your mother have any stories, any stories about it from other relatives, about her growing up, where she went to school, what her, her aspirations were, you know, whether, what instrument did she play. I mean those are the things. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Yes, well my mother is a piano player, so she grew up again, learning to play the piano. She was the performer in the family, although others, as were her sisters and brothers were musicians as well. In fact, they were, my uncle Jerry, she was the oldest, but he was the first son. He played the bass fiddle. And so they played together. My Aunt JoAnn (ph.) plays the piano, so they were a musical family. At least the children were musical. Grandpa worked at, again, Firestone and grandma was like a caterer, housekeeper. So that's, that's, they were all just playing music and performing. They were also very artistic. They could draw and design things. Very creative siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother, I'm trying to think, um, I lost my question. Did they come from a tradition of playing in Alabama or did the, or was it something that started in Akron? Speaker 2: This--it started in Akron. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so, so did she finish school or did she start playing, you know, or-- Speaker 2: She finished school. I believe she did some college as well, but, of course, music was her life and is her life, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What band did she get in at the beginning, I mean did she stay in the same band he whole life, or did she start, you know? Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know what, these are questions I really have to ask her. I don't know what her early bands were at a certain point, she and Uncle Jerry, you know, played together with others and again, that's how she met my dad. Story_ID: 295416 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: James Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, Wilcher, W-I-L-C-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 13th, 1921- Speaker 1: In- Speaker 2: --in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now what do you know about your ancestors on your father's side? How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about them? Speaker 2: I can only go back to Alabama. Montgomery, Alabama. My father's grandmother had fourteen children. His mother, my grandmother, was the second, was the second, I believe, and she was forced to leave school in the second grade to take care of the rest of the children. So they called her daddy. Speaker 1: They called her daddy? They didn't call her mommy? Speaker 2: No, they called her daddy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And again she came up to Akron, as did others. She married a, a businessman who had an insurance company back then. And she was a housekeeper. She cleaned homes for the Brubaker [ph.], others, and she, she actually raised me from the age of ten months on, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so she had been taking care of children a long time I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did, how did both families get up, get to Ohio? I think there's a, I've heard stories, see I'm from Ohio. People, a lot of Alabama people went to Cleveland [Ohio] and Akron and Toledo [Ohio], and on up to Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and I think it's a train line that runs up, I don't know if they came up by train or that's because-- Speaker 2: I suspect they came by train. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: At that time, I would think that was better. I don't even think buses, I think train probably. Speaker 1: Yeah I think some direct route or something because I know a lot of people hoboed up, you know. In those days you could hop a train and, so I don't know how they did it, but did they have a story about coming up from-- Speaker 2: I don't recall a specific story about getting there. Because all I knew is that they were there and they'd been there for some time. My mother's mother, they're the Smarts [ph.], when I, when I, as I knew them, they were pretty accomplished and well educated as a family, so I don't I don't remember stories about how they got to that place. My great grandmother on my mother's side used to read the newspapers every day and she was very, so she was pretty well advanced, you know, in terms of her, in her, not really academic, but her, in terms of her, you know, way of dealing with the world and in her approaches to the world. Story_ID: 295417 Speaker 1: My father's [James Wilcher] mother, Granny, I'm sorry that's what I called her. Again she was the mother but she was a lot more down home, you know, but again, I, I don't recall her giving, telling me stories about how they got there, I just remember her marrying the gentlemen who had the insurance company. He eventually left to find other work and then-- Speaker 2: Oh so she married a man that had an insurance company? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That sounds like a, like a big deal for those days. Speaker 1: Yes. It was a big deal for African Americans in Akron, Ohio. Speaker 2: What was the name of his company, do you know? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Well, I had to ask now. Somebody who's watching this might was to research and find out. But that's a good-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --That's something that they could look up, or try to find. What was his names? Speaker 1: James Wilcher. Speaker 2: James Wilcher, okay. Speaker 1: His family came from Augusta, Georgia. I do remember that. Speaker 2: So that's your grandfather? Speaker 1: Grandfather. I didn't know him, but this is what I was told. In fact, some from Georgia have been communicating with me on the internet. They discovered me and so I'm beginning, beginning to get little notes on the internet about the Wilcher family in Georgia. Speaker 2: Okay. So he was in the insurance business. Had his own company? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: That's something. That would have in the--around 1900, I suppose, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe a little later, but it was, 'cause dad remembers that, and then maybe the depression that caused the company to fail. Speaker 2: Okay. Well it could have been in the '20s [1920s], it could have been in the '20s [1920s], you said--yeah, in the '20s [1920s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: But that's quite an accomplishment for those days. So, yeah, a lot of companies failed in 1929, so-- Speaker 1: Of course. Story_ID: 295418 Speaker 1: So did your father [James Wilcher] have any stories about growing up in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: He was born in Cleveland but they moved to Akron [Ohio] and, well, of course, he being the performer that he is, he would tell me stories about standing on street corners doing his tap dancing and whatever he could to earn a few pennies. He and his brother Marcus Wilcher, of course, lived in an area as we know where blacks were kind of limited in terms of their choices of homes, and there were always issues with respect to discrimination. Also, he just told me about a story about watching when he was a little boy working for this Jewish company and the woman, he was standing watching these people in white hoods walk down the street, and he asked who are these people, and the woman told him this is the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. So he does remember that. He remembered a time when people couldn't, blacks couldn't buy luxury cars, for example, Cadillacs. They wouldn't sell them to black people. Obviously, eventually, they did. But, I mean he remembers a time, again in Ohio there weren't there, when I grew up anyway, there weren't the, the, you know, the fountains with black and white and whatever, but the discrimination was still very much a reality. Speaker 1: Yeah, still a color line. Speaker 2: Still a color line. And my--his brother, Marcus Wilcher, he was a realtor, realtor and had a mortgage company and he is given credit for being the first to help blacks get mortgages in areas outside of the, sort of the limited parts of Akron. They could move up to West Akron and other places. And so people remembered him for that. He passed away about two years ago, but he is, for Akron, for integrating, helping to integrate Akron. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is he, have you been to the Apex Musuem [Atlanta, Georgia] in Akron [sic.]? Speaker 2: No, haven't been back in a while. Speaker 1: Not the Apex, I'm trying to think, I'm thinking about Atlanta [Georgia], but, it's a black museum there. Speaker 2: I should go. Speaker 1: Well, some of them, I mean, there's a lot of history. We were in Akron a couple of years ago, interviewed maybe ten or eleven people and, some of the, some of the most wonderful family stories about Akron I've ever heard, you know, really. So-- Speaker 2: I remember another scene. I remember my mother's father, my grandfather, my grandpa, went to Firestone, was a carpenter by trade. And could not get into the carpenter's union, and that's why he worked for Firestone. Even back then, issues in terms of discrimination, even in organized labor, you know, were--had an impact on us, in terms of our families, but I, he wanted to be--to do his trade, and was not able to. Speaker 1: Yeah, that, those laws didn't really break until the '50s [1950s], you know, really. Story_ID: 295419 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Jeanne Evans Cheatham and James Wilcher] met? Speaker 2: Not one that they have shared with me, except that I know that again, that they met, but with the music, their love of music, of course. Speaker 1: Now what did your father play, was he primarily a dancer or did he play an instrument too? Speaker 2: He was a drummer. He is a drummer. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's still playing? Speaker 2: Retired, but still a drummer. That's his life. Speaker 1: All right. Now they were in the same band at one point and they met and-do you know what year they got married? Speaker 2: Well, they did not get married. So I appeared. In fact they were playing music in Erie, Pennsylvania, when I was born. And so, that's their story. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born on the road with the band. What was the name of the band again? Speaker 2: These hard questions, I should know these things, I never asked them. I'll have to get back to you. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: That's awful. I should call dad. I'm trying to remember. I just remember it was Uncle Jerry [Jerry Evans] and mom and dad and maybe one other person, you know, in this band together. And I remember them practicing in grandma's house, my mom's mom's house and I remember him playing, practicing his drums in the garage and everybody, all the kids would come over and, you know, would hear him. Those are my early memories. Speaker 1: So your parents really didn't, they never married. All right. Were they together for a period of time (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --I mean, you know, as a couple, you know, before they, you know? Speaker 2: Yes. I think that's as much as I'm prepared to share. Story_ID: 295420 Speaker 1: But you were raised primarily by your, your father's [James Wilcher] mother [Viola Wilcher]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So when you were growing up your household consisted of, it was your grandmother-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then were there other cousins there? Speaker 2: For a, yes, for a short while, actually for a few years, my, my Uncle Mike, the person who I said integrated the area, he and his wife had five children and so they lived in Akron [Ohio] for a while so they were effectively my, you know, my siblings for all intents and purposes. So they lived upstairs and Granny [Viola Wilcher] lived downstairs. And she kind of looked over all of us, including the discipline, and we all laugh now about some of the things she would do to make sure we were in line. Speaker 1: These are referred to today as old school ways of raising I guess--so she was, what kind of things would she do? Speaker 2: Well, we always laughed about the wet dish rag. She had a way with the wet dish rag, you know, kinda popped you here and there and you knew to get straight. She also, because when you're small, anybody that shakes their fists at you and they're a grown-up, it looks big. She could that and that was enough for me. But, she had a temper. In fact, she told me, she spanked my father until he was eighteen. I wouldn't say she abused us, but she was, she kept us in line and she believed in education and so, even though she only had a second grade education, I knew, it was made clear that the teacher was presumed to be correct and if you came home having problems in school, you had problems at home. And so we had no difficulties there too. I was a pretty good student. Story_ID: 295421 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your parent's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham and James Wilcher] personalities as much as you can maybe, and who do you take after? Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting. I'm a lot like my dad, but it's interesting I have traits like my mother, even though I didn't grow up with her. We both loved to shop, even as she's retired, Neiman Marcus is her favorite store and I, I didn't inherit my father's talent for frugality, you know. But I also have, I don't know, I think I probably have his, a little of his bravado when necessary, you know. He's got a temper though he rarely shows it, but's it's an internal power that commands respect and sometimes I'm able to reflect, but yeah, personality wise, I'm a little like both, even though I didn't, you know, grow up with her. Story_ID: 295422 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember being carried and I was in a dark place like a train station. I can, you know, visualize it now. Again, dark, I could see the lights and I know I was being carried. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you describe where you grew up and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. I--when I lived with granny in Akron, Ohio. We lived on Mallison Avenue and along with other friends. The sights and sounds, I remember walking to school. I went to Lane School [Samuel A. Lane School, Akron, Ohio], elementary school. I had a few phobias. I was afraid of steam shovels and they were building the gas station and I had to have friends kind of run me across. I don't knew which I was afraid of the steam shovel, but I was, and a few other things, but I, I remember that and I guess I just remember being with Granny and her teaching me, you know, how to read or, how to write at four. I was a little girl. And I knew how to call my mother's family, you know, my uncles if we needed something, oh granny is sick, come quick, or something, so she, she sort of taught me things about reading and math, you know when I was very young. Smells, let's see. Just her cooking, you know, that good fashion southern cooking. Taught me how to make chocolate cake at an early age. And so I think that's, you know, again, my mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] mother's house where my uncle [Jerry Evans] still lived, I remember them because they were six feet tall and over, and I was very small. And in a way they, in a way I was a little intimidated because they'd come and get me and they'd stand between me. You know, they were protecting me but they were awfully big and that I remember. But, it was a good time, it really was, and then with my cousins there too, you know we all played together. They were like family, and, of course, when they left that was a little, you know, it's like losing your family. Speaker 1: How old were you when they left? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess I was about seven, you know, but, you know, they moved to California, and it worked out well for them. Speaker 1: So was it just you and your granny then? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 295423 Speaker 1: You want to tell us what happened next? Now, so you're by yourself then at seven? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You were the only child with Granny [Viola Wilcher], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the household just consisted of you and Granny? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you could get a lot of attention, huh? Speaker 2: Well, I suppose I could. And, of course, I had my friends and then my mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] family kind of lived on Euclid Avenue, around and down, I don't know how many, about a mile or two down the road. Speaker 1: So you maintained a pretty good-- Speaker 2: So I saw that. Yes, I was close to them as well. And so I wasn't totally alone, of course Granny again worked hard. The one thing she wanted me to do was learn how to clean house. I wasn't very good at that so I think I disappointed her there, but she was happy that at least I was good in school. And so that's what I could bring home to her. Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting point. Sometimes you find your parents and grandparents don't really appreciate that difference. They want a person to do physical labor and that sort of thing and they find out they're good in school, they really don't encourage it. But your grandmother encouraged you. Your-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And certainly didn't discourage me. And if I said there was no acting out in school, of course, because at that time people believed the teacher was always right so we had a high regard on both sides of the family for education. So possibly because she never had the opportunity having to leave school at second grade to take care of her family. Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend? Which grade schools did you attend? Speaker 2: In Akron [Ohio] I attended Lane Elementary School [Samuel A. Lane Elementary School, Akron, Ohio] and I spent one year at West Junior High School [Akron, Ohio]. It was converted to a junior high. I remember both my parents [Jeanne Evans Cheatham], I believe, went, or my dad went, to West High [School, Akron, Ohio]. They converted it to a junior high school. I mean some of that's coming back now. But-- Speaker 1: Okay. So Lane Elementary School. Speaker 2: And West Junior High. Speaker 1: West Junior High. Speaker 2: And that's when my grandmother called dad and said it's time for you to, to take over because she knew that she was getting old. Speaker 1: About how old was she? Speaker 2: She was in her seventies. Then we learned she kind of pushed her age back so she was probably in her eighties at the time. And so dad came down. He had been again living in, he had met a, he had moved to Boston [Massachusetts] and I was about twelve. He had moved to Boston and when she said to come, he did a remarkable thing for me, he took training at OIC [offer in compromise], went to work for Honeywell and he stopped playing music full time. And he also married my stepmother, Ruby Wilcher, and then I went to live with them when I was thirteen, the summer when I became thirteen. Story_ID: 295424 Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a little girl and how would you describe yourself? What was your personality like? What would you like to do? Did you like music or television, or books, or? What did you like? Speaker 2: I liked all three. I was, I knew I was musical. I had inherited both--my ear from both sides, clearly. I clearly could have gone into music as a career. Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument? Speaker 2: I played violin. To Akron, Ohio's credit, the public school system at that time compared to some others, was excellent. We had music education, including violin, played in an orchestra, I also sang, and so that's, that's what I did. I like books as well, I just love school. For me at that time, the year had started in September, and that's when I was happiest, being in school. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: I liked drawing. Speaker 1: Could you draw? You were a good artist? Speaker 2: I was pretty good. I had one time considered going to the Rhode Island School of Design [Providence, Rhode Island], but took a different path. I guess, let me see, music, I mean music, of course, and maybe English in elementary school [Samuel A. Lane Elementary School, Akron, Ohio], but, we'll tell the later story about some other subjects that I enjoyed, including languages. Story_ID: 295425 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what church did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, my father's [James Wilcher] mother, Granny [Viola Wilcher], was a Pentecostal Holiness Church member, and they had a little church right in the park, just right next to my street and you could hear the tambourines going and music going and she'd go and she'd also, when she wasn't well, she used to speak in tongues, at home. I'd hear her going. Yes, speaking in tongues, so I knew what that was all about because she'd listen to Reverend Fulton J. Sheen and some of these others and that's what she would do. Now my mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] mother on the other hand was a Methodist and these people didn't get the spirit, you know. And I'd go to their church too and I'd go to Sunday School you see. So I had two different kinds of experiences in terms of church-going, which is, will be an interesting story later in terms of my other religious kind of past. Speaker 1: Were you a member of either church? Speaker 2: Well, of course, I left when I was twelve, and so I hadn't formally joined either, you know, in terms of baptism and that kind of thing. It was when I moved to Boston then I joined my stepmother's church which was, which was a Baptist church, Ebenezer Baptist, and that's where I was baptized. Story_ID: 295426 Speaker 1: You were in [Samuel A.] Lane Elementary School in the beginning in Akron [Ohio], then when you were at West Junior High School [Akron, Ohio], your father [James Wilcher] came back and moved to Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you go to school in Boston? Speaker 2: Well, for the first year when I arrived, I went to, they call it now Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King, Jr. Middle School, Boston, Massachusetts], it was called then Patrick T. Campbell Junior High [School, Boston, Massachusetts] and that was, you know we lived in what we called Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts]. It was on the line with Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], so essential Roxbury/Dorchester, and a very different place from my experiences in Akron. Very different. Speaker 1: On the good side or bad side? Speaker 2: Well, again, maybe it's the nature of more concentrated urban environments. In my neighborhood we had kids who, you know when I do my homework, they'd look at me and say why are you doing that? You know they bring wine to school and they were proud of that, you know, and having sex at an early age, and these were all new to me. Or having parties with the red light. (Laughter) I hadn't seen that before. So it was a very different experience and I could see the frustration in my, with the teachers, you know, because it, maybe it was, it was the '60s [1960s] and so, was it, I guess the '60s [1960s] and, and there was a lot of rebellion going on too I think. Where you know, particularly the teachers was white, they were presumed to be racist and, you know, I think kids were able to get away with more than they should have. Hence, that year I took the Latin School test, you know, to get into girls' Latin, and I was the only one in the school and they had tracking, they had an academic program. Speaker 1: So you got in Girls Latin? Speaker 2: Girls Latin School [Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: About, wait, what year was that? Speaker 2: '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: So now you're in high school now? Okay. Speaker 2: I should also say when I went to Boston and enrolled at Patrick T. Campbell, they put me in the art section. They didn't know if I could draw from a hole in the wall, but he looked at me and said art section, and they had an academic section and others, so the tracking never, I never forgot that, and it's something I always want to, in my next life, to really address. Didn't inhibit me, but others, you know that were tracked into the business section, which basically was a general, you were teaching girls how to be secretaries. I don't know that you make those choices in the eighth grade, you know, but that's the way they had tracked these kids, but as I said, interestingly enough, I was the only one who managed to get into Latin School. Story_ID: 295427 Speaker 1: So you were the only black student, girl--black girl in Latin School [Girls Latin School; Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: From my school, from my, junior high [Patrick T. Campbell Junior High School; Martin Luther King, Jr. Middle School, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Oh from your--okay. Speaker 2: There were others. Many of the students at Latin School were from--came from the parochial schools, however, not necessarily from the Boston Public School System. But, we had a few African Americans in our, in our school, but as I said, I was the only one who got in from Patrick T. Campbell. Speaker 1: Oh, ok. How did you like Girls Latin? Speaker 2: I was very comfortable there. It required discipline, four hours of homework a night. Didn't have much of a social life. I fell in love with the boy next door, but maybe it's a good thing. I took another path, yeah I was afraid of him 'cause he knew I was really crazy about him, but fortunately I went the academic path and I enjoyed Latin and French. My family always wondered about that. I think it's because of the musical background, because French is sung. Bonjour. Comment ca va? And that's why, I think why I picked it up so easily. But when I took the achievement tests, and I scored it's like a 775 out of 800 after two years of French, so for some reason I was just drawn to that language, as well as Latin. Speaker 1: Okay. So you know, Latin is seldom taught in the public schools anymore, but in those days it was still, you know, an important course. Speaker 2: And it's coming back. In fact, one of my little projects today is to start a Latin School in my county because, because, I mean because the entire curriculum of the solid curriculum in English. Four years of English, four years of Latin, four years, three years of another language, four years of math and science, and I found that Latin, having an understanding of it helps me to understand modern language is better because many of them are based, the romance languages, on Latin, and so it was easy for me to, to understand our own, our own English, as well as other romance languages. I think it's still important. Speaker 1: In medical terms and so forth, (unclear) in Latin. Speaker 2: Yes, so. Speaker 1: So, now, what was life like in high school? You did a lot of studying apparently in high school. You said you were in love with the boy the next door, but how was your social life in high school? Do you remember clubs or, did you run for class office or any of that, those sorts of things? Speaker 2: I ran for class office once. I--being a politician, running for something wasn't really my, my forte. I just didn't really have it. But I was a, I think I was a member of the French Club and, you know, I had other friends and, you know, we went to church together and, you know, and, and hung out. You know I had other than African American friends and that was interesting going to their homes and seeing how they lived. So that was kind of an interesting experience, having been there. So I was a pretty active teenager, but in, I still had friends around the neighborhood, but I just couldn't see them as often as, as I did, so--in a way it's kind of ostracizing because everybody thinks you're, you think you're stuck up and you think you're special when you don't really, you just in a different school and so that, you know, always creates issues, but with my friends at Latin we, you know, we supported each other and, and, and we, we got through it, you know. It was fun, it was fine. Story_ID: 295428 Speaker 1: Now when you were in junior high school, I guess and then, well, I guess partly in grade school [Samuel A. Lane Elementary School, Akron, Ohio], the Civil Rights Movement is going on. Did, did you--was your family interested in the Civil Rights Movement? I mean, did they discuss it a lot, or? Speaker 2: They discussed it some. Of course, Uncle Mike [Marcus Wilcher] was always politically active, even when he moved to California, you know, he went to Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and he just loved it, and he was, he was a part of a group called, what is it, the Media Coalition, the Black Media Coalition [National Black Media Coaliton]. And where they would challenge the license renewals of TV, you know, TVs and you know, stations and radio stations if they didn't have blacks hired, so we, we were just that kind of family. Also, I remember in 1967 in Boston [Massachusetts], the riot. I remember standing there when just people, I think it was '67 [1967] or '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Was it after Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: That's what I'm trying to remember if that's what-- Speaker 1: 'Cause Dr. King was probably '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: '68 [1968]. I think it may have been '68 [1968] although '67 [1967], you know, there are things that happened before Dr. King died. I remember standing there watching Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] go up in flames, my neighborhood. You know, we were standing there criticizing them, but they, you know, but they, they just broke into everything they could and stole merchandise and whatever. But you could sense the frustration. I mean clearly it wasn't just a free for all. It was pent up anger and frustration. But yes, so to answer your question, we were fairly focused on the affairs of the day. Speaker 1: Do you remember the March on Washington? Speaker 2: '63 [1963], when I was twelve, vaguely. '63 [1963] I was still in Akron [Ohio]. I guess what I remember more was Kennedy being killed. Speaker 1: Okay. That was the same, later on that same year. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean I certainly remember that but that's, that's the time I was living with Granny, you know, so we weren't too focused on those issues at the time, but aware of them, of course. Speaker 1: Now was your, your uncle a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or anything? Speaker 2: I'm sure he was. He was pretty active, you know. He told me once that he was so active with The Black Media Coalition that a group of companies got together and offered him a job in Africa, to get him out of the country, which he turned down. He also put himself in law school later on, because he was suing so many companies, he decided to go to law school in his sixties and obtained his degree in law. Some school in California. Speaker 1: So what, what was his name, Mike? Speaker 2: Marcus, and he changed his middle name. He was Marcus Lee Wilcher, and he changed his name to Garvey. Marcus Garvey Wilcher. Speaker 1: Were there any Garveyites in the family as such, back in the day, do you know? Speaker 2: You know, I, I vaguely remember dad mentioning, and this is again is a vague memory about even Granny being sensitive to those things, but I don't remember her telling me about that kind of thing. I don't know about Uncle Mike. I'm sure he could've, would have been. He obviously was the revolutionary in the family, but, you know, I'd have to specifically ask (unclear). I vaguely remember something, but I don't know, I can't tell you specifically. Speaker 1: So some of them, they could have been. Speaker 2: Could have been, yes. Speaker 1: 'Cause I know they had Garveyites in Akron, you know, back in the, in the, his demise, Garvey, his demise in 1927, basically when that whole nation started breaking up, in '27 [1927], '28 [1928], '29 [1929]. Speaker 2: Okay, so Granny might, her generation might have been. Um-hum. I'll have to see. Speaker 1: Okay, so you remember the riots in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], you were in Latin school [Girls Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetss], did, so you graduated in what '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969]. Um-hum. Speaker 1: So you were in high school when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing when Dr. King was killed? Speaker 2: I, it was in the afternoon, yes? So probably in school. I just remember it being very chilling and, you know, being very fearful that things would just blow up. You know, I guess we all were. And just feeling very, very cold. And scared, you know. But, yeah, probably in school. Story_ID: 295429 Speaker 1: In high school [Girls Latin School; Boston Latin Academy, Boston, Massachusetts], did you--now being so active and being in academics, did you, what were your aspirations in high school in terms of going to college? You knew you were going to school somewhere, right? So you're-- Speaker 2: I knew I was going to school, which was the, the wonderful thing about being in a school like Latin school, even if none of your family members, immediate family were in college, everybody else was planning that so that you sort of went along with the flow. Although I never wanted to be poor. One of the things that when I was young, I knew the way not to be poor was to go to college, so there was no way I was going to get pregnant and have a bunch of kids, no way. Because I understood that that would ground me into poverty, keep me there and I didn't want to be there. And I--actually both sides of my family, you know, while they may have been technically, of lower income, they never thought that way, you know. My mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] mother, she was a housekeeper, she was, to me she was a caterer. That's what she said, and a nurse, and so hence my family, my mom, my uncles went to college. You know they were always very articulate. Maybe it's the Ohio dialect, but it's, they all speak well, okay? And I--better than I do. My dad is far more articulate than I am I think. So we always, never thought about doing anything but growing up and doing well. So that, even when I, at Latin School, I wasn't sure where I was going, but I knew I was going somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you end up going to Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Holyoke. Speaker 1: Now how did that, now that's a kind of exclusive school, so you must have been a pretty top student to get into Mount Holyoke. Speaker 2: Well Girls Latin School, roughly 90-plus percent of the graduates went to college. So they was, it was a public college for those who don't know. A public college prep school, its male counterpart was Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts] which was established in 1635, and educated some of the nation's presidents as well as other leaders, so, I mean it's a history of going to college. The question was where? And at that time, this was right before the Ivy League began to bring in women. So, in '69 [1969] the choices, in terms of going to a top-flight school, were to go to women's colleges, and so the choice was, as you know, either Holyoke or Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] or Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts]. Radcliff [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time, which was affiliated with Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but I wanted to be close enough home that I could get home without too much wear and tear, but not so close that they would be on the campus. So, Holyoke was far enough, a hundred miles away, western Massachusetts and in the neighborhood was Smith, Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] as well as Hampshire College [Amherst, Massachusetts], which was new so it was a, you had a wonderful opportunity to take classes in all of those places. I chose Mount Holyoke first of all because it had a good language program and French at the time was my interest, but secondly because when I went on the campus, at the time black women, we called each other sisters, and my generation still does, you know, and they were friendly and they greet--everyone was actually--and greeted us and really made me feel at home. And, of course, it's a beautiful campus. I didn't get that kind of reception at Smith, in the admissions office or on the campus, even though they were the same caliber institutions. So I went to Holyoke. Speaker 1: Okay, so there was a comfort level there, had a family kind of an atmosphere. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, how did you like it? Did you find it to be what you expected? Speaker 2: Yes. And again, this is late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], so the sisters, you know, stayed together, you know. We worked together, we lived together. Frankly I wish I had gotten to meet other non-African Americans as I see it now, but at the time, we were fairly insulated and we helped each other, we protected each other, and some of them are still my best friends. I had dinner last week with three of them, two of whom are physicians now. To me that's a success story and an affirmative action story, but anyway, so yes, it was a very friendly environment, and again, a beautiful environment and I was able to spend my first semester senior year in France. So--with scholarships--so I, I have no regrets for going there. Story_ID: 295430 Speaker 1: Where did you live in France when you went to France? Speaker 2: I was in Paris [France], lived with a family in the suburbs and that's an interesting story. I don't know if Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] knew the extent to which--well my French family was socialist, my language professor, I believe it was the French, you know, the reading, you know the literature, was a Maoist and the other was a Marxist of some sort, and we read Mao's [Mao Zedong] Little Red Book in French. I do not believe that Mount Holyoke was aware of the extent to which we had been exposed to all of that, but the good thing is they were in to deconstructing language and literature long before we discovered here--it here in the United States. Speaker 1: Deconstructionism, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. And it also helped me to think even more critically about the world in which we lived and the consumption focus of life in the United States. So I decided to come back, not to be in the academy, but to be an instrument for social change. Speaker 1: Okay, so it had that kind of influence on you there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So now did you at the time, were you aware of the black activists of French expression, like [Patrice] Lumumba or [Aime] Cesaire, or people like that? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yes. Speaker 1: So just tell us a little bit about what you were reading in terms of those people 'cause, [Frantz] Fanon, of course, is a big one, but I mean, just talk a little bit of that. Speaker 2: Well yes, Fanon had most, more of an impact on me. I was a French and Philosophy major. Of course, we spent a lot more time with the existentialists and others, but Fanon still has, I think about his work, on occasion even now when I try to understand the nature of racism, and the impact on people of color. And, in fact, if I ever go back to school, I want to focus on that. So that was some of the, some of the reading that we did back then. So, as I said, I brought it back, the thinking, with me in terms of the United States and what I do with my life. Speaker 1: Okay. So are there any professors at Mount Holyoke that you would consider mentors or people that really made a big impression on you? Speaker 2: I thing Professor Rose [ph.] was my philosophy professor, the first class I took. Think she's passed on now. But, I realized I had some talent with respect to sort of looking at things from a philosophical standpoint. That was enjoyable. We had some French professors. Professor Switten, I believe her name was, who was just excellent in French. But as it works, the way I learned French most importantly was being there, you know. You really have to spend time in that country to really understand how the language works and the impact of culture on language. And so-- Speaker 1: Did you learn anything, did some things, are there things that you learned in France about, about the African presence or the black presence in France that you didn't know before you went over there that was profound? Speaker 2: Well, I mean socially that, those were the people I kind of hung with. Interesting. The Senegalese--Senegalais. Those were my friends and so I could see it, you know, lived it in some respects. Like the gentleman I dated. You know, we'd go to the, sit in the cafe, and you know, the French are so romantic, but yes, most of my friends, social friends were, were from Senegal and other African countries, so yes we saw that. A colleague of mine who was there she took up with a North African, which was kind of interesting because he was clearly a Muslim and she found it kind of curious why he'd always walk a few steps ahead of her. Social, cultural issues there. But no, clearly, the effect, the influx of Africans in Paris, was clear. Interestingly enough though, the question of discrimination comes up in the attitudes of the French towards their former colonist or colonized peoples and I remember one conductor calling me, I think he called me the N-word, you know, in French, and I don't feel that I was, it was as comfortable an environment as I thought it should be, should have been, because you know you hear about [James] Baldwin and all these blacks who went long before, but that had changed. And with the whole black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)The whole black expatriate thing (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --was not what it, well, it wasn't as romantically as, it's wasn't as comfortable for them as we thought? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 295431 Speaker 1: So when you got back from France, I guess it's just before graduation, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First--No, it was first semester, senior year. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So I came, yeah, I came back, yes, this for the second semester, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, when you were on the verge of graduation, now what was your major? Speaker 2: Philosophy and French. Speaker 1: Okay, philosophy and French. So did you imagine yourself a French philosopher, you know? Speaker 2: (shakes head) Speaker 1: No, huh? Okay. Speaker 2: No. When I came back I decided to go to law school. Speaker 1: Okay, why law school after, you know, French and philosophy, I see those as esoteric pursuits. Law school is so nailed down, you know. Speaker 2: But, in the United States, if you want to change at least our traditions and our government and its policies, the law is the logical choice, but before I went to law school I received a master's degree from the New School for Social Research [New School University, New York New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to the New School for Social Research? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what kind of master's did you get? Speaker 2: Urban Affairs and Policy Analysis. Now I heard of the New School because one of our sociology professors graduated from the New School and I had learned that the New School was founded by Germans Jews escaping the Holocaust. And, they early on had a focus on political economics. In other words, this was the left of center type of institution of higher education. Still in a bit of a radical mode. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you graduated from Mount Holyoke and what year was it? Speaker 2: In '73 [1973] . Speaker 1: And in New School you were there until? Speaker 2: I started New School in '74 [1974] and was there for two years. Speaker 1: Okay. So you came out in '75 [1975]? Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-six. Okay. So, well what kind of experiences did you have in the New School? Did you meet any, any teachers there or people in New York [New York] that influenced you? Speaker 2: Mr. Euclese [ph.] who was the director of the program was, I thought, very sharp and very focused and analytical and we learned a lot in terms analyzing urban policy issues, and what made the New School unique was that they would bring in policy makers to give us real life issues to work on. It wasn't very statistically and numeric and analytically in terms of numbers and number crunching. We didn't really focus a lot on that. We focused on reality and how to solve real problems. Ed Koch [Edward Koch] for instance when he was in the House of Representatives at the time, had an issue that he asked us to work on and so we did that. So that's to me what made it unique. New York, of course, is New York, and I lived in Harlem. That was my first home out of--away from the house in Boston [Massachusetts], and, of course, that was an interesting story. Lived in, what's called, of course, rent controlled apartment and on St. Nicholas Terrace near City College [The City College of New York, New York, New York] and I learned all about the issues facing New Yorkers, including the scourge of the drug trade in Harlem. Of course, developed a healthy fear of hanging out too long at night by myself, being on the subway, and I guess, it was kind of a negative, the alienation of people in New York because of the fear of, you know, being harmed and what effect it had on people and just the way they lived their lives. And so I decide to leave New York when I graduated. I didn't want New York to get in me. Speaker 1: So those times when New York was really rough, Harlem was really rough in those days. Speaker 2: It was fairly rough so it was a nice apartment in my building. People, you know, working people and, you know, but around, we, you had to keep your eyes open and that kind of thing, and so that was interesting and a certainly an issue that needed, needs a solution or needed a solution. Still does. But, so the New School was great and meeting some interesting people there. I mean New Yorkers are--some of them are fabulous, as they say, and personalities were really great, some of them, and so I, it was an interesting time. And then one semester I spent up in Albany, New York at the state House working for a member of the legislature and seeing how the New York legislature worked. So that too was very fascinating so it was a preparation for law school, first of all. Many people get into some top flight schools partly because they've done other things and they've made themselves interesting. And I knew that's probably what I needed to do as well. So it was a good way to still--focus on policy but I also realized being there that I needed that law degree to have the kind of entry point that I wanted in terms of having an impact on policy. Story_ID: 295432 Speaker 1: How did you decide on Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]? I guess I mean it's--most people would say that, hope it's not a dumb question. If you can get in you probably would get in, right? I mean most people would feel that way. That's probably-- Speaker 2: You know I never thought about it as not being a possibility, you know. I gave a speech recently where I said, even in high school I used to write my name Shirley Wilcher, B.A, M.A., J.D., Ph.D. and I'd just keep doing it. So it never occurred to me that I wouldn't you see. So, but I was smart, you obviously want to apply, they advise you to apply to about ten schools and I did. And I never really expected the letter from Harvard to be honest with you. I didn't say it wouldn't happen, I wanted to go to Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] because I wanted to continue that Berkeley, you know, kind of radical, change the world. I just wanted to be in that environment. That's where I planned to go and I was admitted to Berkeley but I was admitted to Harvard and so I had a choice here. And I started to turn them down and, but people convinced me are you crazy? Even to this day I wonder what it would've, what would've life been like if I had gone to Berkeley, you now, but I got the thing that probably was helpful for what I ended up doing. Story_ID: 295433 Speaker 1: Well how did you find Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Was it--I heard it's real tough the first year, they say. Speaker 2: It is. I just wrote--last year I wrote an article for, I think it was black--was it [The] Black Collegian, in which I talk about what one needs to do to prepare, especially African Americans, especially when you don't grow up in a family of lawyers. You need to know what a Tort is, you know. Speaker 1: That's not a little thing with cherries in it? Speaker 2: Exactly. I mean you really to need to know what the environment is like. The movie '[The] Paper Chase' was not far from reality, and what the biggest challenge I found for a number of us was having confidence. The kind of confidence, you assume, but when you get around, you could start swimming with sharks, you know, and it's, it's the students, it is the peer pressure that is so intense as much as it is to the professors, you know. They're the ones. I mean in a way it's healthy, but in a way it's not, you know you have to steel yourself for that kind of really intense competition. And you've got to have the confidence. I had to struggle to develop the confidence to deal in that environment. One of the things sometimes I think that, that we're inclined to do with our children is we're so negative, we're so interested in keeping them in line that we don't allow them to really explore and to believe in themselves that it's okay sometimes to feel the wall and touch and do things. It's like I knew--I brought some baggage with me but I think we were able, I was able to get through that by the third year it was alright. Speaker 1: Did you have any ideas about why that's true? We discussed that too with other people, the feeling the way black people raise their children, I mean, even a, I mean a good families maybe put too much on them sometime. You know, again, we're concerned now that kids are out here not being raised at all. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But there is a tendency to be so tight with kids that they won't really, know that it's okay to deviate from-- Speaker 2: But it's also okay to say, even when it was not true, you're great, you're fabulous, you're brilliant. Somebody needs to tell you that once in a while. Speaker 1: So you think we have more negative reinforcement than positive? Speaker 2: Yes. Although as I said sometimes that dish rag could have been timely when I see some of these cases these days. But you have to have the positive as well. And when you're in those kinds of environments you have to be able to reach in and find something to hold on to that's positive that reminds you that you're okay, that you're as smart as they are. When you know you are, but definitely you're tested. So our, our children really need to be prepared for that. I mean this law firm (laughter) is probably a continuation of that kind of culture. Story_ID: 295434 Speaker 1: Was that the toughest part of school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] you think, trying to maintain your own confidence in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --in that kind of environment when Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --it is designed really to break you down in some ways? Speaker 2: Yes. And it is designed to break you down. And so one has to really be prepared, but to know that that's what you're walking into. Okay, and again, kind of affirm, you know, that you belong there, okay. That you're there for a reason, that you did well in undergraduate school, and so that was, that was my first year challenge, I think, but beyond that, it was fine. And I became the radical that I normally seem to be. I have to tell you, some things I will not share with you, but let me just say I, I seem not to have any fear of authority and authority figures. And for a good thing, you know. I was a member of the Black Law Students' Association, you know. Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] remembers me. I may have skipped a class or two. He said are you in here? No, 'cause I was out, you know, changing the world, you know, and so that's kind of, because I wanted to go to law school. I never wanted to practice law. That was not my interest. It was doing public policy, being where I can really have an impact, hence I left and, of course, moved to Washington [D.C.], eventually. So, yes, I gained my confidence. It was fine and my friends were wonderfully supportive. Some of them now are judges, you know, in private practice. Harvard has a wonderful story. Speaker 1: How did the Black Law Students' Association [BLSA] help you, in what ways did it help? Speaker 2: Well, it helped because it really helped me to channel the energies that I had in terms of, again, making change. And so I was able to, I was the, what is that, the Internal Vice President and so we, you know, obviously we were discussing issues related to civil rights and that was a way to do that. Of course, National BLSA activities were enjoyable. In fact, I met Ted Shaw [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw] at a National BLSA meeting where he had run for president and I supported this woman. He never let me forget the fact that I challenged him in one of the halls, you know, and where do you stand on X issues? And he never let me forget that. Well, hey, that's the way I am and, you know, he had to--to account for where he stood. And so that's, again, a way of channeling and developing those instincts and the desires for movement and change. Story_ID: 295435 Speaker 1: You have any stories about Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] you can share with us? Speaker 2: Well I'll just say that I was involved in a conference called The Third World conference that became very controversial and Derrick didn't really get involved in that. Who did help us was Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], Professor Ferguson, who's now passed on, who was an ambassador to Uganda and he helped, there was a controversy and he helped to mediate it, and, but Derrick at my graduation, said "Well, I heard you wanted to do some things"--I'll just paraphrase it-"to upset the order, but keep doing what you're doing." I'll never forget him coming to me at the graduation, saying keep doing what you're doing. I just have a tendency to try to shake up the status quo, and maybe one day I'll write about it. I threatened to write my book so maybe I'll do that. Speaker 1: What kind of things did you do actually? Did you wanna talk about? Speaker 2: We had, as I said, we had a third world conference and let's just say some of the participants at the conference at the time were very controversial. And in fact, I can share at this point that one of the representatives came from Libya, which at the time, as you can imagine, some people objected to. He was the third secretary, he was a little, you know, low level person but this was a third world conference and we wanted to hear what they had to say. But it caused quite an uproar that I hadn't predicted, but what was interesting was the man looked like an African American that could walk down the street. We didn't know what they looked like, we didn't know what they're positions were. We wanted a debate on the issues, okay, this is what colleges are supposed--academics, institutions are supposed to create but people didn't want him there. And people, some professors, signed letters to get people to not come to the conference, some law professors, who shall remain nameless. And I went to the dean and said this is not the kind of activity I expect the professorial to engage in. And they got upset with me because I had the wherewith--I had the gumption, I don't know where I get the, you know, the arrogance to criticize a law professor. I thought he shouldn't have been involved in this and Mr. Ferguson, to his credit, helped us to mediate and that's, so I'll always give him credit and remember him for that. And that had an impact even in terms of my next job. So-- Speaker 1: You mean a negative impact? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, we didn't think one speaker would have caused that, or maybe it was, they say it was insensitive, that's okay, that a view. But we just wanted to have a debate. Speaker 1: What, was this like 1978, '79 [1979]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978]? Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so. As I said I seem to attract (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay now-- Speaker 2: --controversy (laughter). Story_ID: 295436 Speaker 1: Now in '78 [1978], too, you clerked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, right? Speaker 2: Yes, '77 [1977] and '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now tell us about that experience. Who was there when--? Was [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers there, or--? (Unclear). Speaker 2: No, in '77 [1977] I was in San Francisco [California] when they still had an office there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so, Alice, I think it as Beasley, was there, and some other names that will come back to me. In fact, Uncle Mike's [Marcus Wilcher] wife, my aunt, was able to help me get that job because they knew each other and that was the continuing impact of that. And so, it was, it was a great experience. It was a great experience being in San Francisco and Oakland [California] at the time. The next year was '78 [1978] and if you recall that was the year of the Bakke [Regents of the University of California vs. Bakke] decision. So it was wonderful being there, you know, when history was being made and to, to, you know, sort of, kind of tangential (unclear) to just be a part of history. Speaker 1: Now, can you kind of just maybe summarize what Bakke was about because I think it impacts a lot of what your life work is. It's an affirmative case and Allan Bakke sued the University of California I think it was. Speaker 2: Sued the University of California Davis [Davis, California], you see David had--Davis basically set aside a number of slots for, you know, for affirmative action purposes and he challenged that and the decision was very--there were a number of opinions that came out of that case but the opinion of Justice Powell [Lewis F. Powell, Jr.] was, was key, and essentially he said race could be taken into account, but quotas could not be used. One could not set aside slots for individuals, you know, under the Fourteenth Amendment, so, we kind of, you know, that, that decision has had an impact for many years and certainly until the decision in the Grutter case a couple of years ago. Speaker 1: Now what case was that? Speaker 2: It's the case against the University of Michigan [Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], G-R-U-T-T-E-R, Grutter vs. Bollinger, B-O-L-L-I-N-G-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Gratz vs. Bollinger. Essentially some form of affirmative action were fine and, you know, because of the compelling state interest involved in promoting diversity. So, I mean that was, that was a major case in '78 [1978]--although in speeches I talk about the fact that, again, colleges have been using affirmative action before, then and after, but since '68 [1968] and, in fact, I believe many of my friends were recruited to the Ivy League after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] died. I mean these colleges really made efforts at that time to reach into the inner cities. At Dartmouth they had some young men who were in gangs, I mean serious Chicago [Illinois] gangs, and these were some of the most brilliant people I have ever met in my life. A gentleman that I dated from on the streets of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He didn't graduate, but he was a math genius and he was doing computers before they became popular, okay? That stated post-'68 [1968], so we've got, I mean, almost a forty-year history of affirmative action. You know, it's not that recent. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '78 [1978], the Bakke decision. So what, the NAACP have to kind of retool itself after the Bakke decision to go forward and-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if its was LDF [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Legal Defense Fund] that had to retool itself, but colleges and universities, obviously there was an impact in higher education. I don't know that it was a negative, I think that it helped colleges in terms of how they approached the issue of affirmative action, and what kinds of affirmative action programs they could or couldn't have. So, I think it helped that generation of African Americans and then Latinos in terms of getting access to colleges and universities. It probably helped me getting into Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, so in a way that's like pre-Bakke, but still, around the same time. In fact, if I recall, I do recall, the Harvard motto was referenced in the Bakke decision and so obviously continued. So it, it, I think it, it created opportunities for a generation of us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 295437 Speaker 1: Are there any other stories from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Let me see, '79 [1979], no, no more stories. There I went to work, accepted a job in a law firm [Proskauer Rose Goetz and Mendelson] thinking that I needed to preserve my options. I really wanted to do civil rights but everybody said up there you need to go to a law firm and work in a firm for a while. I didn't really need to and I stayed there a year and was not a happy camper, just because that's not what I wanted to do. So ultimately, I applied and received a job at the National, w-what was then the Center for Law and Social Policy, and that was in 1980, yes, and, yeah, I believe that was, yeah, '80 [1980] and that was the women's rights project which eventually became the National Women's Law Center [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Had you, had you, you had spent some time on women's issues at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right? You just alluded to something earlier, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but most of my issues at Harvard were race issues. I really, you know, I came on the tail end of the feminist, the early feminist movement. We really weren't focusing on gender as much back then. I came at the beginning of the feminist movement I guess is what I'm saying. It really wasn't my issue. My, our issues were race but obviously there is a gender component to that. Women of color again being double victims in some respects of discrimination, and so they hired me. Actually they hired me to work on a project in Sweden where the Swedes had a, a, some government funding that they gave to companies if 40 percent of their hires were women. They called it The Quota Program, which was interesting because here quotas, there's a lot of controversy around quotas, so Charles Brown, Professor Brown, who's an economist from Mich- from Maryland, and I spent about six weeks, no more like three weeks, in Sweden. It was very interesting and that's what I was hired to do, take a look at that and, in the meantime, clearly there were a lot of other things going on in 1980. Of course, we had a new president, 1981 we had a new administration and a very different administration, and so that's when the battles began (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], Ronald Reagan era-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --begins. And so, go ahead, I just want to name to (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and so the Swedish issue was good for me because eventually I really would like to get back to the international arena, (background noise) because anti-discrimination and diversity, affirmative action have gone international. Story_ID: 295438 Speaker 1: But in 1981, as you mentioned, the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration began, and its positions on issues such as affirmative action was clearly very different from, let's say, ours. And they made an attempt to change regulations and laws and policies in numerous ways and so in a way it was a major setback for us in the civil rights community because of who was in the White House. Fortunately, we had people like Augustus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F "Gus" Hawkins] and the Democrats in control of the House at the time so that helped to stem the tide of what I would call regression, you know, in terms of Civil Rights law and policy. In 19--I don't know if you want to go '85 [1985]--but that's when I left the Women's Law Center [Washington, D.C.] and went on Capitol Hill to work for a Augustus Hawkins who in his staff, where he was the Chair of the House Legislation and Labor committee. Now Gus, as you know, has been in public life for many years. He's in his nineties now. He had already spent twenty-eight years in the California legislature and he was the Chair of Education and Labor and a colleague of mine who worked for Gus, Ed Cooke, Edmund Cooke [ph.], who's now at a law firm here in Washington, D.C. He--The Venable firm [Veneble LLP], in fact. He hired me. He meant, I had met him at a meeting and I told well I really wanted to go on Capitol Hill and he called me and offered me a job when Mr. Hawkins became the chair of the committee, and so I started in '85 [1985] and, I must say, this will be in my book to probably, if I ever get around to writing it. My first--and I started in April and in the Summer of '85 [1985] we received a plain brown envelope on, at the Rayburn House Office Building [Washington, D.C.] and in that envelope was Ed Meese [Edwin Meese]--a hand-written version of an attempt to change Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Executive Order 11246 that requires affirmative action. He wanted to essentially eliminate what we call goals and timetables. If you don't have a goal, as my colleague, Bernard Emerson [ph.] would say, "If you don't' know where you're going, any road will get you there." We need targets and goals for these affirmative programs and policies. He wanted to get rid of that because that's something the administration had wanted to do, changing the regulations or whatever. Now an executive order is simply that and it can be changed by a president at any time. The story is, however, he waited until Labor Secretary Bill Brock, was on safari in Africa before he tried to move this change through the domestic policy council and I think it was, it was an error on his part because first of all, The labor s-, most importantly, the labor s- that he was trotting on, the labor secretary's turf, Bill Brock. So he had already created a problem there, so Brock had to come back and fight it back. At the time Clarence Thomas by the way was, I think, Chair of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. So and somebody, some friend in the White House managed to get this copy to us. Story_ID: 295439 Speaker 1: You had an envelope from Edwin Meese, I think? Speaker 2: From the White House and inside was this proposed change to Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] executive order [Executive Order 11246] requiring affirmative action and he wanted to, we called it eviscerate, it's a little graphic but, he basically wanted to gut the essence of the affirmative action program. And since it was an executive order, a presidential order, not something that was enacted by, through the [U.S.] Congress, it could be changed at any time. This executive order covered most, all probably, or most large companies, as well as medium-sized companies. They--it ranged from the Boeings [The Boeing Company] and the Texacos [Texaco, Inc.] to Neiman Marcus. Any company that sells goods and services to the federal government of ten thousand dollars or more, were required, since 1961, actually since Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], to not discriminate and they must use affirmative action. And that did not sit well with our colleagues in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration, hence, when Mr. Brock [William E. Brock] was allegedly having fun on safari is when he attempted to make that change. Someone got a copy to us and we had to begin a monumental effort to urge President Reagan not to change the executive order. To their credit, private industry took a lead role in urging the president not to make the change and making it clear that affirmative action was important to them in maintaining--now we use the term, diverse--work force and work place. So I, they must be commended. In fact, the National Association of Manufacturers at that time led by Bill McEwan [William McEwan], an African American gentleman from, of course, the St. Louis [Missouri] area was a lead person. I understand that he has since passed on. I think that's correct. I tried to find him a few, I guess a few months ago, to thank him and to recognize him for his leadership in preserving affirmative action. But also, it was a multi-part struggle, including members of Congress, Mr. Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins], my boss, but also members of the min- maj- minority party at that time, including Mr. Michel [Robert H. Michel]. I believe that's his name. I'm getting a little older so my memory goes, but the minority leader, I recall, signed a letter to the president, Senator Dole, Robert Dole, I recall, was a signatory. He has since changed his views on affirmative action but at the time he was a signatory. So we had private industry, we had the Congress and, of course, we had the civil rights community, an interesting coalition, and fortunately Mr. Meese was not able to prevail, did not prevail. Story_ID: 295440 Speaker 1: That raises an interesting question because I think it happened recently, you know, in the Michigan case [Grutter vs. Bollinger, 2003] that forces that, you know, we would not suspect, you know, came out and supported affirmative action. I think it was the military in the Michigan case was a real unexpected source of support for affirmative action. Who--could you maybe give us your analysis of who was, whose interests, you know, were being served by Edwin Meese and President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] when they were trying to shoot it [Executive Order 11246] down. And, why, I mean you would think would be their interest of these big businesses and so forth, but it doesn't seem to be. I mean, what's your analysis of that? Speaker 2: My view was, this is clearly ideologically-based. We had, and we continue to have, a segment on what we call the right, that honestly believes that discrimination is, I mean, that affirmative action or taking an effort to inculcate and to include people of color in the workplace this way is an act of discrimination. I honestly believe that. I believe, with all due respect, that Mr. Thomas [Clarence Thomas], who was again at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] at that time, for instance, shares that view. Speaker 1: So the ideology reverses what really works, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, they consider themselves victims when that happens. They're the victims of discrimination if you visit some of the web sites, the Center for Individual Rights [Washington, D.C.], the Center for Equal Opportunity [Falls Church, Virginia]. They consider affirmative action a form of discrimination. What was interesting at that time also was their use of the media in making others, the members of the public, agree with them, ultimately, over time. One of our jobs and we had a very small group of three working on civil rights issues for the committee, and overseeing the agencies. We would have to, it would be a Friday, and Ed Meese and Brad Reynolds was the assistant attorney general I believe at the time, would wait until Friday to release a report that showed that the [U.S.] Department of Labor was enforcing quotas. Good move. Friday night, Mr. Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] probably on his way to California and members of [U.S.] Congress went someplace else. We had to scramble to find people to write a counter press release. Wonderful media strategy and they would use the buzz words: quotas. At the time quotas was a big, major issue with a flash board, made people angry, and so they convinced their colleagues in the media to use the Q word, even when the agencies, all regulations had their quotas, you know, but they're saying, you know, you throw something on the wall often enough, something is gonna stick. People began to believe it. I called it what I considered what it was, disinformation, if not misinformation because they knew the truth in terms of that agency, but the truth was of little consequence, and so we had to learn--I had to learn how to work with the media, you know. I'm not saying I was a Deep Throat, but let me just say, you had to play defense, and you had to have your colleagues, people that you knew, who would call you, to find, to counter what the others were doing. This is the Washington [D.C.] game. Welcome to Washington. I mean you, so that the fourth estate, I believe it called the fourth estate, sometimes I get mixed, the fourth escape, the media was an instrument of public policy. Now we can have a long discussion about whether we were successful in terms of the nation, the public understanding of affirmative action. In many respects, we were not. We only had three people and one media person who was serving the whole committee, against the administration's use of the press. So it was, that was a challenging time and frustrating and it still is because I think we still have a long way to go in terms of re-educating America about the benefits of affirmative action. But it started, for me it started in the Reagan years and I will not name at least one member of the press who has actually redeemed himself, but all the stories that Meese and company used to leak, he seemed to be able to report, and he was of color. And he used the Q word. Speaker 1: Did you all name him? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I mean is it-- Speaker 2: Prominent black journalist and commentator. Speaker 1: Well, okay. I don't know why you wouldn't name him, but-- Speaker 2: No, I, I, you know, one of these days I'll have a chat with him about what he did because he doesn't, maybe he was young, you know he needed, this was a great opportunity for him, but he did a lot of damage when he would run those stories and use that kind of language. And, I never remember getting a call, you know, to get the other side of the story, you see. And so we had to do a lot of work to counter this, you know, quotas nonsense. Story_ID: 295441 Speaker 1: Now you went on to work for EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You never did? Okay. Speaker 2: No. Again, remember the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration--they probably wouldn't hire me, okay, but in fact, I got to know some EEOC people because again part of my job was to oversee the agencies. We couldn't pass a lot of civil rights legislation during the Cl- the Reagan years because Mr., you know, there's opportunity for mischief. Anytime you open up a piece of legislation somebody can introduce a bill that could, you know, change things in a way that you don't want them changed, and, of course, you had the president there, so what we had to do, we had, we had to use the oversight authority of the [U.S.] Congress to get in and dig in to make sure and through oversight have hearings to make sure that the agency wouldn't go too far, you know, in terms of regression, and that's what I spent a lot of my time doing. We did oversight reports. I know it sounds boring, but we had to know what was going on in those agencies. And what was interesting, when I read that Mr. Deep Throat has decided to expose himself finally after all those years, he was not alone. I mean we had, we had a system. We would call an agency person that wanted to talk and leave a name, I'd say Donna's calling, and they'd know who that was, and they'd call back and we'd have a nice chat or we'd meet for lunch somewhere. So most of what I learned about what was going on in the agencies came from inside. Some of these officials would never imagine what I learned about the things that they did and that will not go on record, however, from a policy standpoint, much of what we learned was leaked by people who were so angry with what the administration was doing in the area of civil rights that they were willing to put their careers in jeopardy to share information, hence, we had oversight hearings Mr. Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] would have a hearing, bring up Mr. [Clarence] Thomas, bring up the lLabor, you know, department [U.S. Department of Labor] and other agencies. Similarly, Don Edwards [William Donlon Edwards] over at the [House] Judiciary Committee, would bring, you know, 'cause he had the authority over the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. He was a subcommittee chair, would bring up the justice department people, and so we would work with the staff of the justice department of the Judiciary Committee to hold those hearings, to hold them accountable. Story_ID: 295442 Speaker 1: And one last thing that I--that, that we did was to, to do a major investigation of the [U.S.] Department of Labor; and it's--again, because we knew, we had heard that Edwin Meese was having an impact on the way the labor department enforced the executive order [Executive Order 11246], the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] order. See what they couldn't do by legislation, you know, it's easy to change the direction of an agency without publicizing it, so we went to every region and we learned a lot and we wrote a report some--with some help, okay; and we were about to hold a hearing and at the time the director of the agency that I ultimately led, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance [Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs], he was ready to testify because they, in his view, was opposing the- him from actually enforcing the law the way it was intended to be enforced. They forced him out, and in fact the day before the hearing, I received a call indicating that he was threatened with tax audits and a lot of other things if he didn't testify--if he testified. So, so much for that hearing; and unfortunately, I couldn't get the chairman to swear these people under oath, you know, to tell the truth, you know, the House--[U.S.] Congress does have that authority obviously to take, he didn't want to do it, he was such a gentleman, because I had heard that they, you know they were gonna lie, at the hearing about the way they were enforcing the law, but y- I, as much as I could do, I did as much as I could do. But we wrote a report that was so critical of the way the Department of Labor's agency was being run, that we said basically either the labor secretary knew what was going on and was in agreement or he didn't know and essentially he was asleep at the wheel. So when he saw a draft of that report, he came into Mr. Hawkins' office unannounced, said, "Gus [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins]," (laughter) "we're gonna have to do something." Well, you know, once again, this is my history, I called them like I saw them, and Hawkins was wonderful because he supported us. And so before that report was finished, he had made some changes in that agency so that he would not be embarrassed, you see. So in a way it was a way of changing policy without passing any legislation, okay. So, needless to say, some of those people who are now in working other places, probably still don't like me very much. I'm not a favorite person in some, some circles, but, you know, as I said we had a job to do. Maintaining, you know, at least the legal status quo, as well as policy. Oh, they'd do things, we--they call it marginal notes. They'd send a note, a notice back to, to the field office and the policy was in the margins. That way they didn't have to go through the notice and comments process and change the regulation, you know, it was all very subtle, and somehow we'd get copies of those (laughter), those policies. Your government at work. Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems those years public radio was really good at blowing the whistle on what the administration was doing-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --to undermine many efforts of affirmative action, environmental protection, a lot of things. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And I remember Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], you know, basically gutted public radio at one point too. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes. The philosophy and the process was the same in many civil rights agencies and others, 'cause you could see the similar things, the similarities in terms of things happening with other colleagues. And the other thing they did was to cut the staff dramatically. You know, there are many ways to get around having to enforce the law, and they mastered many of those techniques that it took us years to build back when we, when the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration took over. Story_ID: 295443 Speaker 1: So you were with Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and the house committee [House Education and Labor Committee; House Committee on Education and the Workforce] 'til 1990, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, in '90 [1990] what did you do? Speaker 2: Well, actually I was fortunate to get, to have been hired by the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities [Washington, D.C.] and I told, when I told Mr. Hawkins that I was leaving, the next day he announced his retirement (laughter) and everybody blames me for that. I take no credit, and no blame, for that decision, but that is the association of the nation's private colleges from, you know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to small Baptist colleges to others. Anything you can imagine is probably a member. Well any institution that you can imagine, non-public, so-- Speaker 1: So what was your role there? Speaker 2: I was director for state relations and general counsel ultimately, and so I worked with the state associations of independent colleges and one interesting thing that happened, it's when the assistant secretary for civil rights and education [sic. assistant secretary of education for civil rights], Michael [L.] Williams, I believe his name was, issued a determination that minority scholarships were illegal, a violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act [of 1964]. So here I am representing colleges and here we go again with the civil rights issues, you know, and it caused a major firestorm, and we formed a coalition of the civil rights organizations and the colleges and universities and we were able to ultimately prevail there. Now since then, of course, recently that issue has come up again. But, yeah, we were able to prevail. Story_ID: 295444 Speaker 1: In 1992 you joined the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, right? Or did you-- Speaker 2: And--I started in '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994]? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And we went through the process of clearance which was kind of interesting also in that it's like a campaign, I mean you got a, numerous letters and whatever, so I was successful. I should say, however, I want to give credit to also the National Political Congress of Black Women [National Congress of Black Women] who also helped me get that job. I, you know, when they were founded in '84, [1984] I was the first recording secretary, founded in '84 [1984] as you recall when Gerry Ferraro [Geraldine Ferraro], people were pretty upset that she didn't include African American women in any major role so they started their own group anyway. They helped me get that job and I was, at the time, the highest ranking African American woman in the [U.S.] Department of Labor, until [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, of course, because labor secretary. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what are the highlights of that job? Speaker 2: Well, I was there nearly seven years, and so again the mission was affirmative action. I hope I'm not boring anybody with all these long stories, but essentially, the executive order [Executive Order 11246] was the same executive order that Ed Meese [Edwin Meese] tried to do away with, and we had a challenge. I had a staff of roughly eight hundred people, but we had to investigate, you know I mean, who--companies that were coming, about 100,000 non-construction companies, establishments covered in about 100,000 construction companies. And our job was to make sure that there was compliance. Now first of all, the biggest challenge was, figuring out what I wanted to do, you know, when you're in, I was advised by one unit wanting me to come up with three things that you want to accomplish. You know, I think anybody in these offices really should, and then get them done. One of the things we wanted to do was change the regulations to streamline, but I wanted to raise not only the profile of the agency, but the level of respect, because after the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, let's say it needed a shot in the arm, because companies were allowed to do a lot more than, let's say, we think they should have been able to do in enforcing the law. But also what happened as you recall in 1995 was the [U.S.] House of Representatives turned over, and Mr. [Newt] Gingrich and company. Speaker 1: Yes, that began the Newt Gingrich revolution, yeah, Republican Revolution. Speaker 2: So we had to go back to playing defense on affirmative action. Go back to justifying it, go back to explaining why it was necessary. Instead of making progress we had to go back to square one, so we had to mount an education campaign to save it from this action, and one of the things that we did was to put on the--and it's amazing they're letting me get away with this, put on the internet a list of what we call egregious discrimination cases because I wanted to remind America that we hadn't gone far enough for them to think affirmative action was no longer necessary. And in our view, affirmative action prevents discrimination and so when I see these cases coming through the weekly reports, my hair would stand on end. I thought we were past some of this. So I put them on the Internet, I named the country--the companies. Okay, maybe it wasn't smart but I wanted the world to understand what was still going on in some parts of the country. Story_ID: 295445 Speaker 1: We had one case in particular, that was--that still shocks me, where we did a compliance review in North Carolina. And understand we don't need, we didn't need complaints in order to go in and do an investigation, you know. If you worked or you were a federal contractor, you essentially, you waived your rights in some respects, so, we'd go in and do a compliance review and we learned, first of all, in the parking lot, the compliance office said he saw all of these Confederate flags flying so he, he knew he was kind of in trouble. I'm serious. This was 1990s now. He went in and saw the racist graffiti on the bathroom wall and sexist graffiti. He learned that one young man and this company [TIMCO Aviation Services, Inc.] repaired aircraft equipment, for I think the [U.S.] Air Force, gentleman was raffling his grandfather's Ku Klux Klan [KKK] knife on the shop floor. Okay. Yes I was, 1990s? I'm thinking we're talking about the glass ceiling. Speaker 2: Now this is where again? Speaker 1: In Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Greensboro, okay. Speaker 1: And women were not spared either. I mean this is kind of a blue collar rough and tumble job I guess. One--it was so bad, I flew down there, and that's not something I ever did, to meet with the CEO. They said a couple of guys had these hoods that they turn around backwards to look like members of the Klan just to scare black people. But the women, I never thought women, four white women, who had just resigned because they couldn't stand it. One was a licensed aircraft mechanic. They said, first of all they didn't allow her to do anything but hand out the tools, and they called them, as the old folks would say, everything but the child of God, including the C word on the shop floor, and these women were in tears because I'm sure these jobs paid well, okay, but they couldn't stand the--it's a hostile environment and sexual harassment straight up. One woman is a story, I'm telling, it's sounds unbelievable, but, I mean I've heard 'em in other parts of the country, so now I'm convinced it really happened. This woman was being harassed by her supervisor and one day, the story goes, he--she was in the elevator with her and grabbed and basically said, "I've got you alone now." They said the door opened, she keep going and never looked back. She just, you know--I can't stand this anymore, I'm out of here. So I went down there with my colleague from my agency [U.S. Department of Labor] and I said didn't you know this was going on, because the blacks said they tried to meet with him to tell him what was happening, and somewhere in the conversation, he indicated, well, there aren't that many members of the Klan in here. Okay. One is too many. Needless to say, the company was found out of compliance, and of course, they settled, signed a conciliation agreement. Unfortunately, this agency is opposed to Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] couldn't get punitive damages 'cause was a case if ever I had seen one for punitive damages. And after I got back, this gentleman who sounded like an Anglo, if I may so generalize, he said not only were we right in what we found, but there was one guy, the one guy who was a supervisor, they say when he didn't make the meetings, they didn't call him Johnny or Joe, they called him the N, okay. He said the N-word is used all over the place, profusely, okay? They were angry because we always get news releases and the point of that was not to embarrass a company but to show other companies to try to obviously hinder that happening someplace else. It was a way to induce behavioral changes. And they were upset with us, and they called, but hey, that time we did get covered by The Washington Post, in the business section, rarely got covered, but that time we did. Story_ID: 295446 Speaker 1: So I put together a list, and that wasn't the only one, there was some others I talk about in my speeches and I could go on and on. I'm sorry if you have other questions, but I'll tell you one or two others very quickly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go ahead, no, go ahead, go ahead. Speaker 1: In the same city [Greensboro, North Carolina], we did, and these, again, these are not complaining investigations so some of these people were suffering in silence because they wanted to keep their jobs which was so shocking to me. Most of our egregious cases was not complaint investigations. This company [TIMCO Aviation Services, Inc.] did software work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. So as I say, it must be just, this one didn't involve chicken plucking. And they had the two African American white collar workers, when the toilets overflowed, you know, they had to clean it up. Now imagine going to work in your suit, you just bought this suit from Neiman Marcus or Dillard's or wherever and you got to do janitorial work. And we were told this by the white workers that this was going on. Needless to say, in that case, once that hit the newspapers I was told that some members of management and officers were let go, thankfully--that's rare. But that was the most embarrassing thing for them, but you know, it happened also in like, Alabama. Did a compliance review, that's a case that I always talk about, a bank in Mobile [Alabama], couldn't understand why blacks weren't being hired as bank tellers, looked at the interview notes, you know, because we always look to see what, in order to compare the, you know. I called one candidate A, in writing, there, blond hair, blue eyed teller type appearance. I called the other one candidate B, very large lips and hips, dark skin black girl. Hair longer than most, but appearances aren't good enough to meet the public. In writing. Needless to say, this company paid more than two hundred thousand [dollars] to all those African Americans who didn't get jobs for reasons other than their abilities. I could go on and on. And, not to bore anybody, but this is, this was the 1990s and this was still going on. Story_ID: 295447 Speaker 1: Well, do you have another case for us? Speaker 2: Well as Henny Youngman used to say, I think it was Henny Youngman, said "I've got a million of 'em." Speaker 1: A million of 'em. Speaker 2: I've got (laughter) I've got a few and, but more than just the cases, what we try to do after again, the Gingrich [Newton Leroy "Newt" Gingrich] Revolution, was to show, again, showing the reality was very different than the way he thought. We were the first agency to begin a tester program. It was a pilot. Where we hired, hired the, a little group in Washington [D.C.] to find, to do matched pairs and since the banking industry was doing the hiring off the street, we sent in like a black male and a white male to go in to apply for a job, just to see, you know, right in the nation's capitol, right in front of everybody, you know, in your face is what they call me, but I'm sorry, I felt it needed to be there. What's interesting is the, the results were--it was a very small test, but there was more subtle, what one might call discrimination, but it was still there. For instance, for the white male, they might say, well your resume looks good, we don't really have a job here, but I'll send this to Bethesda, you know, to the lower, whiter suburbs for those who don't know, Bethesda, Maryland, out in Montgomery County. For the African American, the answer would simply be no, we don't have a job. No referrals, no nothing. Okay. And so it happened that way. The effects are the same of course, no employment, and we saw that in a noteworthy number of cases. Again, it was a small test and we wanted to go further, I wanted to do testing in San Francisco [California] and Chicago [Illinois] with Latinos and others, but at that time, the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] decided they wanted to do testing and I recall, if I recall correctly, Mr. Gingrich himself testified that no funds for the EEOC shall be used for that. Now they call this a stealth, the employers were, of course, outraged, you know, but, and I would say in my speeches, you know, you never know who's going to be applying for your job so be on your guard and do the right thing. But I thought it was very effective, and what we did actually wasn't the gotcha game that employers would complain about. What we did, knowing that it was just a test, we brought in the (unclear) they were banks, the American Bankers Association and we sat down and talked about the results and we worked together on a, on a booklet for banks on how to avoid problems of discrimination. And so we did something that was kind of proactive and so, because I--we were criticized a lot for being a little too aggressive. Story_ID: 295448 Speaker 1: I heard a presentation once in the early '90s [1990s] by a pro--a psychologist actually from University--from Saint Cloud University [Saint Cloud State University, Saint Cloud, Minnesota] of Minnesota. His name was [Dr. Richard R.] Green. He did this for America and it was like affirmative action workshop, and this workshop he showed a segment from 20/20, ABC's 20/20 where there's a group in Chicago [Illinois] that actually had matched pairs that they sent out to rent an apartment, to buy a car, to buy shoes and so forth. They showed this on 20/20. What it revealed, you know, I guess he summed up as saying that racism in the United States is like the air we breathe. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Most of the people when they showed them the video of how they treated the two identical college graduates, the same height, same weight, the same grades, you know, the same bank account, they made sure they had the same resources when they would go apply for, same record when they applied for a job, you know. Discrimination was so blatant, most people would see it, the people that did it, didn't believe that they did it. Until they saw it, and they well there you are. You're charging this man two thousand dollars more for this car, you know, why, you know. No we didn't and then they'd show it to him. He said well, yeah, I guess we did, but it's like the air that people breathe. It's not the most of the hard, I mean racism in the United States doesn't occur on the part of [Ku Klux] Klan members, as so much as it occurs on the part of everyday people, just swimming in the atmosphere that has been created by years and years of discrimination. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is this basically true estimation. Speaker 2: I would, I would agree with that. And it's so interesting because the groups that like, that supported, that would have supported [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan just argued with me when I debate them. You know the Klan case is just one isolated case. Then I'd come up with another and I just keep going on and they're all isolated, they're just not accepting that this is a part of our culture. It's the way we think. Again, I like the studies of psychology of racism because it's just fascinating that we're so unconscious. They are so unconscious of it, and we have to be conscious of it in many ways. I tell the story about when I worked for Mr. Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins], and I was here in Washington [D.C.], one Saturday I decided to go this store that no longer exists now, called Garfinckels, in Montgomery Mall and I wasn't gonna dress up that day, okay, I didn't think I needed to dress up to go to Garfinckels. Well, as soon as I got there the security guard, I know we all have this story, even Oprah [Winfrey] has a story now, you know, this guy followed me into the designer room. Now he had on these, these sweat pants you know, he was no further than you are from me, and didn't even mind letting me know, making it clear that he was there. And then I, so I said well, I don't think he's shopping in the designer shop and I turned around and I went to the jewelry counter and there he was right behind me. So I'm annoyed because he wasn't even subtle about it. So I went up to him of course, in my usual way, and I asked him, you know, why are you following me, on what authority, what criteria do you use to follow people? Of course he wouldn't tell me any of that just to say that he had the right to do that. Okay. So I went home, still upset and I called the headquarters and sure enough Miss Hanne Merriman, a senior official, not the president. I couldn't believe she was answering the phone. It was kind of after hours. Maybe her secretary had gone home. So we had a nice conversation, and essentially and I thought to myself and I know every--you get this story a lot, but I thought to myself, I did everything they wanted me to do, they asked me to do. I went to these great schools, I got this degree, you know, I'm working on Capitol Hill, and it's still not enough. I'm still being followed around in these stores, presumed to be a thief, and that was twenty-some-odd years ago and I'm still mad, I'm still upset, you know, because I paid my dues and they still decided to treat me this way. And she sent me a letter apologizing and what not, but it has the impact and it's deep on the victim. And, so I guess that's why I continue along this path in terms of civil rights. We still have a long way to go and in my view, and if we showed at Labor affirmative action would have prevented that company from having [Ku Klux] Klan rallies for rebels. In where the company had to pay thirty thousand dollars to clean up the walls, it was a small company, I walked through the headquarters and, and, like, you know, in fifteen minutes. If I could, if it was that small, then clearly, surely the CEO should have seen that, and affirmative action rules that you make an effort, an affirmative step to prevent discrimination. He should have had that stuff off the walls. The women shoudn't have been harassed the way they were, and the "N" word certainly shouldn't have been used. One guy was officially fired. The guy who grabbed the woman, you know, but, that's what affirmative action means. You don't just sit by and let aff--and let discrimination happen, wait- waiting for a complaint. Story_ID: 295449 Speaker 1: Before we get off of these cases and stuff, there's a, every year, there's article after article, I know in Chicago [Illinois], the [Chicago] Sun-Times and the [Chicago] Tribune, and of course, the [Chicago] Defender about in some new venue that black people are basically cheated in. Like the insurance industry charging more for insurance, you pay more for a car, you pay more for a house, you, medical, you get sick more than anybody else, you know, you don't, you don't get the same kind of care, and it goes on and on, and these are scientific, I mean, studies that show these things, and every time a new study comes out, there's an article in the paper about it. Then what price are we paying for discrimination, I mean, after all this time, you know the discussion of reparations which is always thrown back to a slavery thing, you know, like it's nothing going on now, you know, but what price are we paying for this average black person? Speaker 2: Well, I mean generally, I think Andrew Brimmer [HistoryMaker Andrew F. Brimmer] did a study a while ago about the economic cost of discrimination. But I think the impact, I think we certainly see it very vividly in our cities. Every day I turn on the morning news and here's somebody else has been shot, somebody's angry and we're shooting each other for really trivial reasons, you know, he dissed me, he dissed me--I really feel that it's internalizing racism which means I'm going back to start rereading Frantz Fanon frankly, because I think he hit the nail on the head about this stuff. We are internalizing it. What makes this time difficult, different from that in the sixties is, we didn't have, then we had some leadership that really focused on the issue in different ways. Now it's all kind of scattered and unfocused and dispersed so we don't know who we're mad at. We just mad, you know, we don't know what's causing this pain, so we're gonna act it out on each other. You know back then we knew not to hurt each other, we knew, at least it was part of the discussion and the debate, you know. You're hurting yourself, you're doing the enemy's job for him. Speaker 1: You referring to the black power, or the black consciousness era-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that a lot of us, you know, wish would come back. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. At least think before we engage or even the selling of drugs and poisoning our own communities. I think it's self-hate, the failure to raise, as you said, in terms of raising our children. I chatted with a colleague who was on the Columbus School Board [Columbus City Schools Board of Education, Columbus, Ohio], they have now eleven-year-olds coming in the school with babies. You know, where is this gonna stop? And I really do attribute much of that to the effects of racism, internally, physiologically, economically with no options, no jobs, okay? And it's just a vicious cycle. And so I guess that's why I continue to work 'cause I am, and because they say by mid-century, forty-seven percent of all Americans will be Hispanic, Asian and Black, you know. We have really got to focus on what we're gonna do to make sure that we are truly mainstreamed economically in society and deal with the barriers caused by racism. Story_ID: 295450 Speaker 1: Well, you know, at the end of the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] Administration I--'cause everybody, political appointees have to leave and you get the clear--it was a pink slip as a memo, I mean, you know, and so in 2001, I formed my own company, Wilcher Global LLC, because I wanted to continue to work in the area of civil rights, equal employment opportunity, and affirmative action. Clearly, as aggressive as we were on enforcing the law, I don't think we're that aggressive, but you know, I wasn't favored, a lot of companies, okay, as I talked to, just recently talked to [HistoryMaker] Arthur Fletcher and he had the same experience when he left. Speaker 2: Now Arthur Fletcher is known as the father of affirmative action, so-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --so can you tell us a little bit about him? Speaker 1: Well, again, I'm sure others can do a better job than I, but he is given credit in the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] Administration, for spearheading what was called the Philadelphia Plan to integrate the construction traits in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area, and he was obviously vilified by many, but he really started to put some peace into our affirmative action laws. He deserves a lot of credit. Again, this is a republican administration, that took the lead in terms of really adding, you know, the substance, so he, he is to be commended, but, yeah, we were talking, about having similar experiences after leaving government. Story_ID: 295451 Speaker 1: Well, anyway, I started my firm, Wilcher Global [LLC], and-- Speaker 2: Now before we get to Wilcher Global, or was it while you were still working for administration, you worked for Americans for a Fair Chance [AFC] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. Speaker 2: --and I guess became The Conference on Civil Rights [sic. Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights]--Leadership Conference on Civil Rights right? Speaker 1: Yeah, well after I again left the administration, one of my clients was Americans for a Fair Chance, and this was a consortium of six civil rights organizations that was formed to do public education around affirmative action. And so in the fall of 2001 they asked me to become their Executive Director, and this is all leading up to the Michigan [Grutter vs. Bollinger] decision in 2003, so this is the prep for that and so that's what we did and I learned a lot in terms of again, working with the media, trying to hone the message as relates to affirmative action, you know to re-educate America, and it's not easy. I want to credit the Ford Foundation for, for supporting this, I have to say, because there's still a lot of work that needs to be done, as you know. And I should say we made some efforts before the program was transferred to the Leadership Conference [Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights] we were on the verge of actually having a public service announcements, which I think is still important, with major Hollywood stars on this issue, you know, so you turn on, you look at NBC and you have somebody giving a good story about how affirmative action helped that individual, you know, to become a doctor, you know, a lawyer. I mean we have a generation of veterans out here because of affirmative action, doing good things. Again, to counter at the negativity and the disinformation, as I call it. I think that should continue. Hopefully, somebody will pick it up. And so yeah, the program was transferred to the Leadership Conference. I went back to Wilcher Global, and so that's where I am now. Story_ID: 295452 Speaker 1: By the way I should say, I was honored in the--while I--Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] Administration by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I received the Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], you know, award, and I also--Keeper of the Flame award, and when I worked for, out at Wilcher Global, I received last year, an award, the Rosa Parks Award from the American Association for Affirmative Action. And I'm currently their Interim Executive Director part-time. I've offered to help them open a Washington [D.C.] Office because I believe that we still need a presence. I am not afraid to say the words affirmative action. I think it is still necessary especially when you heard about all of the discrimination issues. Story_ID: 295453 Speaker 1: How did you feel about the--I guess it was in 2003, I guess, when, was that in 2003? When they, yeah, they--all of the people came to Washington [D.C.] in support of affirmative action. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now it was a, seemed like it was, you know, maybe some sort of throwback to the old days in some ways. Speaker 2: Yes. And I have to give, there's a group called By Any Means Necessary, a student group called BAMM (laughter) and they were wonderful in organizing students to come down and they, they're outside, this was the Supreme Court, you know, and they were having the oral argument in that Michigan [Grutter vs. Bollinger, 2003] case, the Grutter case, and yeah, it was a throwback to the '60s [1960s] I was out there and we had a little table next to Tom Joyner. Didn't get to meet him though, but you know, it felt good, it really did, to see the issue was supported and embraced, and as you mentioned, not only by the students but the military filed brief--briefs, the, employers of private industry, Fortune 500 companies, so I'm sure it was a wake-up call for the conservatives who thought they had, had won this one by a landslide. Well, we won't even get into the President [George Walker Bush] himself, you know, having supported his, the administration brief on affirmative action and then we found out he himself is a beneficiary of affirmative action. You see the oldest kind of affirmative action that comes with being the son of, you know, well connected people, wealthy people. It's fascinating. I could go on and on about the, the unfairness of, you know, the factor as I call it hypocrisy but the, of the fact that some have benefited for so long 'cause they went to the right schools, or you know. Story_ID: 295454 Speaker 1: What's the status of affirmative action today, and what do you see as the future of affirmative action? Speaker 2: Well, again, thanks to the Michigan [Grutter vs. Bollinger, 2003] decision, at least in higher education, some forms of affirmative action are still important. In the employment sector, there's been this, well the law is still there, The Executive Order Lyndon Johnson Executive Order is still there, whether it's enforced as enforced in various stages of intensity. Employment however, employers are still embracing it because they've developed the term diversity now and there's a big question about what that means compared to affirmative action, so at least, ostensibly they are embracing it and that's because they realize who's coming. I just mentioned half of Americans are gonna be people of color in mid-century. They're gonna be their workers, and if you want the top-flight workers, they have to get into these colleges, including the Harvards [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the Mount Holyokes [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], you see. So they're thinking in terms of their own interest and all of them cannot ship their jobs overseas. So they're gonna have to hire some Americans and they're gonna be, many of them are gonna be people of color. So they won't have a choice in some respects. Obviously, they could always have a choice, but it is in their interest. Now, but we'll always have the push-back, you know. I have said before what we, we see in terms of these lawsuits, I think there's a fear, clearly fear and they see the handwriting on the wall, they see the demographics. I think there is a fear of losing one's control, and, as I've said in speeches, I learned how to share in kindergarten, and its coming, it's coming a time when their gonna have to, or we'll have a South Africa situation, where the small minority, racial minority, will be in control. I hope that won't be our future. Story_ID: 295455 Speaker 1: Wilcher Global [LLC], then you're consulting, you know, with colleges and businesses and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. And I also do, I'm doing some investigations, Federal, you know, government investigations. We do training and harassment prevention in other areas. I work with colleagues that, for example, do sexual harassment prevention training in the [Washington] D.C. Department of Corrections. There was a major sexual harassment case brought by women, mostly black women, correctional officers, okay? And so again, these are African Americans and I, to the court's credit, they require this sexual harassment training of managers and staff and refresher training, and I think some companies need to take a look at that because not only for sexual harassment purposes, but racial harassment, as we talked about with the [Ku Klux] Klan raffle case in North Carolina. So they need to pay heed. So that's some of the things that we do. Story_ID: 295456 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, there are several. As I've spent more than, almost twenty-five years in the area of equal employment opportunity and affirmative action, I also see that, you know, going back to what's happening in our communities and we're imploding, we got to focus on education again. It's got to be valued the way my granny [Viola Wilcher] valued education. We cannot tolerate a lack of, of conscientiousness, which means the whole issue with Bill Cosby, I, you know, we couldn't get into that, but I feel him, as they say in the community. We got to take more responsibility. That doesn't make me a conservative. It means we got, for our own survival, 'cause I'm very concerned when I get, as I say, when I hear what I hear every day. I think we're imploding, we have to, some of us, and we've got--and the rest of us have to help to make sure that doesn't happen and, you know, I think about what my role is in this, and that's why I talked about maybe I should help form a Latin School, it's a small thing. But in my county, you know, and I watch 'It's Academic [Quiz Show]' on Saturday mornings. I'm a nerd so I get up and I watch this. The leading schools that are getting these, or doing well don't come from my county, even though it's the wealthiest county for blacks, one of the wealthiest in the nation. So why don't we have those, that caliber of educational institutions. Secondly, though, how do we counteract the notion that it's not cool to be smart, you know, it's the crabs in the barrel thing. I've wondered, if somebody won a PR [public relations] campaign to show that it's cool, to read. Speaker 1: And take over BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Speaker 2: Yes. I can't stand it. With all due respect, are they helping our kids, are they helping our community with these role models, I don't think so and I am, I'm honestly, I, my mind is constantly on the demographics and the future. Sandra Day O'Connor said you, basically, affirmative action, we shouldn't need it in twenty-five years. But that's a short period of time, so that means to get kids in to colleges they have to be prepared. What are we doing to get them prepared? And while others might be having these grandiose meetings about the black community and the agenda, my view is I have to go home. Maybe that's where I can be most effective, right at home. And to do, you know, what I can, you know, to make it happen, at least for a handful of kids. We, who have done well because of affirmative action and others, I think have a responsibility. That's not just some rhetoric. I'm trying to figure out what the solution is so we don't implode. I want the '60s [1960s] to come back. I wanna hear these kids, not only say black is beautiful, but also being intelligent is beautiful, you know, being sharp is beautiful, okay, not killing each other is beautiful, okay, and spreading the poison. And I'd like to see and like to get more of these, these so-called stars, you know, including the rap generation, to really help, but the PR--I learned from Ed Meese [Edwin Meese] and company how the PR campaign can help and it's not that difficult if we have the will. But we also have to have the leadership that is focused, not only on the folks on Capitol Hill, but our own communities. This is my view and it has nothing to do with being conservative. It's talking about the survival, and we've got, somebody, one of them, has to turn around and say yes. You need to go to school, you need to be in school. You need to graduate, you need to go to college, it's cool, then you can buy your car without having to worry about being shot at, you know. What happened to granny's values and it all happened in one generation, or two 'cause as I said I lived with my granny and there was no way I was acting out in school or the switch would be waiting for me at home. What happened to the switch? I'm sorry, I'm preaching, but one generation and that went away, seemed to. And those were good values that we need to bring back. I don't know how, but I've got, I gotta start at home, and I hope others will and I think, I hope our leadership, I see we have a new NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] President I believe [HistoryMaker Bruce Gordon], Executive Director, President. Speaker 1: Bruce, what's his- Speaker 2: Donovan? Or- Speaker 1: Bruce, well anyway he's a new one. Speaker 2: Yes. I think we need to focus internally as well. Let's get our own house in order here. Asians and Anglos do not have a monopoly on intelligence, okay, with these SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and whatever. They may be racially biased, but some of us are able to do fairly decently. And it's a question of learning how also, and that means focus and education, enough with speech. But we got to turn internally and get our house in order. Story_ID: 295457 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, too. We ask, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, and you're still young, so what would you consider, I mean, is there anything that you would, anything major that you would do over again? Speaker 2: If I went back to the Labor Department [U.S. Department of Labor], I think I probably wouldn't have been quite so confrontational with the employers because some of them actually were decent people--are decent people. For me life was black and white, you know. I'm learning there's also grays. So that's a part of the maturation process I think too. But on the other hand, it is my nature to see an issue, to see an injustice and to confront it head on. Speaker 1: Are you suggesting that perhaps to change the things, it's as much of an educational project as it is a confrontational project? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. You know, you don't always have to beat people about the head and shoulders to get you know, things done properly. I'm learning that. On the other hand, as I said, to tolerate discrimination anywhere is intolerable for me. You know, I don't mean with African Americans, women, it's everybody, it hurts, you know, it hurts the victim and it hurts us as a society, and so I will continue to, to probably spend the rest of my life, I call it living a committed life. I may never be wealthy, but I will leave here knowing that I did what I think I was supposed to do. So, if I just, I changed the tone, but I have no regrets, I never wanted to be in the courtroom practicing law, I wanted to make changes, and I think I was able to in some small way, you know. Or in--I was in areas that most people dream of being. Story_ID: 295458 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: At this point, I think, you know, the work we did at the [U.S.] Department of Labor to promote equal employment opportunity and affirmative action to at least begin to work on the glass ceiling issues and compensation. I didn't have a chance to really talk about what [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman did in her administration to deal with the issue of pay, because what we found is for, not only for women, but for people of color, there clearly are pay disparities going all the way up to the executive suite, and some of our major cases, one with Boeing [The Boeing Company, Chicago, Illinois], one with Texaco [San Ramon, California]. We did a Texaco case for women after they did the private case, you know. And we were in Coca Cola [The Coca Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] while that case was being settled outside. To make companies focus on the way they pay people, particularly people of color has led to some of these large settlements, or as I think, helped to raise the consciousness about compensation. I think that's one of the first 21st Century civil rights issues. Now that we've gotten people in corporate America, we got to make sure they're being paid fairly, as well as promoted. And that is an issue that we need to pay attention to, so I think what we did at Labor, you know, is part of the legacy. Story_ID: 295459 Speaker 1: Now, we haven't asked you much about your family or life today. Do you have children or anything or--you wanna say anything about your-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, no I don't and I guess it's one of the regrets I have in life. You know you make choices. I knew when I got into Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] the number of individuals that I could choose from to date, went down precipitously because of people feel threatened, you know, there're issues. If you make more than your spouse, a colleague of mine who does bankruptcy law for black women getting divorced from men who earn very little comparatively. I just didn't wanna be, you know--because I had opportunities to be in that situation and chose not to. But I had to pay a price and that was not having a family. So, it's interesting, I heard at Harvard Law a couple of years ago when I went up there, 80 percent of the first year black students were female. What are those women gonna do, you know, and so that's the other issue that I'm concerned about, getting African American males into higher education and it's become a critical problem. Men, generally, are dropping off, but, or somewhat, but African American males, I think far more precipitously. Speaker 1: While the jails are filing up. Speaker 2: While the jails are filing up. Once again where is our leadership in helping us get them back on track because the effects occur to families as well as to them individually, so yes, I'd love to. And with my career I could have adopted, but I was so busy, so I made a choice. Story_ID: 295460 Speaker 1: Now how did your parents feel about your success, you know, I mean going to Harvard Law [School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and that sort of thing. Did they-- Speaker 2: Well, I--what's interesting is and I won't take long with this, but I'll never forget being sworn in, and Dad [James Wilcher] was there, you know, and grandma, my mother's [Jeanne Evans Cheatham] mother, with the Bible. In fact they had a little struggle there for a second. Robert Rice [ph.] was standing there trying to figure out which one's going to hold the Bible, but I think and I remember seeing the sun come through the window, and mom was there too, my stepfather. That was a great day. And on the same day I was sworn in Duvall Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] at the Justice Department was being sworn in. And my parents, my mom played music with Duvall's father. Duvall played with Sun Ra. They knew him before I knew him. Speaker 1: Was Duvall Patrick related to Pat Patrick [Laurdine Kenneth "Pat" Patrick]? Speaker 2: Yes, that's his father. This is a small world, but I'll tell you one more story. What really I'll never forget was when I received my law degree and my grandfather, the carpenter, by that time he had had a stroke and he couldn't' talk and he was in a wheelchair and he sworn he would never get in a plane, but he got in a plane to come to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to see me graduate, and I get touched by this because he couldn't say anything. All he could do was cry, and that was really very touching. So he was the first one to get my diploma and see it, you know. And grandpa has since left, but that was cool. Story_ID: 295461 Speaker 1: Now we have one more question, but before I ask that question, is there anything we haven't touched upon that you want to address before we--I ask the last question? Speaker 2: You know, this--I'm just honored to be here, but I just, I just want to urge anyone who's watching this to understand, not only how far we've come, but we've really got to come together in terms of feeling, getting our people into a future where there is positivity and growth and beyond where we are right now. I guess I made it clear my concern, I am--I guess it's alarmed about what's happened, happening to our kids, and so we've got to come up when Mr. Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and everybody else is together on these, with these strategies, let's think about turning inwards. It's okay, even if that means airing the dirty linen, the linen is already out there, so let's help fix our problems and take care of us, because no one will save us but us. Story_ID: 295462 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as having lived a committed life. I suppose I could've graduate from Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I know my dad expects me to make a pile of money, I suppose I could have done that, but I thought it was more important to focus on the issues. I could have been a jazz musician. I didn't really have the desire, the passion for that, but I wanted to make a difference in life, you know, I wanted to be an instrument for social change and justice. So that, hopefully, I'll be remembered for...