 Story_ID: 15325 Speaker 1: I want to first have you state your name and spell it for us and your date of birth. Speaker 2: Roger Wilkins, R-O-G-E-R W-I-L-K-I-N-S, date of birth March 25, 1932. Speaker 1: And I'd like to also have you state today's date. Speaker 2: Today is June 22, 2001. Speaker 1: Okay, and we are at the home of Peggy Cafritz, 3030 - what is it? Speaker 2: Chain Bridge Road. Speaker 1: Chain Bridge Road, okay, in Washington, D.C.. And I also would like to know your occupation. How do you describe yourself? Speaker 2: That's hard. I make my living as a professor of history at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia] where I have been a tenured and endowed, tenured professor and endowed chair for thirteen, almost fourteen years now. I've been a journalist, lawyer, federal official, and philanthropic apparatchik in my lifetime, but I guess the thread through it all is that I really have been essentially an active citizen whose principal interest has been the enlargement of opportunities for black people and other disadvantaged people in the country. That has run throughout virtually every aspect of my career except for the two years when I was in the State Department [United States Department of State] working on problems of developing countries, but even then I was working on African problems. Story_ID: 15326 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: I suppose fried chicken. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? (laughter) I'm sorry. Speaker 2: My favorite destination, vacation destination is the Rocky Mountains of Montana and Wyoming where I love to ride horses. I learned to ride horses in the mountains when I was sixty [years old], and I love it. Speaker 1: Sixty? Speaker 2: Sixty. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: Favorite color? Speaker 1: Blue. Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: Autumn. Speaker 2: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: I really can't say that on camera because it comes straight out of my childhood in Harlem [New York], but moony foony. I mean. Speaker 2: What is moony foony? What is moony foony? (laughter) Speaker 1: It's starts with M and starts with F. I mean, there is a part of me, and apparently it's the linguistic part, that got stuck in childhood in Harlem, and so these colorful ways to express myself emerge far more frequently than my wife [Patricia King] would like, but it certainly amuses my children. Speaker 2: But did moony foony have a meaning? Speaker 1: Moony foony is, it's a euphemism for a very common term in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 15327 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you first--you know, I take people back about what they know about their family, and you have a very historic family, but I want to ask you about your father, Earl [Wilkins], and I'd like you to tell me what you know about him and his background and, you know. Speaker 2: My father was born in December 1905 in St. Louis, Missouri. He had two older siblings, a sister, Armeda [Wilkins], who was two years older than he, and a brother, Roy [Wilkins], who was five and a half years older than he. Their father, William DeWitt Wilkins, was the son of a former slave and was born and raised in and around Holly Springs, Mississippi. And around the turn of the century in 1899, 1900, or so, my father's father, William DeWitt Wilkins, was a young man, strapping young man, walking down the road in Holly Springs when a white man came along and told him to get off the road so he could get his buggy by. And Grandpa thought that there was enough room, and he didn't move. And the white man said, "If you don't move, I'm gonna hit you with a whip, nigger," and Grandpa didn't move off the road. The guy hit him with the whip. Grandpa grabbed the whip and beat the guy up. And the white people went and said to my great-grandfather, who was the one who had been born in slavery, "Uncle Asbury you're," essentially, "you're a good nigger, and we like you, but your boy, Willie, is crazy, and there's nothing that you or I can do for him, and if you don't get him out of town, he's gonna get lynched." So my great-grandfather got Grandpa out of town, and I don't know whether Grandpa was married then or whether he and his girlfriend left together and got married in St. Louis, but they left. And her name was Sweetie Edmundson, Mayfield Edmundson, but her nickname was Sweetie, and so they were married, and they went to St. Louis, and that's where they had these three kids. Shortly after my father was born, his mother died. And in her illness, her sister, Elizabeth [Edmundson Williams], who lived in St. Paul, Minnesota came to tend her. And when my grandmother knew she was dying, she said to her sister, Elizabeth, "Please don't let my children go back to Mississippi and be raised in Mississippi." So she died, and Elizabeth took her back to be buried in Mississippi in a little graveyard outside Holly Springs by the Beverly Chapel CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church, and I've been to that churchyard where my great-grandmother, where my grandmother and my great-grandparents are buried. And then Great-aunt Elizabeth sent a wire to her husband, Sam [Williams], who was unrelated to these children in any way except by marriage--and they had no children, Sam and Elizabeth--and he was a dining car man, special car man, on the Northern Pacific [Railway]. And the wire was, "I'd like to bring the baby home so we can raise them." That was my father, Earl. Sam wired back and said, "You don't break up families. Bring them all." Story_ID: 15328 Speaker 1: And Grandpa [William DeWitt Wilkins] ultimately became a minister, an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, but then he was a laborer, and he wasn't a man of what you would call steady habits. So my father [Earl Wilkins] and his siblings [Roy Wilkins; Armeda Wilkins] in segregated St. Louis [Missouri] at the turn of the century were what we would call children very much at risk, and it is possible had they not been taken to St. Paul [Minnesota], they would have been street kids. God knows what would have happened to Aunt Armeda. The boys were obviously smart boys, I mean as they turned out. They could have been gangster slicks. God knows what they would have been, but - and this is important when you think of street kids in urban America today. The transformation of the Wilkins family from sharecropping, slavery, sharecropping, and street risks in segregated St. Louis, the transformation came about because Aunt Elizabeth [Williams] and Uncle Sam [Williams] provided a safe home, a stable home, a connection to the economy through Uncle Sam's job. And therefore Uncle Sam and Aunt Elizabeth had great authority, and these kids had a sense of a connection to an economy in which they would have a place. That plus the public schools of St. Paul, Minnesota and then ultimately the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] where all three went. Now my aunt Armeda died when she was a student there, but Roy went off and became a journalist at the 'Kansas City Call,' the black paper in Kansas City [Missouri]. When my father, Earl, graduated from the University of Minnesota, he joined the '[Kansas City] Call' as a reporter, columnist, and financial business manager of the paper. Roy went off to become [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois's associate editor on the 'Crisis' in New York [New York]. Earl married a woman named Helen Jackson whom he had met at the University of Minnesota--and you have to follow this very carefully. The way Earl met Helen Jackson was that his older brother, Roy, was going with a girl named Marvel Jackson. That is, these two people who are older siblings met at the University of Minnesota, and they started dating. Roy came home and said, "There's another pretty one there, and you oughta come with me someday so he met the little sister." When Marvel finished at the University of Minnesota, she told her mother that she wanted to go work in New York [New York]. That was my mother's mother that Marvel told, my maternal grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson]. She [maternal grandmother] knew only one person in New York, and that was W. E. B. DuBois because she had been a maid in some white folks' house in Connecticut when she was young, and DuBois had visited the house, met her, thought she was smart and she was very pretty, and DuBois had an eye for pretty young women, and he remembered her. So she wrote a letter to DuBois and said, "My daughter wants to come. Would you help her get started in New York?" She went. DuBois looked at her and said, "You can't be the daughter of that young woman." He looked at her again and said, "Of course, you are. You look just like her. I'll hire you." And so she bugs DuBois about this brilliant--said he needed an assistant editor, and she just had just the one, and his name was Roy Wilkins, and he was out there in Kansas City and DuBois should hired him. And that's how DuBois came to hire Roy. That's how Roy Wilkins got to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] headquarters. Story_ID: 15329 Speaker 1: Now along the way Roy [Wilkins] and Marvel [Jackson Cooke] broke up. Marvel went on--she just died last November [2000] at the age of 99 and a half, and she became one of the leading Communists [political party], black Communists in New York [New York]. She was also a journalist and very active in labor agitation in the field of journalism. She worked for the 'Amsterdam News,' a paper called the 'People's Voice' and the 'Compass.' And as far as we know, she may have been the first black in the country to work on a paper, white paper, in general circulation. She certainly, as far as we know, was the first black woman, and she was a crusading journalist and, as I say, a Communist, and quite a person in her own right. But one of the ways that--one of the things that she did for my side of the family was that she got Uncle Roy into the 'Crisis' [magazine]. And to leap ahead for just one second, the only reason Julian Bond was able to persuade me to take on the burden of being the publisher of the 'Crisis' magazine at a time when it needed to be revived was my paternal uncle and my maternal aunt [Marvel Jackson Cooke] had this deep history in this magazine, and when I was a little boy, my uncle had introduced me to [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois, and so I mean you couldn't say no. Story_ID: 15330 Speaker 1: My father [Earl Wilkins] was a very fine journalist, but he got tuberculosis in 1932 when he was only 27 years old. In those days if you got tuberculosis, you were pretty well cooked. Now he lived for another eight years, but he was away from home for about three in the sanitarium, and he died when I was eight so a lot of people think I'm Roy's [Wilkins] kid because my father died when he was young, but I really--he was an extraordinary man. He was a very smart man, and he loved to write. He loved the English language. He read the dictionary for fun, and one of my favorite--I guess perhaps my favorite childhood memory is one night my mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins] and my grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson], my mother's mother who lived with us, went out for the evening, and my father said, "Now we're going to have the night. We're going to spend the night out the way men spend nights." I didn't know what that meant, but we ended up, both of us, reading about English kings because he loved [William] Shakespeare, and he was sitting there reading 'King Lear,' and I was reading my 'King Arthur' picture book. And it was a quiet time, father and son together. And he taught me language early. Before I went to school, he was having me--he bought a child's dictionary, and he'd have me learn a certain number of words every day. At the end of the day I'd have to come and tell him about these words and spell them and tell him what they meant and so forth. So I really got to love writing at a very early age. Story_ID: 15331 Speaker 1: When I was well into my thirties, I suppose about thirty-eight, almost forty, yeah, thirty-eight or so, I was at the Ford Foundation, had a very cushy bureaucratic job and the kind of life in New York [New York] where, you know--at that time a black guy at that stage with my credentials, we were just on an escalator. All you had to do was just stand there and be nice and keep your fingernails clean and so forth, and you just go up and up and up. But I wrote something, contributed something to the 'Washington Post,' and they invited me to come and be a member of the editorial board in 1972. I took a cut in pay, and I got off the escalator because I didn't want to be on the escalator anyway. And I got off the escalator and I went and wrote for the Post, and then I left the Post and became--was the first black to be on the editorial board of the Post, and then I went and became the first black on the editorial board of the '[New York] Times.' And ultimately Bill Raspberry of the 'Washington Post' and I became the first blacks ever selected to sit on the Pulitzer Prize Board and a few years later I became the first black chairman of the [Pulitzer Prize] Board. And when I sat down to chair my meeting, first meeting at the board, I said silently, "This is for you, Dad [Earl Wilkins]." It was like he didn't have a chance to finish it up, you know, his journalistic career, and I figured for his kid to become chairman of the Pulitzer Prize Board was my tribute to him. Story_ID: 15332 Speaker 1: My great-grandfather had been owned by people in South Carolina who came west to Mississippi and brought him west. His name was Mound Jeffries, and his wife's first name is lost to posterity. But they had this little boy who became my great-grandfather [Asbury Wilkins], and he was troubled. He didn't understand how God could let some people be slaves, and he wanted to know was God white or was He black or was He half white. His mother--when he was really troubled by these questions, his mother, my great-great-grandmother, would get in bed with him and hold him and say that God is in the sky, and He loves us all, and one day He will reach down from the sky, and He will make all His children free. At some point that child was sold away from the plantation and away from his parents to a slave owner named Wilkins, and that was somewhere in the neighborhood of Holly Springs [Mississippi]. And his name--that child's name was changed from Asbury Jeffries to Asbury Wilkins, and that is the man who became William Wilkins' father [grandfather] and who sent him [grandfather] away from the lynch mob. Story_ID: 15333 Speaker 1: Well, you were so young when your father [Earl Wilkins], you know, passed away, but do you--were there any stories that people talk about in terms of his growing up that your uncle Roy [Wilkins] shared with you or your aunt Armeda [Wilkins]? Speaker 2: Armeda died before I was born. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: There were not a lot of stories. It's very interesting. My parents' generation, with the exception of my aunt Marvel [Jackson Cooke], the one who was the Communist [political party], was very reticent about the past. And once when I was writing my autobiography, I asked my mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins] some questions about--and she told me some things that I hadn't known. I said, "Well, why didn't you tell me about this before?" She said, "I don't know, Roger. I guess it is just that we didn't like to clank our chains." And my uncle Roy, I loved him, and he loved me, but we were not close in the sense of intimacy. We didn't--neither of us understood how to do it because I had lost my father and really didn't know how to speak, talk easily to grown people. He had never had any children. And his whole life had been one of loss of loved people. So he was not emotionally accessible. Now we loved each other very much, but the talking was hard so he did not tell me many stories. Story_ID: 15334 Speaker 1: But, you know, what I did know was that Auntie, as they called her--[maternal great] Aunt Elizabeth [Williams]-- and my baby child is named Elizabeth for her in honor of the wisdom and generosity of that woman--Auntie was good and strict and loving, and [great] Uncle [Sam Williams] emphasized education. That's what I know. They [Roy Wilkins, uncle; Armeda Wilkins, aunt; Earl Wilkins, father] were fiercely disciplined children. Minnesota was--didn't have any blacks so they had lots of white people whom they knew. It's very interesting. Both--my mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins] grew up in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and my father in St. Paul [Minnesota]. And I'm a profound believer in integration. I came up in a generation that was fighting for integration. I was born into segregation. I hated it. I hated the limitations. I hated being told that there are good places and good things that are forbidden to you. I hated that. And so I have remained an integrationist, although I've surely seen the limitations. And I really have a substantially greater amount of faith in the ability of white Americans to change than many, many of my black compatriots. And I wondered where the integration beliefs and where the ability to reach to the humanity of white citizens came from, and I really believe it came from my parents who grew up in this very optimistic setting. That is to say it's not to say that Minnesota didn't have racism. It did. I mean my mother was valedictorian of her high school, and the white folks tried to steal it from her, stuff like that. When my [maternal] grandfather [Madison Jackson] went and built his house for his three girls to grow up in, four girls [Marvel Jackson Cooke; Meredith Jackson; Helen Jackson Wilkins], the white folks tried to get him to leave the community, and they kept on trying until Grandma [Amy Wood Jackson] came out on the porch and said, "Get out of here" and brandished a broom at them. But these were Scandinavians, by and large, and they were open-minded people, and they weren't profoundly racist, and some of them were gentle and welcoming, and I think that I absorbed the belief in the possibility of goodness in all people from them. Story_ID: 15335 Speaker 1: I was just--you know, I was curious because I was wondering, you know, how life was there [in Minnesota], like there. Speaker 2: They were--look, these people, both of my parents grew up--I mean, I remember Patricia Roberts Harris when he testified--when people had said, when she was going to be Secretary of HUD [Housing and Urban Development], "Well, you know, she's not really black because she didn't blah, blah, blah." And she testified, "Well, I was, too, because my father worked on the railroad." And all of us other black people laughed at her and said, "Pat, wait, get out of here, you know?" If your folks worked on the railroad in the beginning of the century, your family was in good shape because that was one of the steadiest and best jobs black people could have. Now, granted, these people were servants. They were treated badly. Grandpa [Madison Jackson] was a--my mother's father was also a railroad man. You know, you had to clean spittoons. You had to take crap from white people, but whatever you did in those days, you had to take crap from white people, but at least when these men did it, they were employed steadily, and their children lived in nice, sturdy houses. They didn't know about missing meals, and they expected to go to college, which they did. So I come from--I'm a very lucky person. I come from a set of parents, parents on both sides, who had middle-class lives from the early part of the century, the last century, middle-class aspirations, and certainly had--my parents had very high aspirations for their only child. Story_ID: 15336 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What her background is and, you know, her name. Give her name, first name. Speaker 2: My mother's name was--she was born Helen Natalie Jackson. And her mother [Amy Wood Jackson] was born in Virginia in 1874, the daughter of a light-skinned, well-educated black man who was free, at least by adulthood. You know, he was born well into--and is said to have been part of the Underground Railroad. Story_ID: 15337 Speaker 1: Now your mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins], so you were saying her family was from Virginia. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so her [grand] father was a postal man, and then he had a--I have letters that he wrote, very literate man, perfect handwriting, so he was well-educated, and he was very light-skinned and well-dressed in the photographs I've seen. So, you say, "Well, how did he get to be so light? How did he get to be free? Was he the love child of who, what?" And it's said that a white woman looked after his education. Was she his mother? Was she his grandmother? We just don't know, but all of a sudden out of the woodwork he appears. So he's one place. And then he marries a young woman who's--he marries a full-blooded Cherokee Indian named Persidia (ph), and they had thirteen children of whom my [maternal] grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson], who was born in 1874 in Virginia, was either twelfth or thirteenth. So you know there wasn't an awful lot that he could for her, having had all these kids, but I don't know how she got from Virginia-- She only had an eighth-grade education. She was a very smart woman and very pretty woman, but she went from Virginia to Connecticut where she was a servant. And that's where she met [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois. Somehow she took a test to become a teacher in schools on Indian reservations, and so she was teaching on an Indian reservation in South Dakota as a young woman and my--near Pierre, South Dakota. And my grandfather [Madison Jackson], who was running on the road, he was a sleeping car man. And he was reading law on the road in the days when you could read law. And he passed the bar in South Dakota, but just about the time he had passed the bar, he had met and married my grandmother. And there weren't any clients in South Dakota for a black lawyer anyway, and they were going to have children so he moved to Minnesota so that he could be in a college town where, as he said, he could send his girls to college so they would never have to work in white--cleaning white people's homes. And so they lived fairly near the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Story_ID: 15338 Speaker 1: I've seen the house where my mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins] and her sisters grew up. And so Marvel [Jackson Cooke], whom I told you about, went to the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. The second sister, Meredith [Jackson], died in childhood. My mother, the third, Helen, was--Marvel was very smart. I think all three girls were smart. Marvel was very smart. Moved to Minnesota, and so Marvel went to the University of Minnesota and to Ohio State [University, Columbus], and then she went east. My mother was valedictorian of her high school class, and then she went to the University of Minnesota. My grandfather [Madison Jackson] was dying, and so she raced through school trying very hard to graduate in time for him to see her graduate. But she did it in three and a half years, but he died before he saw her graduate, but she made Phi Beta Kappa [honor society] before he died, and he was very, very proud of that. And she went off to Trenton, New Jersey as a social worker, and then she went to Kansas City [Missouri] to marry my father [Earl Wilkins], and they had me. And she worked for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] there. And at the time of my father's fatal illness, my mother had been offered the job as the director of the national YWCA's civil rights office or race relations, whatever they called it at that time in 1940 when it was created. And my father and another fellow had decided that they would go to New York [New York], and the other fellow went first, and they would start the first black advertising firm, and so that was. Speaker 2: This is in what year? Speaker 1: 1940 they were planning this. And so my mother went first, and she took this job in New York. And at that point, just after Christmas, my father became very ill. And he died in January 1941. So I went to New York, and my grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson], my mother's mother who had taught at an Indian school, came with us to take care of me. And I went to Harlem [New York] schools because we lived in Harlem, and my mother ran this Office of Civil Rights and went south desegregating YWCAs throughout the south and raising hackles in the time before it was at all safe. And here she was, a very, very pretty thirty-one, thirty-two year old widow, and she was going south and doing these things, and she had an assistant. She hired an assistant in her office, and she got this assistant into a civil rights career, and she launched this assistant during her civil rights career, and this assistant's name was Dorothy Height. And if you see Dorothy, you tell her that you understand she's got a fund of Roger stories, and she will tell you about what Roger was like at eight and nine years old. She will tell you that. Anyway, my mother ran that office until--she was a widow for about three and a half years. Then she met a physician named Robert Claytor who practiced in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and she married him. And so when I was twelve [years old], we moved to Grand Rapids. Story_ID: 15339 Speaker 1: When you moved to [Harlem] New York because you had just--what was going on inside of you at this point because this is a whole, you know--it's a--you're really a small town boy at that point, and you're moving into a major metropolitan area, even though you have your mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins] and father, but--I mean your mother and grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson] because you lost your father [Earl Wilkins], and I was just wondering, you know, what that whole experience was like and then your mother is you know, traveling around so? Speaker 2: Children don't really understand the enormity and finality of death, you know? When my father was ill--I'm glad you took me back because there's something really important to say. When my father--I loved him so much. When he was ill, he still tried to--this was before World War II, we're still in the Depression [1929-1939]. And he would sit on his bed--he was bedridden then--in the bedroom with a Royal portable typewriter on his lap, and he was writing stories freelance that he was sending off to magazines in an effort to help take care of the family. And I watched him do that in his final illness, not knowing that it was his final illness, but of course, I put it together, and I really thought that this was what brave men did. And I still write. I'm just, as we speak, publishing a book. I mean it's going to be out tomorrow virtually, and I still love to write. I still love to polish sentences and, in part, it is because I watched my father do that, and I thought that's what good, brave men do. You use writing as a tool to make things better, which was he was trying to do and what I do. And when I sit at the computer and write, my father is just there in me--the love of the words, the love of making them flow. And when people say to me, as they sometimes do, "God, you write beautifully," it's him. But when he was--his bedroom was in back of the house, and I would--one of my chores was to burn the trash in the trash bin way out by the alley. And when I was out there, he would make paper airplanes out of papers that he used, and he would just sail them out the window. And they would soar, and after he died, I would still do the trash, and I would look at the window expecting, even though--knowing it wouldn't come--expecting the airplanes to come sailing out. So when I went to New York, I knew he was dead. I mean I knew the words. I'd been to his funeral. I'd seen my grandfather [William DeWitt Wilkins] cry. I had seen the casket lowered into the earth, but I didn't know the enormity of the absence. But he's been dead now for sixty years, and there hasn't been a day in that sixty years that I haven't thought of him. And it's strange because I think of him as my father, as somebody who I would seek guidance from and whose approval I would seek. I'm almost twice his age. I have seen continents. I have been to places. I have wielded power that he could never imagine. I have achieved things that he could not have imagined in his lifetime, and I still think of him as Daddy older. I mean it's strange. My son [David Wilkins] is--I have two children [Amy Wilkins, David Wilkins] who are older than my father was when he died, and I guide--you know, I give them parental advice and love, and I look at them as young people. And yet this man who was younger than they, I still in my mind view--so it's--the mind plays tricks. And so when I went to New York, I knew he was dead,ut I didn't really fully comprehend it. Story_ID: 15340 Speaker 1: And my family had made New York [New York] wonderful for me. It was a city where they had trains that ran underground. It was a city where they had these tall skyscrapers. They--the city had the automat, you could just go and place a nickel in, and the food came out. They had major league baseball teams. And best of all, it was a city that had my [maternal] aunt Marvel [Jackson Cooke] and my [paternal] uncle Roy [Wilkins]. And one of the things that--when I first went to New York, they--you know, black men on the trains looked out fo the black people on the trains, and so one of the waiters came out of the train in Penn Station [New York], and he saw my uncle Roy standing there. And he said, "Sir, are you waiting for an older lady and a little boy who looks just like you?" And he said, "Yes." And he said, "They're coming right along." So that's the--and my first--this is the other thing about my family before I get back to my wonderful mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins]. My first subway ride, when subways were a nickel, was the Double A train, not the A, the Double A which was the local going from 155th Street Station downtown, and there were three men, and I guess these guys all said we're going to take care of this little boy whose daddy's [Earl Wilkins] dead - my uncle Roy [Wilkins], Walter White who was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Thurgood [Marshall]. Now how could I have turned out differently than I have, right? Story_ID: 15341 Speaker 1: Can I ask one more question about your mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins]? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Because it intrigues me. She's the one who also very early had a tremendous loss, and yet she was a modern day woman in many ways, I mean. Was it because of the history with her grandmother? Was it how she was cultivated? But, I'm just saying she had lost her father [Earl Wilkins]. She had gained you and, you know, a husband [Robert Claytor], but she had lost her husband, and yet she's in New York [New York]. It doesn't seem like she missed a beat. She's setting up an office [at the Young Women's Christian Association]. She was--I mean. Speaker 2: My mother is a very deceptive person. She was--when she was young, she was, in the ways that people judged black people, so she was a very light-skinned woman. Very pretty, very good manners and very gentle. But she had underneath that a will of steel, and she took care of me. She was going to take--she was going to give me a good life. The men--there were men in New York, and they just came around her like crazy. And she was not gonna marry some jackleg guy just for the apparent security or whatever else it was. She just wasn't going to do it. That was not--and she wanted good values for me, a sturdy, good person, and if possible, she wanted to get me the heck out of New York because New York--Harlem was not a good place to raise boys. Story_ID: 15342 Speaker 1: So she [mother, Helen Jackson Wilkins] wanted to get me out of [Harlem] New York. And she married this wonderful man [Robert Claytor] who was from Virginia and a very self-sufficient man, put himself through college and law school - I mean med school. And was a bachelor, forty-four, forty-five year old bachelor when she met him. And he kind of had been raised on a farm. He was, you know, kind of a country man with country values. And he and I never really bonded, but he sheltered me through my teenage years. And he made it possible for me to grow up in a safe environment where there was a good public school, a good public university, "the best public university on the planet," one might say of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], but--and years later when he died, he died about twelve years ago, I guess, and he and my mother had had a very good life. And she had come to love him very, very, very deeply, and he had loved her very much. And after everybody was gone, I stayed around in Grand Rapids [Michigan] for awhile to help her do the tidying up on his will and make sure that everything was in place and so forth. And we're sitting in her den again quietly, maybe three days after the funeral or so. And I said, "Mama, you loved Papa a lot, didn't you?" She said, "Yes, I did." And I said, "But that grew over time, didn't it?" She said, "Yes." And I said, "And when you married him, he was a nice man, but the main reason you married him was because you were taking care of your little boy." She said, "How long have you known that?" (laughter) Story_ID: 15343 Speaker 1: But Mama [Helen Jackson Wilkins Claytor] was--is--she's also--well, she became--she never worked again for a living after she married my stepfather [Rpbert Claytor], but she became a volunteer. She really believed in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] movement. She became a volunteer in the YWCA, and she was the first black person on the board of the Grand Rapids [Michigan] YWCA. Then she became the first black president against a lot of opposition. I mean people said oh, and one guy's wife came to - a woman came to Mama and said my husband says if you become the president, he's gonna just go to bed, and he'll be sick, and my mother said well, I'm not his doctor, and she became president, and by God, he went to bed, now whether he was sick or not, but he stayed in bed for a month or so, and there was opposition, and when we moved into our house in Grand Rapids, there was opposition to our living in the north end of Grand Rapids, but that's the only place my stepfather could find a house big enough for this whole family that he'd married. Speaker 2: Now who was in the house besides your mother and you? Speaker 1: Grandmother. That was it, but he needed - you know, he needed a bedroom. He needed at least three bedrooms, and the little piled-up black community didn't have any houses so - and he was a very light-skinned guy with straight hair and green eyes. They didn't ask him what color he was when he went and bought the house. Then when they found out, they were very upset. Mom then became the first - one of the first blacks on the National Board of the YWCA and then the first black national officer and finally the first black president of the National YWCA, and she did that for two years - I mean two terms, six or eight years, I can't remember which - and she's very honored even now. She's 94, and she's been retired for many, many years, but boy, when you say her name to some of the people who know that movement, it's - but people who know her say, you know, Helen - when you ask, well, how could this widow do it? Her friends say well, Helen's got that sweet, sweet smile, and she'll just smile at you, and her best friend says this. She'll just smile at you and smile at you and just smile and smile, and all the while she's cutting your throat, and I realized when I was a bureaucrat in the government that I was like that, and I said how did I get this way, and then I had to laugh when I thought about it. I said because you watched your mama. I mean there's a sweetness to the way I present myself most of the time, but there's really a fierce will and a determination, and that's how she was all her life, and you didn't cross her, and she didn't - I mean - and with all the sweetness, and she's a very religious woman, very, very - she served for many, many years on the steering committee of the Episcopal church in western Michigan - I guess the diocese of Western Michigan - and she - but underneath the sweetness and the deep religious faith, there's a will to get ahead. There's a personal drive. There's a kind of a fierce, fierce, fierce persona that is always protected and enhanced, always behind this kind of soft sweetness, and so this widow, who looked vulnerable and sweet, was a very determined human being. Story_ID: 15344 Speaker 1: When you moved to Grand Rapids [Michigan], okay, and that was another move for you, and you have a new family, even though the constant is your grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson] moving with you and your mother [Helen Jackson Wilkins Claytor]. What was that--you know, this is--because you're, what--at this point, how old are you? Speaker 2: Twelve. Speaker 1: Twelve. Okay. Twelve. Okay. Speaker 2: I was terrified, I mean, because, look, we were--upstairs in our apartment in Harlem [New York] we were middle class. Downstairs in the street, it was the street. And I had just spent my first semester in junior high school [PS 164, Harlem, New York], and there were really tough people in that junior high school. I mean there were tough people, and you were always negotiating it. Now, I mean, it's not like the kids worry today that somebody's got a gun. There was never any sense that there were guns, but there were knives, and there were fists, and there were gangs, and that was enough to cause a little brown middle-class scholar a good deal of anxiety. Now I could fight, and I could run, and I could negotiate, and I could do all of those things. But I didn't like to do it. I did not like the danger. I did not like the idea that every day you had to hide, you know, because--and I was in the rapid advancement class, you know. We were tracked from 7AR, which meant rapid advance. That means you're going to get out of junior high school in two and a half years instead of three. And then they said 7AR--that's the--and 7A1, 7A2, 7A3. Well, you can imagine what 7A7 was. These kids were tracked straight for Sing Sing [Prison, Ossining, New York] essentially. And you can imagine what they felt about us in the rapid advancement class, and of course, they would inflict it on us when they could. So we had alliances, you know, with other gangs. Well, I knew--at least I knew how to do it in my neighborhood. I knew what the alliances were. I knew where the places to hide were. I knew the guys who could fight. I knew what--I knew everything. Story_ID: 15345 Speaker 1: All of a sudden I'm going into a new place [Grand Rapids, Michigan], and I don't know anything, and I am really worried. But the one thing that I had not counted on, I never imagined because I had come from a segregated neighborhood--legally segregated in Kansas City [Missouri]--to a de facto segregated in Harlem [New York], I had never expected that I would end up in a neighborhood where I was the only black person, the only black kid. In my wildest fantasies, I would have never imagined such a thing. And of course, psychically, that turned out to be harder than anything because these were all-American white kids in 1944. And even to the best of them, I was a freak. I went to class, (jerks his head around in imitation) and it was--and I can tell you exactly who went like that. I remember his--I know his name. I remember the size of his head. I remember. I'm not going to say his name, he may still be alive. Maybe he turned out not to be a bad guy so I'm not gonna. But they threw rocks at me, and they spat on my bicycle seat and said, "Nigger, go home. Go back where you belong. Monkeys belong"--all that crap. People chased me home. It was very hard and even harder. Ultimately, not too long, I got some friends and a good group of friends, one of whom is still a close friend, and I, you know, I was elected to things. I was running on the track team. I was on the basketball team. I was president of the student council. You know, I was a really popular kid before it was all over, but it's still hard growing up being an adolescent and your hormones are going crazy, you know? You're just--all you think of is girls. Well, you know, you don't kind of color-code this animal stuff like, "Oh, let me get in my car and drive across town and find somebody with this color skin," you know? I mean, you're down there. You're fourteen years old, and you're scuffling around in the bottom of your locker, and you look up, and there is some girl stretching for the top of her locker and stretching her sweater. All rational thought stops at that moment so (laughter), and that's how it was. Well, that was very tough because the girls weren't going to go out with me. I mean that was--and they treated--I mean the girls liked me, but they loved the fact that there was somebody who knew the boys and was like a boy but was to them a neuter so they could talk to me. I mean it was like being inside of a harem or something. It was not good. It was very painful, and the whole socialization stuff was painful. Moreover, it was really hard because at the same time I am now losing my fluency in the black culture, right? I come out of Harlem, I'm with it and, you know, and now I'm there, and all of a sudden I'm with the straightest of middle-class white kids in the Midwest, and I'm becoming more and more like them. That was--it was like being in no world. Story_ID: 15346 Speaker 1: Both of these places, and one was Grand Rapids [Michigan] and one was Saginaw [Michigan]. And my stepfather [Robert Claytor] figured that Saginaw was an easier place. It had more blacks, that Grand Rapids would be the harder place, and he knew his brother [Archer Claytor] was softer. So he sent his brother to Saginaw. He said, "You go to Saginaw, and I'll go to--and take Grand Rapids." And that's what he did. And his brother made a lot more money, and you know. I knew his brother, and he was a wonderful man. Had a silly wife [Marie Claytor], you know, one of these social climbing, "I went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]," and (imitating her) da dee dee--you know, just, but--and my stepfather just made a good, solid, never wealthy, just upper middle-class living as a doctor for the poor black people in Grand Rapids. And he loved his brother, and his brother loved him, and they spent a lot of time seeing each other. And then one night, I guess while I was in college, some guy who Uncle Archer had delivered was looking for some drugs, thought probably the doctor had some drugs in his house, broke in his house, killed Uncle Archer, killed his wife, Marie, and that was that. Story_ID: 15347 Speaker 1: Can you just go over real quickly, though, the schools you went to and, I mean, where you--I'm going back to [Harlem] New York, but what the names of the schools were. Speaker 2: Well, my school in Kansas City [Missouri] was Crispus Attucks. And my school in--first school in New York was PS46, which was at the intersection of St. Nicholas Avenue and 156th Street. And then my junior high school was PS164, Stitt Junior High which was at Edgecombe Avenue and about 165th Street. And then in Grand Rapids [Michigan], I went to Creston High School, which was both junior high and high [school]. And then I got there second half of seventh grade, and I finished there in June '49 [1949] and went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor]. Got an AB [Bachelor of Arts] in '53 [1953] and an LLB [Bachelor of Law] in '56 [1956]. Story_ID: 15348 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to Grand Rapids [Michigan]. So you're in this school. What is the black--what is the community like? I mean you're staying on the white part of town, but it's -- Speaker 2: It's the same. Our blocks where we lived was working-class white people. We lived in a big house. The house we had was the house that had been the farmhouse for this whole area around there so our house was bigger, but it wasn't--you know, it was old. My stepfather [Robert Claytor] had it renovated and fixed up, but it was a big, old farmhouse. My mother [Helen Jackson Claytor] still lives in it. But these were working-class people, and maybe--and it was largely a working-class high school [Creston High School, Grand Rapids, Michigan], although there were some middle-class families and a few upper middle class people, you know, people who were like small business people. A guy owned an Oldsmobile [automobile] whose father owned an Oldsmobile dealership, a girl whose father owned a Maytag [home appliances] business, things like that. But the real wealth of the city was in the suburb of East Grand Rapids [Michigan]. So it was working class but a little upper middle class, some middle class and an upper middle class. Story_ID: 15349 Speaker 1: And what--so you said your father didn't really - you know, I mean your stepfather [Robert Claytor] and you really never connected and so. Speaker 2: Well, we connected, but we didn't bond. It was the way it was with [paternal uncle] Roy [Wilkins]. I mean partly it was me. None of--neither of these guys was my father. My father [Earl Wilkins] was an open, verbal, funny guy who really was interested in me and would talk to me. I mean here's--I mean my family laughs at me now, my kids [Amy Wilkins, David Wilkins, Elizabeth Wilkins] and my wife [Patricia King], because I could sit at the table in our house in Kansas City [Missouri] when I was a little boy, and I could tell you whose car--who was coming home because of the sound of the car motor. And so I would say, "Oh, that's Mardish (ph). Oh, that's Mr. Robinson. Oh, that's Mr. Washington." And my father used to call me M-M-N-N-S-S, Meddlesome Matty, Nosy Nellie, Super Snooper. Well, I am a gossipy guy who likes to--ooh, a siren outside, I like to still today--and they say, "See, your father was right." But--so I had this easy relationship with him, and we talked and he--and neither my uncle nor my stepfather was easy with a child that way. And my stepfather, a very good and intelligent man, was not a verbal man. He was very--he was the strong, silent type, and a wonderful human being. And what he did for me in my lifetime was essential, but we were, you know, we just were pals. Story_ID: 15350 Speaker 1: So who's forming you as a person? I mean who's influencing you during your puberty years or those years? Were you living inside yourself a lot? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Me. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I really did live inside myself. I didn't much speak to my mother [Helen Jackson Claytor] or my stepfather [Robert Claytor]. And ultimately I became my own father, but it took a long time. And the, you know, process was messy, and there was an awful midlife crisis which--I agree now with the general psychiatric notion of delayed grief, kids who lose a parent. There were times--it used to be every Christmas I would go into this serious depression, and I drank too much at all times in those years anyway, but I would really go on benders at Christmastime. And I thought it was Christmas blues, you know. I mean all this--everybody's happy at Christmas. Well, people who aren't happy at Christmas are very unhappy, and so I thought that that's what, and people who were not with family and so forth. And I was divorced and separated from my family and so forth. I just thought it was that. So I thought it was always just loneliness at Christmastime. All of a sudden, I realized, one day I started drinking after work, and I was drinking, and I said why is this? Every Christmas you do it, and it's always about a week before Christmas. Why is it? Oh, it's December 19th. It's Daddy's [Earl Wilkins] birthday. And--you know, and I look back and I--there are gallons of liquor I wouldn't have drunk, and there are lots of people I wouldn't have hurt. But I think a lot of that stuff is just necessary for me to purge the old hurt, deal with it in some kind of way and then reconstruct my life in a way that made emotional and psychic sense to me. But your question was very astute. I did live inside myself. I did form myself, and in a sense, although I am a friendly person, I'm a loner. And I think it's because of that, living inside myself for so long, not having that father to guide me and having a mother who was many wonderful things, but she was very often about her own business. So she was--so I had lots of adults who were not really emotionally available to me. And then she had these other--she had two children [July Claytor, Sharon Claytor Peters] in her marriage with my stepfather to whom she had to give attention as well. And so I really--and I understood that, and I approved of it and thought of myself as the strong, silent type, but it really did leave me out there doing it pretty much on my own. My grandmother [Amy Wood Jackson] died when I was eighteen. But you know, hard as it was, except for people I've hurt, I wouldn't have it any other way because I'm really happy in my own skin. I really, I really like who I am now. Story_ID: 15351 Speaker 1: Who were your role models? Was it your uncle [Roy Wilkins]? I'm just trying to figure out. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, it's funny, a whole generation of role models, really. I guess the biggest--you read history for reasons. My biggest role model is a woman, Harriet Tubman. I mean that woman--I just can't--it's like Jack [Jackie] Robinson wrote, 'I Never Had It Made.' She could have had it made. She got out of slavery. She had a skill. She was a seamstress. She got to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. She could've taken care of herself. She just kept on going back, risking herself because she knew those people were back there, and they needed her. That story, when I read it, I must have been fifteen [years old], thought about it, and it just exploded in me, you know? I was talking to my daughter [Elizabeth Wilkins], my baby daughter, just finished high school. She's an academic star. She's going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And I was driving her home from a place where we had celebrated her graduation, and I said, "I'm so proud of you, but, sure, your academic success makes me proud, but your character really makes me proud. You are a generous person. You're giving. You're loving. You're a wonderful friend to your friends. You are a disciplined person. You organize your work. You do your work. You know what your priorities are, but you know how to have fun, but with all of that and all of your achievements, I want you to know that you are one of the luckiest seventeen-year-olds on the face of this planet, and it's a planet in which there is an overwhelming abundance of misery and want. And so you've got to share all your life. One way or another, you've got to figure out a way to give back." That's straight out of Harriet Tubman. I mean that's the value. Story_ID: 15352 Speaker 1: Now the other role model--you were talking to me about Negro League Baseball. The first baseball game I ever saw in this life, the pitcher was a man named Satchel Paige down in Kansas City [Missouri]. But there's another former Kansas City Monarch who was just my quintessential hero, and it's Jack Roosevelt Robinson. My quintessential hero in this life is Jack Roosevelt Robinson. He broke into the major leagues when I was fifteen years old. It is the time, if there is any time when a boy's mind is focused on professional sports, it's when he's about fifteen. I mean that the mind and the experience are not large enough to understand the wider world. Jack breaks in, and he and Rachel [Robinson] look like the perfect couple. They're both beautiful, and I've often told Rachel. I said, "You know, I loved Jack. You know, I love Jack, Rachel. But I hate him, too, because I loved you. I always loved you, Rachel. I love you right now." And she laughs and says, "You fool." But I'll tell you his accomplishment that year when he was a rookie, when he couldn't stay in the hotels in St. Louis [Missouri], when in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] they just said the nastiest things, that nasty bench happened, and they threw black cats out, and they yelled, and they hollered everything they could yell at him, and they tried to spike him. And we didn't know in 1947 what a fierce and feisty and militant black man he was because he held it all in. And he took it and still managed to do the hardest thing in sports, which is to hit a baseball consistently. And he hit an almost 300 [batting average], and he fielded flawlessly, and then he went on to excel some more. And when they let him loose, my God, he stood up to the white folks, and then all of a sudden he wasn't so popular anymore with all these sportswriters because then they liked [Roy] Campanella better because Campanella was more accommodating. And if I--I mean Thurgood [Marshall] is a hero of mine, big, huge, loving, old bear of a hero, but I guess my--the hero that--of my emotions and my heart was Jack. And there was another thing, the fact that he was beautiful, and he was really dark, you know? It just--I mean he--the fact that everything he was, it was right out there, the country--and the whole country was focused, and I don't know a sport that gets that kind of attention now. Maybe [Eldrick] Tiger [Woods] gets almost as much attention as Jack did, but with all that on his shoulders. I mean, he knew he was carrying all of us on his shoulders and that his deportment and his ability, all of that, the way we were going to be treated by white people was going to be affected by what he did and how we felt about ourselves was gonna--he was a very smart fellow. And he did, he took it all in. Now, Jack died when he was only about fifty-six years old. I am sure that the strain of those couple of years when he had to hold it in shortened his life very substantially. So you asked who it [mentor] was, it was he. Story_ID: 15353 Speaker 1: You know what I find interesting about this, and I have to ask you this now because you come from--both on your mother [Helen Jackson Claytor] and father's [Earl Wilkins] side, you know, are fairly fair-skinned people, and yet you identify with, you know, the browns--you know, I mean, I find that very interesting. It's like the blacker, the better. I mean not in a way, but it's almost in a way, you know, you identify. Speaker 2: I really despised the color consciousness that was so prevalent in the black community as I was growing up. I don't know where that came from, maybe from [maternal aunt] Marvel's [Marvel Cooke] husband. His name was Cecil Cooke, and he was a Panamanian, he was very black. And I loved Uncle Cecil very much. And even though I never knew Sam Williams, the uncle by marriage who raised my father and my uncle [Roy Wilkins] and my sister [aunt, Armeda Wilkins], I always knew Uncle Sam was coal black. And I loved his memory. I mean the idea that this guy took in these three kids who he didn't even--wasn't even related to and had never seen, and he made this commitment that he was going to raise these kids, and he did it. And then I hear silly black people going around and talking about, "this one's better because he's light and this one's better because he's dark." I mean, I could--I mean, "this one's no good because he's dark." How could I stand that? I remember my roommate got married. My roommate got married forty-five years ago tomorrow. He's dead now. He's a wonderful guy named John Louis, and he was a physician in Detroit [Michigan]. And at John and Savan's (ph) wedding I was sitting next to a girl who I will not name because she is still alive, and we had on white dinner jackets. There was a brunch the day after the wedding. And he married--John married a girl whose father was the wealthiest doctor in Detroit, or one of the wealthiest, and so this is a big, big, big do. And when the dancing started, this girl started laughing--and she had been at [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor] with us and was a good friend--and I said, "What are you laughing at?" And I had looked in the direction she was looking in, and I didn't--I couldn't--and she just couldn't stop laughing. She was a very light-skinned girl. And finally she said, "Him, him." And I looked, and there was a guy dancing, and he was a good-looking guy. And he had on a white dinner jacket, and he was black. Very black, coal black. And I said, "What's so funny?" She started laughing and she said, "He looks like he just came off the boat." And I just was enraged. I got up from the table, and I walked away because I didn't want to--because I liked her. She was a friend, and I didn't want to cuss her out at this party. So I've always had that, but I think it comes from--because I thought, you know, I thought that color discri--I mean, here we are yelling and hollering about white folks who won't deal with us, right, and then here we are looking at other black folks and being even more cruel. And I understood that from very early, so that's where. Story_ID: 15354 Speaker 1: In high school, now what are you--what subjects are you attracted to? Speaker 2: Writing. Writing, history, and English. Speaker 1: And what--did you know, did you--when did you decide that you wanted to go to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor]? Speaker 2: When I was a junior in high school [Creston High School, Grand Rapids, Michigan] and Michigan won the National Football Championship and went to Rose Bowl [Pasadena Tournament of Roses, California] and beat Stanford [University, Stanford, California] forty-nine to nothing. Are you kidding? My family was talking to me about going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I said to myself, "I'm not going to a little dinky, dunk Eastern football. I want to see big-time football." And I persuaded them, both--mainly on the ground that we had a great university right there, cheap, and they had one little girl who was going to be college age when my stepfather's [Robert Claytor] earnings would be declining. What's the point? And then the next year, when I was a senior in high school, Michigan went undefeated again. I went ah, boy, I got there. They won their first two games in my freshman year, and then they--for the next seven years, that seven-year period when I was there was the worst seven years in Michigan football history. I saw some of the worst Michigan football there ever was, but nevertheless Michigan football is one of the staples of my life. Speaker 1: Now you go in. You major in what? Speaker 2: Political science. Speaker 1: Political science. Now why that major? Was it because of the work of your uncle [Roy Wilkins]? Speaker 2: I have no idea. I have no idea. Well, you know, I--somehow, you know, I guess there was something in me that said civic life, politics. How does the country run, you know, but it was totally unformed. Story_ID: 15355 Speaker 1: And how many blacks were in your class? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. There was--the University [of Michigan, Ann Arbor] was, you know, integrated, but it was segregated. And so there were a couple hundred of us, I guess, on the campus all told. And we had our social life. I mean, we didn't--we talked--there were some white people who talked to us, and they were nice people, but basically we were with each other. I mean you'd go into the Michigan League [student union, Ann Arbor, Michigan], you know, and there would be a black table, you know. And Ella Fitzgerald would be on the jukebox, and you just walk in, and you see one table bouncing, and there they are, you know. You know, Ella sang, 'A Tisket, A Tasket,' you know, everybody going (bouncing and laughing). And so you'd go over there. And we traveled in groups, and nobody--most of the time I was there, none of the black fraternities and sororities had a house so you'd have your social events in public places, and all of the blacks on campus would be invited. And we knew--it was a lot easier for us than it has been for these kids lately because--essentially, we knew that they didn't much want us there. You know, they had to take us. Now some of the professors were very nice and very supportive, but basically they didn't really care about us. But we said, "Well, we're here, you know, and we're gonna get this stuff. We don't give a [expletive] what you think. We're gonna do our stuff and go where we need to go." And that was our attitude, but nevertheless we loved Michigan, I mean because we were college kids, and this was a formative moment for us. And I would not--and I'm glad I didn't go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Masssachusetts] because the aspiration, you know, the Harvard aspiration is to prepare young white men to run the world and run the banks. Well, I wasn't going to run the world and run the banks so I'd have been--you know, they'd put this--there wouldn't have been any hole for this peg to go in. So I'm very nostalgic about and grateful for the education I got at Michigan. Story_ID: 15356 Speaker 1: This is your first time away from home now, in some respects. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this is formative like, you know, college is formative. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I'm just wondering, what--did your grades ever go down or were you just like really driven? You know, were you? Speaker 2: Did they ever go down? Speaker 1: I mean, these are girls. You had this whole thing. You had been in this sort of. Speaker 2: Did my grades go down? Speaker 1: I'm just wondering for a period of time. I just remember how you said the girl was reaching, and you couldn't--you know, I mean, and you're in a decent black group, right? No, I'm just saying are you motivated? Are you? Speaker 2: I was motivated by a lot of things, not so much by books. They [the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] had preliminary exams for freshman, and so it was to let you know after five weeks, you know, how you were doing. Because everybody said, "Oh, boy, get to college. College is going to be hard, oh, oh, oh, oh." And so they had preliminary exams in all of your courses, and I got all As. I said, "Uh huh. All right. Got that settled. Now let me go live my life." The grades went [imitates a crashing plane]. I majored in--I mean I got a degree in political science, but I majored in campus politics. Student NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the student government, being president of the class, and girls--well, two girls in particular. My girlfriend in my freshman year and part of my sophomore year and then my girlfriend from junior, senior year and through law school whom I married [Eve Wilkins]. And that girl, who will have a birthday tomorrow, the number of which I will not say, but anyway she will have a birthday tomorrow--and we're still friends, good friends--was the reason I went to law school because I finished college in--I finished college in 1953, and the Korean War was still on. And I was going to have to go in the army, and there was no--nobody knew how long it would go. So I decided that I wanted to not crawl around in muddy foxholes in the 48th Parallel. I thought maybe I wanted--I knew I wanted to fly because--my wife [Patricia King] says I'm still the oldest hot-rodder in the United States. I was a hot-rodder then, and I wanted to go fly jet planes and shoot down people in the sky. And I went to an air force base. I signed up. I went to an air force base, Rantoul Air Force Base, Chanute Air Force Base in Rantoul, Illinois. There were a hundred of us. The first day they gave us a physical. Fifty guys were going. The next day they gave us a mental exam all day long. By nightfall another forty-four were gone. Ninety-four percent of the guys were gone after the first two days. There were six of us left, and there's now only some hand-eye coordination stuff to do which was easy because I was a good athlete. Even now I've got terrific hand-eye coordination. I mean if something starts to fall off the top shelf, I've got it before it hits the counter. So to do that then would be very easy. To make a long story short, I got to do--I went over to do this at the appointed hour, and the sergeant wouldn't let me. Just wouldn't let me. He was being irrational and nasty. He would not let me. And when somebody else said to him as he was walking away, I heard him call me a nigger. I mean I heard him refer to me as a nigger, and I said, "You can take your air force and shove it." And I left the air force base, went back, and applied because this girl was still at the University of Michigan with two more years. Story_ID: 15357 Speaker 1: So I left this [United States] Air Force base [Chanute Air Force Base, Rantoul, Illinois], and I said, "The heck with you guys." And I went, and I applied to law school, and I applied to graduate school in political science. I was accepted in both, and I decided to go to law school [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] because I said to myself, "Heck, you don't want to be a college teacher ever so why don't you go to law school?" So it's ironic at the end of my life I would find such joy in college teaching. But at the University of Michigan the most segregated part of life was the fraternity and sorority system. All up and down Washington Avenue [Ann Arbor, Michigan] they had great big fraternity and sorority houses, and they're all white, all white, still are. And I've always thought that they are just antithetical to the idea of education. You take kids at seventeen [years old], you bring them in, and you want to expand them. What the fraternity and sorority systems do and what they did at Michigan was these kids are rushing fraternities and sororities before they've even seen the inside of a classroom. And what are they looking for? They're looking for communities just like the ones they came from so it's--for them, it's an extension of high school, and they don't expand. And they grow up to be like George [W.] Bush, you know, I mean, limited, truly limited human beings with no capacity to see beyond themselves and have empathy. And so there was a movement to force the fraternities and sororities to amend their charters--because most of these things had charters making Jews and blacks unacceptable--either change the charters or get off campus. And we passed twice in the student government when I was on it, and I was the head of the committee that did it the second time, a--I don't remember what it was called--a proposal. I guess you have to propose it to the administration that after three years these outfits would be put off the campus. And on both occasions the administration essentially pooh-poohed us and said, "Go back and play in your little sandboxes, kids, because this is grownup stuff." Well, of course, an awful lot of alumni support comes from these places, and if they had done this, particularly back when we were doing it in the early fifties [1950s]. This is before Brown v. Board [of Education, Topeka, Kansas, 1954], right, and we're fighting this. And we're also fighting to get them to cut hair, black people's hair, in the [University of] Michigan Union. And we're fighting to get the barbershops around the campus to cut black people's hair. Of course, black kids didn't want their hair cut by the white barbers anyway, but then--and to make places around the campus--let black girls try on clothes like they let the white girls. I mean we were pushing the limits even back then. Story_ID: 15358 Speaker 1: Now there were some Communists [political party]. And there was a guy named Mike Sharpe. There were two guys, Mike Sharpe and Ed Schafer. I remember them very well. And Mike was a graduate student [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] in economics. He's a very sweet guy, and Ed was, but I wasn't about that. I mean, you know, we black folks had enough troubles. What did we need Communism [political philosophy] for? And I always never understood my [maternal] aunt Marvel's [Marvel Cooke] Communism. I mean I just never. I loved her to the day she died, and to the day she died she was a Communist, and I'm the executor of her will, and the residuary legatee of her will is some formally Communist organizations. I make sure they're gonna get their money, but I still never really fully--I never understood it. So when those guys tried to, you know, get close to me, I said, "No, fellows." Well, ironically it has just come to my attention that Mike Sharpe became a publisher, an academic publisher, and he's a very wealthy guy, M. E Sharpe Publishing Company. And I've been getting books from M. E. Sharpe Publishing Company, buying some terrific books. I learned recently when I was in Ann Arbor that M. E. Sharpe is my old acquaintance, Mike Sharpe, and that he did his Ph.D. dissertation. And it was a much more than adequate dissertation, and they refused to give him his Ph.D. because apparently they didn't like his politics. And so I've been in touch with Mike and all kinds of people have written to the University [of Michigan, Ann Arbor], most notably John Kenneth Galbraith. And I recently wrote a letter to the president of the university and said--and I know the president. He's a friend of mine. I said, "Lee [C. Bollinger], this is wrong. This is just wrong. Mike earned"--and I told him how we knew each other and that we weren't political allies, that I wasn't a Communist, I was a Cold War liberal, but he was a good guy, and there's no reason for him not to have his Ph.D. So, that's about the Communists. Story_ID: 15359 Speaker 1: At this whole same time, your [paternal] uncle [Roy Wilkins] is very involved and has very heightened visibility. Speaker 2: Well, by the time I was a junior in law school, he had become an executive director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but, you know, he was--even before that, he was essentially running the place because Walter [White] had just kind of let the reins go. And so Roy was, I think, the top man from about 1949 on. So yeah, he was visible. And I can't--you know, look, I can't--when you ask me who the people were who influenced me, of course, Roy influenced me. I mean I watched his mannerisms. He took me when he went and made speeches when I was a kid eight and nine years old. I was an NAACP office brat. I knew Cecilia Marshall when she was a secretary there before she was married to Thurgood [Marshall]. I mean, you know, these women now say well, they helped raise me so of course, you know. And I was proud of my uncle, and I loved him, and I was proud of my mother [Helen Jackson Craytor], and I loved her. So there really was no way that--and I hated segregation. I cannot tell you how much I hated segregation, and I hated white people dealing with me as if I were an inferior being. I could not stand it. So there was--and I also could understand that I was a very lucky person. And I saw poor black people. And so all of this, you know, but Harriet Tubman and Jack Robinson are right there on the altar of my character. Story_ID: 15360 Speaker 1: Now, so law school--when you get into law school, do you like it? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was fun. I mean, the same thing happened in law school [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor]. They give you exams. You know, "Oh, law school's really hard. Oh, boy, you thought college was hard, but it was nothing, oh, law school." They give you first-term exams. Same thing, blew the top off. I mean I was so far ahead than anybody else was. I was just off doing my stuff. Well, first of all, I worked my way through law school. I mean when I finished college, I mean I helped my stepfather [Robert Claytor] pay for college. But then I said, "Look, you've got these little kids." By this time, he had another, a second child. I said, "I'm grown. I'll pay for my law school." So I worked my way through law school. I worked in factories in the summertime and I--which I had been doing in college as well--and I got a job in an undergraduate dorm to pay for my expenses. So it wasn't --I wasn't as frivolous as I had been in undergraduate school. But my undergraduate stuff, I don't give--I mean there's nothing I am as an adult today that wasn't enhanced in some way by the things that I did in college. But I wasn't frivolous. I did study in law school, but I had--I never really bought it, all of this nobility of the law. All of this the law is a jealous mistress. This is a sacred profession. Read the great [Oliver Wendell] Holmes and all of that stuff. I never really quite bought it. And I always had this nagging suspicion, as they were telling me all this lofty stuff, that this is a trade school. And I also knew that there were grifter lawyers. And I loved Thurgood [Marshall] and what he did, but I couldn't go work for them. I mean I worked for him in the summer between my junior and senior years. Speaker 1: You interned there [at the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I loved it. I loved it, and I loved the guys, Thurgood and Bob Carter, and Connie was not a guy, but I loved Connie Motley and Bill Taylor and Jack Greenberg and just--they were just wonderful people. Good to me, and they all wanted me back, and they thought I did good work that summer. But, you know, [paternal uncle] Roy [Wilkins] was on the board, and I was--and Thurgood was like an uncle. Between those two giants, I just wanted to be me, and I couldn't. So I went into a private firm, and I really didn't like it very much. And they used to keep saying that they had--there were two brothers who were the main partners in the firm, and they kept on saying to the son of the senior partner and to me--and Arthur was a great pal of mine. They kept saying to Arthur and me, "You guys, you're gonna have this firm someday. You're gonna be us. You're gonna"--and Arthur and I would go for--get drunk after work and say, "We don't want to be them." And Arthur said, "Save me." He said, "You can quit, but how am I gonna quit my dad? I'm not gonna--I don't wanna be this." And both of us understood that there was--that this was not us. And I think they were serious that--and I think they were excited, these socialist Jewish labor lawyers in New York with international interests, the notion that they would leave this firm to their son and his great, black buddy who was also their protg. But Arthur and I were having none of it. Unfortunately, Arthur did quit his father. He died, and that was really--he was a wonderful guy. But in any event, I was--[President] John F. Kennedy was one of the best things that ever happened to me because he got elected. I went to Washington [District of Columbia], never looked back on the law. Speaker 1: Now did you--the name of that firm is Delson, Levin and? Speaker 2: Gordon. Speaker 1: Gordon. Okay. Story_ID: 15361 Speaker 1: Now had you gotten married at the time? Speaker 2: Oh, I got married. I got married forty-five years ago last Saturday. It was the day I graduated from law school, and Eve and I--instead of going to graduation, we went to a church on Euclid Avenue in Cleveland [Ohio] and had a big, fancy wedding. Story_ID: 15362 Speaker 1: So you finish at the University of Michigan [Law School, Ann Arbor] and go to New York? I mean do you meet Arthur? You meet him at? Speaker 2: A professor of mine at Michigan introduced me to the firm [Delson, Levin and Gordon] and recommended me. Story_ID: 15363 Speaker 1: I came to Washington in '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: You came when L. B. [Lyndon B. Johnson] -- Speaker 1: No. No. [John F.] Kennedy was President in '62. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Right. Right. Speaker 1: And I went to work for the administrator [Fowler Hamilton] of AID [Agency for International Development]. And I worked on Africa and Asia. I was his eyes and ears on Africa and Asia and in fending off the Inspector General. And it was--and the first administrator was a man named Fowler Hamilton. And then he left in December '62 [1962], and a man named David Bell, who was one of Kennedy's brilliant Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] recruitments and a wonderful human being--just died six months ago. He was a wonderful man. And we went immediately in December '62 [1962] to Vietnam and then around. And I got to Vietnam and said, "This is wrong. We're not gonna win here. We shouldn't be here. These other guys that we're fighting are the guys who have the aspirations and dreams, and we don't belong here. We're gonna lose. Even if we"--and I remember saying this. I said it to people when I came back. "Those other guys have got the dream. The guys that we're supporting don't have any dreams. They're not gonna--the other guys fight all the time. Our guys only fight when the sun is up and never on weekends. It's a fantasy." And even if we even knew how to fix that country, if you could fix a country, and make it exactly the way we want it, we'd have to keep two million men in that place for the next ten years. That was an underestimate, but the other guys got the dream. We should cut our losses and get the hell out of there. Now, that is not a retrospective thought. That is what I thought when I was thirty years old and saw that place, and I started fighting against that war then. Now I can't say that I did it because of the kind of morality that the kids had three or four years later. I just went there and saw it was a loser, and that [United States Secretary of Defense Robert] McNamara and his generals were deluding themselves. And so I did everything I could to oppose that war. Story_ID: 15364 Speaker 1: Meanwhile [in the midst of the Vietnam War], I'm watching the Civil Rights Movement and saying, "I need--that's where I need to be." And before I had left New York [New York], I had started writing things about, "Hey, there's a civil rights movement in the south, but what we need is a civil rights movement up here because these people in the inner cities are getting--they got on paper all the rights that those people down there are fighting for, and they still have these horrible jobs and--if they have a job at all--and lousy housing and all the rest, and we've gotta have a northern movement up here." So--and I even tried to get my law firm to let me open a branch of it or at least stake me to a startup as a lawyer in the inner city in Brooklyn [New York], which was where I lived, in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. They wouldn't do it, and meanwhile I just was getting ready to go and didn't want to be a lawyer anyway. So I always cared about poverty in the inner city. That was always the place where my heart was. And when it became clear that my fight against the war in Vietnam was getting nowhere inside the government, and Mr. [David] Bell said, "Well, look, it's time for you to run something anyway. So you can either run something here [Agency for International Development], but I'd say you ought to go and run something out in the world like an office in the Vietnam"--because the Vietnam operation is our biggest overseas--"you could be an officer in Vietnam." I said, "No way that I'm going to Vietnam"--or I could have been the deputy director of our mission in Nepal. Well, I kind of wanted to go to Kathmandu [Nepal]. I mean, you know, the Himalayas [mountain range], oh boy, that--but we had a little--we had a small girl [Amy Wilkins], and my wife was pregnant. Well, ain't no way you're going to go to Kathmandu with a pregnant wife so I left foreign affairs and went into civil rights and since have never left. Story_ID: 15365 Speaker 1: And is that when you got on with the [United States] Justice Department? Speaker 2: No. I went into a new agency called the Community Relations Service that was created by the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and I got in on the ground floor as they were creating it. And it was headed by a man named [Thomas] Leroy Collins who had been the governor of Florida, a very nice, good man, and I just heard him referred to on the radio the other day as the best governor Florida ever had. Collins was a wonderful guy, a liberal guy from the South at the time. And that agency was in the [United States] Commerce Department because they thought that we would go into the South to help these southern communities get over their racism because the businessmen were more enlightened, and you'd get the businessmen to move on the other parts of the city to accommodate the needs and the wishes of black people so that you didn't have to have a demonstration all the time, that progress could be made. But just as I get to the place, the city started erupting, and so essentially I turned, first, my own operation inside the place, and then when I became director, I turned the whole place into a thing that dealt with the inner cities. But at the time Collins left the job to do something else, and so [President Lyndon B.] Johnson decided ultimately that he would have me replace Collins, but he would take the agency and put it in the Department of Justice. And so that's how I got to Justice. Story_ID: 15366 Speaker 1: And did you like that whole experience of what you were doing there during that time working for the inner city? I had heard someplace where they referred even to that organization [Community Relations Service, Justice Department] as a spy, you know, that there was a belief that it was part of a spy organization. Speaker 2: Well, we had a--did I like it? It was so hard. It was so hard. If your heart is a civil rights heart and you're working for the United States government, which was at the moment the most sympathetic to black aspirations than any U. S. government there has ever been, but it's still a white folks' government. And it still is not where black folks are, and your job is to pull this government, and you are trying to pull people who are your superiors to a place that they can't even see, don't know, and is politically perilous for them. And you're doing that, and you're breaking your heart, and you're breaking your pick every day inside that government to make that happen. And in the meantime, on the outside the brothers on the street are looking at you in your coat and tie and sitting up there in the Justice Department. You cannot be a righteous brother. There is no way. Don't even try it, particularly if your name is Wilkins and your [paternal] uncle [Roy Wilkins] is the head of this slow civil rights organization [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as viewed from the streets. And so you know, who are you? And so my view of what needed to happen was that in all the transactions in the inner cities, the government's inclination was always to talk to the Negroes with coats and ties and titles. And the riots or the rebellions, whichever you prefer, were erupting out of the people that these people with coats and ties probably didn't know, and if they knew, didn't like them very much. But there was all of this grassroots activity, and my view was put these grassroots people at the table, have them in direct connection with the federal government, and put them at the table and change the dynamics of the city government so they have a voice. We had to know who these people were, and of course, with all the paranoia that was going around in those days, of course a lot of people thought we were spies. Story_ID: 15367 Speaker 1: The people in the street thought we [Community Relations Service, Department of Justice] were spies on the inside of the government. We were viewed as, without any doubt, the most radical people that there were in the government and hated by [J. Edgar] Hoover. Hoover reported to the White House that I was running a black power organization. And so the guys in the White House sent the memo back, and the Attorney General [Ramsey Clark], who was my friend, said, "Mr. Hoover's reporting over my head to the White House that you're running a black power organization." And he looked at me and said, "Well?" And I said, "Well, for once Hoover's got it right." (laughter) I hated Hoover. Hoover hated me, and it was open. It was just open and clear this day, and this was before I knew he was bugging [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and it was before I knew anything about the COINTELPRO [series of Federal Bureau of Investigation counterintelligence programs designed to neutralize political dissidents]. He's just a stone racist, and he had--you know, people said, "He was a racist, and he was an anticommunist." He had one overriding and abiding passion, and that was the preservation and promotion of J. Edgar Hoover, period, whatever it took. Now he would also indulge his passions against black people and his passions against the Communists [political party] and all that stuff, but the central core what he was about was J. Edgar Hoover and the myth. He was a dreadful, destructive human being, blackmailed presidents, tried to destroy people, tried to destroy King. He was horrible, horrible, undermined the civil rights movement at every turn. He was just detestable. Story_ID: 15368 Speaker 1: Now are you proud of things that you did out of that [Community Relations Service, Justice Department]? So you say that, you know, you were sort of in between things. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, are you proud of anything that came out of that whole position there? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Oh, sure. I mean I contributed to the shape of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. To a moral certainty, I know that my voice was the crucial one in the timing of President [Lyndon B.] Johnson sending the Voting Rights [Act of 1965] proposal up when he did. Speaker 1: Now explain that. Speaker 2: Well, I mean--look, the people marching and dying were the ones who got the nation's attention. There's no question. What had to happen in Washington [District of Columbia] was that energy had to be translated inside meeting rooms where people would--where people who knew each other could have conversations, very contentious conversations, but they understood. The people in the government could not understand [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.]. I mean they know what he did, but Martin was a preacher, and Martin would come with this Southern preacher way of talking, and these guys would sit there, and they'd look blitzed, you know? They didn't, they just--but they were always telling me, the white people who were in charge of stuff, were always telling me how much they liked my [paternal] uncle Roy [Wilkins]. Well, of course, he talked the kind of English language that they understood, and he was an elegant, polished Northern person, but he had to be polite. You know, he and Whitney [M. Young] and those guys, they all had to be polite when they came. The guys who did the gut fighting were the guys like Bill Taylor, Carl Holman, Lisle Carter, Ed Sylvester and me and Ruby Martin--and we were the ones who were pounding away. But they knew they needed us because they knew that we knew things that they didn't know that they needed to know in terms of what had to be done. They didn't always want to listen to us, but they often--and there was a meeting one day after, you know, after John Lewis and those guys got smashed up at the Edmund Pettus Bridge down in Selma [Alabama, 7 Mar 1965]. Then the country went nuts, and everybody started demonstrating against the federal government. Johnson went out, "Why are they demonstrating against me? I did this, I did that, and the other thing." He was yelling and hollering, and then he convened a big meeting of the civil rights people, and I won't go through the whole dynamics, but at the end I really ripped into Vice President [Hubert] Humphrey who was running the meeting. And I got really angry because he said that you know--just bought [J. Edgar] Hoover's crap that these people were--there was Communist [political party] inspiration in what they're doing. I said, "What are you talking about, Communist inspiration? That is wrong. You go to Selma [Alabama]. I was in Selma last week. I saw it. You don't have to have no Communist tell you that you've got no plumbing, that you got--that your streets aren't paved, that you got no sewage. No Communists need to tell you that. These people can think. They can see. They know they get gypped, and they know. They know they know that things have to change." I didn't say Communists. I said, "Yes, sir, you did," and I said, "Now, you--what we can do, we can just--what we need to do is right now send up a bill." The Attorney General, Nick Katzenbach, said, "Oh, well, we got this (unclear) do this needlepoint." I said forget that. Just as Secretary Wirth (ph) said, "Send up a bill. Send it up now. Say it's right. Say it's needed." You can see that these many years later I get worked up as I put myself back in that moment. They got to the White House, counsel was sitting there and said, "Well, want to sum up, Lee [White]?" He said, "I'm gonna go and tell the President what has happened here, and what else is there to say except what Roger said?" And a couple days later the President stood up in the Rose Garden [White House, Washington, D.C.] and said essentially what they wrote for him, and it had a lot of what I had said in it. So but that's what we did inside. And we took--before I got there, we had a demonstration against [U. S. Attorney General] Bobby [Robert] Kennedy, against you know--and we took, you took leave, but you went out, and boy, you marched. And you marched against the [United States] Justice Department, and you stood there and you said, "You got a lily-white department, and you gotta change it." And Bobby came out, and he was mad, and he tried to tell us all that he was doing and blah, blah and boo, boo, boo. We did that. That was before the March on Washington [28 Aug 1963]. Story_ID: 15369 Speaker 1: The issue for me inside the government, there was a moment when I was going to disappear into the bureaucracy very early on. When my boss [Fowler Hamilton] at AID [Agency for International Development] was leaving, and I thought I was going to sink into the bureaucracy never to be heard from again. And I thought President [John F.] Kennedy was really slow and lousy on civil rights. And I had been bugging my friend at the White House and just telling him, "This guy is terrible, blahdiddy, blahdiddy, blahdiddy, blahdiddy, blah." And Jimmy [James] Baldwin would write something, you know, 'The Fire Next Time.' I'd say, "Give this to the President." You've gotta read this stuff, you know. I loved Jimmy. I just loved him. Anyway, so finally when I was going to disappear, I was telling this guy just all this stuff. So he said, "Look, Roger." He said, "I understand your passion, but I don't understand the issues the way you do. But if you will write it in a memo, I will give it to the President." I said, "You will?" He said, "Yeah." So I then had to think about this memo because I thought, "Oh, my, you know, I've got this future ahead of me." And I thought, "What the hell are you here for? What is the point, if you're not going to speak for the people who--what is the point of being a lucky Negro if you're not going to speak for the people who can't speak for themselves? You're here because they gotta have some colored people here. You've got to speak for them." And so I wrote a blistering memo about President Kennedy's shortfalls, and I made some suggestions about what a civil rights bill oughta look like. And some of that made its way--I mean some of it looked like parts of it survived into the law that finally was proposed. But I also blasted him for not having enough blacks on the White House staff. And I said, you know, "You talk about all these agencies gotta hire black people, blah, blah, blah, blah." I said, "Everybody can look and see it's a joke over here. You've got one black guy, and he's a token, and everybody is so--what is the--just phony." So the White House comes with a guy named Lee White, a wonderful guy. He calls me over, and he looks at me and says, "Do you really think that President Kennedy doesn't care about civil rights?" I said, "Yeah." Because the thing about writing that memo is, I'll tell you, I asked myself the question at that point that you can never answer negatively. Are you a man or a piece of [expletive]? Once you ask yourself that question, then you've gotta go be a man, right? And so I never flinched after that really. I mean, it was--you've gotta be faithful to Harriet Tubman. You've gotta be faithful to Jack [Jackie Robinson]. You've gotta be faithful to those black people who don't have any voice. That's why you're here. That's your purpose, and I never changed that the whole time I was in the government. So although people who used to say, "Oh, he's a spy, he's this, he's that," I mean I knew it was just partly their anger, partly they didn't know, but I can't go out and explain myself to everybody on the street. All I could do was to live my life the way I believed it should be lived. And there were many other things that I thought were things that were useful, but in the end there was the one great thing. Poor People's Campaign came. Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was by now dead. Andy [Andrew Young] and the rest of those guys were just splattered. The only guy who really had energy and had the stuff together was Jesse [Jackson], and he's running, you know. Jesse doesn't ever stop so there came a little infrastructure that grew up from inside the government--there was Carl Holman--a wonderful, wonderful man, one of my dearest friends--Lisle Carter, Ed Sylvester, and Marian Wright Edelman who was around, not with CDS [Children's Defense Fund]. She was just around, and we would go at night. The rest of us were in the government. We'd go at night, and we'd advise them how to do it, and then the government--the next day we would receive the stuff that we had suggested, and then we would--but in the end there was going to be a massacre on the Mall [Washington, D.C.]. I mean because the longer they stayed, the more evil the park police became, and they were the least well-trained police, and they were pretty racist, and we just said there was gonna--it was clear. And the people inside the place were just going--they are just so we had to figure out a way to negotiate it so that everybody--they could get out, save face, and I did. I took risks, could've been killed, but everybody--it ended peacefully. Nobody got killed. The movement got some victory. And I remember I went back to the Department of Justice after that, and everybody had a beer, and [Attorney General] Ramsey [Clark] said, "I'm gonna have a beer with Roger. You saved this town today." And that was nice. That was nice, and the other thing that you say well, did I get something out of that? Andy once told me, he said you know, you know, he said, "Roger, you're the civil rights movement. Martin and I always say you're the leader of the civil rights movement inside the government." That's nice. Story_ID: 15370 Speaker 1: Did you like L.B.J. [President Lyndon B. Johnson] better than [President John F.] Kennedy because people--you know, it would come out--was he--or were they both just the same, and he was? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. I didn't know Kennedy really. I met him once. Speaker 1: But I'm talking about maybe the administrations. Speaker 2: Well, the administrations were similar. I mean it was just an extension, but look, Kennedy didn't have the passion. Kennedy was a rich, spoiled kid. Now it turned out that he had some real guts, and he was a better president than you would expect. I mean he was a playboy. I mean now he did go to the [United States] Army and the [United States] Navy, and he was a hero. When--the thing about Kennedy was, when he was called upon, he could rise to the occasion. But mainly he was around, you know, being a playboy. And he was good-looking and rich, and you know. What the hell did he know about black people? I mean black people didn't go to Hyannis [Massachusetts]. Black people weren't playing touch football with him in the Harvard Yard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--I mean or in Palm Beach [Florida]. He didn't understand us, and he said to one of his friends, "The poor bastards." I mean that's how he viewed us. And Jack, you know, Roosevelt Robinson and Doris Nixon in '60 [1960] and Harry, told me this story, Belafonte--did Belafonte tell you this story? All right, well, I'm not gonna. Speaker 1: No, but go on, go on, tell the story. Speaker 2: So Harry says that everybody said to Jack, "Well, why did you endorse [Richard] Nixon?" He said, "Well, I went and saw Kennedy, and he could never look me in the eye. And I went to see Nixon, and he looked me in the eye, and he told"--well, you know, Nixon loved athletics, and he had grown up in southern California, and Jack had grown up in southern California so they had this wonderful conversation. And so this story got back. Louie Martin told Kennedy the story so then Harry goes to see him, Kennedy. And Harry said, "Well, look here, President Kennedy, and he'd go here. Look here." The President's just diving around for his eyes. So Kennedy had to learn. Now he learned. He made some wonderful civil rights speeches after, you know, Mississippi and Medgar [Evers's assassination] and the little girls got blown up [Sixteen Street Baptist Church Bombing, Montgomery, Alabama]. He finally got there, but it was slow. Story_ID: 15371 Speaker 1: [President Lyndon B.] Johnson didn't have to learn. He grew up hungry and poor, and he knew hungry and poor, and he really cared. Now he did say--he did--he did use the word 'nigger,' you know. We all know from the tapes. As somebody who listens to tapes all the time told me the other day, depending on who he was talking to, he had three words for black people. If he was talking to black people or liberals, he would talk about Negroes. If he was talking to the general run of southerners, he'd about nigras. If he was talking to some of his southern pals, he said niggers. But the fact is he cared. The fact is his heart was right. Now he got upset. He was so obsessed by that stupid [Vietnam] war of his that finally he got pulled off, and he got really upset about the cities, and I think [J. Edgar] Hoover got in his head about Communists [political party] in the cities and so forth. So at the end he was churlish, but there was no question that his heart was right. And I'll tell you in the last--and I didn't talk to him. I got so mad at him, I wanted to get out of that government. And I tried to quit, and [Attorney General] Ramsey [Clark] who is my dear friend, said, "Look, just stay till the end of the administration. I need you, and you are my friend here, and I just need you. And if you leave, they'll just appoint somebody terrible, and that just will add to my problems." So I stayed, but I didn't talk to him anymore after he wouldn't really support the Kerner Commission report [of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, 1968]. I blasted him in the newspaper, made the front page of the 'New York Times,' and I didn't talk to him and he didn't talk to me. Many years later in the summer, I think, of 1972, I think, I was in New York [New York], and I was dragooned to a party given by a woman named Mollie Parnis, who was a dress designer and made dresses for Mrs. [Claudia Taylor] Johnson and made dresses for Mrs. [Mamie Geneva Doud] Eisenhower, a fairly big-time society lady. And she said that they--Mollie wanted me to come to this party, and I said I don't want to go. Anyway, I go to the party. I'm just dragged virtually off the street by Jacob Javits's wife, Marian [Javits]. So I go, but the only reason I went is because they said Johnson was there. Now I haven't talked to Johnson--this is the summer of '72 [1972]--I haven't talked to Johnson since the spring of '68 [1968] and haven't seen him since then. So, but I can't resist. Well, he was much older then. His hair was very white, and I thought of him as a very old man. Well, I think he died when he was younger than I am, but he looked really old. But he saw me, and he's talking to a bunch of celebrities. He's talking to Barbara Walters and Walter Cronkite and that British guy who does the T.V. interviews, David Frost, and Mrs. Johnson, and a couple of others. And I was just standing there smoking a cigarette, and Mollie pulls him away from a story. And he looks at me and says, "Well, I know, I know," and he goes and grabs me. He was taller than I was, and he gives me a bear hug, and all of a sudden he's bending me back, and I've got this cigarette, and I'm holding it like this so I won't burn him. And then he starts Johnson's normal stuff. He goes to lying, and he's telling all these people what a great man I was and how I saved the nation again and again and again, and this is one of native America's greatest heroes. And I thought, even though I was really uncomfortable, "Don't stop. Oh, that sounds so good." (laughter) But so then we go off in a corner, and we talk, and so he asks me what I'm doing. I tell him I'm writing for the 'Washington Post' and this and that. And I said, "Well, what are you doing, Mr. President?" He said, "Well, nothing. I'm not doing anything." I said, "Well, why don't you make a big civil rights speech, you know? Everything's going backwards now, [President Richard] Nixon and everything." "But would anybody listen to me?" he says. And I said, "Of course, they'd listen to you. You've still got the second biggest voice in the country. Sure, you should go and make this--you should really make a big speech." He said, "You really think I should?" I said, "Oh, yeah. I really do believe you should." Now I did not like [paternal uncle] Roy Wilkins's wife [Aminda Wilkins] one bit, and she didn't like me one bit, okay. I did not like her, and I ain't gonna change my mind just 'cause she's no longer with us. Anyway, Johnson says to me, "Well, Roger, who should I talk to about that?" I said, "Why don't you talk to my uncle Roy? You guys are the same generation. You like each other. You trust each other." "That's a good idea," he said. "I'm gonna talk to Roy. I'm gonna call him up, and I'm gonna talk to him." I said, "Good, and then you make that speech." He said, "Okay." So I leave a little while later because I just went there to see him. He's way across the room. I cannot get across the room. He's leaning on the piano, and I see him. And he's leaning, and I wave, and he just smiles the sweetest smile and wiggles his fingers at me. And that's the last time I ever saw him. About a week later Roy's wife, Minnie [Aminda Wilkins], calls me and says, (imitating her voice) "Well, your uncle and I are going to the ranch." I said, "Well, what ranch is that, Aunt Minnie?" She says, "The ranch. We're going on the--President Johnson and Lady Bird [First Lady Claudia Taylor Johnson] have invited us down to the ranch." I said, "Well, that's nice." I never said--you know, I never said anything. And so they went. And my uncle came back, and the next time, he said, "You know, Johnson is gonna make a speech. He's gonna make a big speech on civil rights." I said, "Really?" He said, "Yeah, and he wanted me to help him think it through, and we'd spent a lot of time." I said, "Well, whatever possessed him?" He said, "He was just thinking about it, and he thought that this is what he ought to do." I said, "Isn't that wonderful?" Speaker 2: He never knew. Did he know? Speaker 1: No, my uncle didn't know, and I wasn't gonna tell him. And Johnson made that speech at the dedication of his library [Austin, Texas]. He had serious, serious heart disease. He was just popping nitroglycerin pills. His wife did not want him to do it. He made this wonderful civil rights speech. Six weeks later he was dead so that's my L.B.J. [Lyndon B. Johnson]. He cared. Wrong as wrong could be about Vietnam, and he lied to the country, and he should have been driven from office. But in my view he was the best President that black people ever had. Story_ID: 15372 Speaker 1: I mean how do you get to the 'Washington Post' in the first place? Speaker 2: I wrote--I was at the Ford Foundation and did not like it. Speaker 1: You went from government to the Ford Foundation? Speaker 2: Right, and I wrote a piece. I went to the Gridiron dinner, a big, fancy journalistic dinner in 1970 as a guest of Tom Wicker of the 'New York Times,' and I could not believe this thing. It was all men all dressed in their white ties. This is in 1970 after the whole big Civil Rights Movement. I'm sitting there, and, it's supposed to be the men of Washington, D.C., and I'm looking around there, and aside from me, there's only one other black man, and that's the mayor of D.C. [Walter Washington]. I could not believe it. And then [President Richard] Nixon and [Vice President Spiro] Agnew played Dixie, and everybody thinks it's funny as hell. So I wrote a piece about it. You're not supposed to--oh, man, I mean, they hated me. But it blew the place open. They had--the day after that, they had, they got blacks in it, and they got women in it and all this stuff. Do you think anybody at the Gridiron Club ever, from that day in 1970 to this, has ever acknowledged me and said, "Hey, Roger, you know, you really did it?" Not a soul, not a soul. And I never went back to the Gridiron dinner until--never was invited until about two years ago, but that's a good thing I did. Story_ID: 15373 Speaker 1: In the government, there was one other thing that happened that I think is really significant. When I had this conversation with Lee White at the [United States] Justice Department, the fact is my memorandum ripped [U. S. Attorney General Robert] Bobby Kennedy's Justice Department, and Bobby just didn't like me anymore after that. He told everybody I was brash and green and didn't know what I was talking about. But Lee asked me, "Well, now what should we do about the White House staff?" I said, "Hire some people." And I told him where to hire people. And he said, "Give me some names." Well, the short of a long story is that that's how Clifford Alexander first came to the U.S. government because I recommended him to the White House. I told them where to put him on McGeorge Bundy's staff. And then Clifford wasn't going to do it and I called Clifford up and urged him to do it. Well, the next time around when the Democrats [political party] came, Clifford became Secretary of the Army. He opened up the general's list. [U. S. Secretary of State] Colin Powell was on the list. Colin got to be a general so I figure I'm Colin's grandfather. (laughter) I'm not Colin's grandfather, but you never know what leads to what to what. So when you asked were there things in the U.S. government, despite the fact that it was very hard and despite the fact that it was searing and despite the fact that some days I wanted to be a guy on the street with the dashiki screaming and hollering and leading the people--despite all of that, you had a chance to speak for the people. And you were able to make change. Speaker 2: And it's important to have people inside, too--the right people. Speaker 1: Yeah, you can't--the hard part is the institutions are always trying to co-opt you. And you really have to have an anchor. And it pulls you apart because this is a very seductive society, and it has all kinds of stuff to give you. And you have to be willing to give up stuff. Well, when you're giving up stuff when you're 32 and 34 and 36 and 38 and 42 and you're seeing other people not giving up stuff, it's hard. I mean, you know, I'm not a man of steel. There were certain things that I wish I could have had. But in the end I am so glad that I did it the way I did it. And I did it in institutions, too. I did it at the Ford Foundation. I did it at the 'Washington Post.' I did at the 'New York Times.' A lot of people say, I'm sure, I'm crazy. A lot of white people have written me off and said that's just a bad guy. We made a mistake for hiring him. Story_ID: 15374 Speaker 1: I had a conversation once with [President] Ronald Reagan. He didn't like something I'd written. Essentially I said he was a racist. I said his policy on South Africa was racist. He called me up. I was by then gone away to finish my first book, and I was just married, twenty years ago [1981], and we were up at my parents' summer place in Michigan. And I'm talking to Reagan. He called. I'm talking to him. And first he tells me he's not a racist and he used to play football with black people and so forth. And I said, "Okay, Mr. President. Now can we talk about your tax bill?" Meanwhile, my wife [Patricia King], my new wife, was standing right there listening to the whole thing. And so I tell him the tax bill is wrong. It's giving money to rich people, and the poor people need it, and he really oughta--you know, education, employment, you know, everything you'd say to this guy in the White House now [George W. Bush]. And that the rich people don't need the money. The poor people do. You're gonna give a tax break to us. We don't need the tax break, and we're not even rich, you know. And I really pressed him. We finished the conversation, and my new wife looked at me. And she's a very skeptical, independent person, and she's a not a sucker or a pushover in any stretch of the imagination, I want to tell you. And she looked at me, and she said with wonderment on her face, "And there you were talking to the President of the United States, and you didn't give up one inch of your honor." Now, your wife couldn't say a nicer thing to you. And I've tried to--I realized that I've tried to live my life where it doesn't matter who you're talking to or what they've got to bribe you with. You can't give up even an inch of your honor. Story_ID: 15375 Speaker 1: So you get to the--you write this? Speaker 2: I wrote that thing [article about the Gridiron Dinner of 1970], and then they [the 'Washington Post'] asked me to come. They asked me, and ultimately I decided I didn't like the Post--I mean the Ford Foundation, and I wanted to come. And so I did, and I got there in February of--and I went, in part, because of my father [Earl Wilkins]. And I got there in February, and in June [1972] the Watergate burglary occurred, and -- Speaker 1: Watergate. Speaker 2: The Watergate burglary, and I was a lawyer. I'd been in the [United States] Justice Department. I knew the government. I knew prosecutorial things. So it just kind of fell to me to write the editorials on that. And the thing just got bigger and bigger, and I kept on writing editorials. And so in this weird kind of way this just fell into my lap, and when I hadn't been a journalist for a year even. And I just kept, you know--[President Richard] Nixon and those guys kept covering up, and I kept on writing these editorials full of questions, boom, boom, boom. Well, do you say this? Dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. It was good. Speaker 1: Well, what role then were Ber -- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) They were the reporters. Speaker 1: They're the reporters, but you're handling it from the editorial side? Speaker 2: Right. There are two different operations. They--you know, they were guys I came to know and who became friends, but I knew--well, I knew Carl [Bernstein] a little. I didn't know [Robert] Bob [Woodward] at all, and then we became friends, and I respected their work and liked it. And they respected my work and liked it. And Herblock [Herbert Lawrence Block] also was cited for the work that won the Pulitzer [Prize] for the Post that he did for his cartoons. Story_ID: 15376 Speaker 1: I have one question to ask about this. I mean journalists are--you know, they tend to be--feel that you have to have gone to journalism school. And you did--but you did have a law degree, but the fact--I mean there are not that many blacks also that have sat on editorial boards so I'm just saying was this a friendly environment you came to be in? Speaker 2: In the beginning. First of all, you know, these editorial boards in the 1970s they needed blacks. And since they hadn't hired blacks to--usually the people who write editorials are people who have been journalists for a long time. They hadn't had enough in the pipeline, and so they were looking for blacks who knew--had public--you know, they were looking for a black guy who knew public issues and who could write. I could write. I knew public issues. So--and, you know, other people had been hired who weren't strictly journalists. It was really a friendly environment, and I had some friends who I just loved. Herblock [Herbert Lawrence Block] was one of them and a fellow named [Robert] Bob Asher who wrote editorials on local stuff was just a great, great pal. I had other good friends on the paper, many good friends on the paper. Ben Bradlee is still a good friend, but ultimately I came to have a very hard time with the editor of the editorial page and his deputy. And I just didn't--I didn't think it was worth it staying there. And people at the 'New York Times' had made it clear that they wanted me so I went in. This is--I mean the misunderstandings of white people about black people are endless. I went in. By this time I'd done my conversation with the Times. And I went in, and I told Phil Geyelin, the editor, and his deputy, Meg Greenfield, that I was leaving. And she said--Meg looked at me and said, "You're leaving?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "But what will you do?" I said, "I'll find something," like this (with an emotionless face). "I'll be all right." But what will you do without our paternalistic hand on your pointy little head? (laughter) Story_ID: 15377 Speaker 1: You know, this was--going, though, on the journalistic side was an important turning point, though, in your career in some respects in that was you starting to commentate. Speaker 2: Well, that's right. Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I mean it's--you know, and that's what you've doing really ever since, I mean. Speaker 2: Right, right, but it was a psychic turning point, too, because I think psychically going back--going into journalism brought me into emotional contact with my father, [Earl Wilkins]. And I went through then this awful period of depression and grieving and self-medicating with Scotch [whiskey] and bourbon and whatever else was handy. And--but I think that if I had not been able to come to terms with my father, I would never have come out as a whole person. And however painful that was, I think it was essential for some healing. And I could finally then say, as I have said to you, I have missed him every day without bleeding. Because I couldn't even say it. I didn't know it. I didn't understand it and having in a sense--and grieving for this young man full of promise unfulfilled. As well as for myself fatherless but, in a sense, is a journalist and then succeeding beyond anything that he could have imagined. In a sense I brought him into me and in a way that he would have been inside me had he lived. But so going into journalism was central, and of course, it had all these other offshoots as a public policy analyst and so forth. Story_ID: 15378 Speaker 1: It was--I would say it was from about 1970--it was about 10 years, 1970 to 1980. When I married Patricia [King], I was coming out of it. And it was really terrible. I mean it was painful depression. It was the kind of--it was at one time suicidal. I mean it was such psychic--I can't even remember it anymore. But it was--there were days I didn't even know how I was going to make it to bedtime. And it sounds, you know, almost like it's self-dramatizing to say it, but that's how it was. Speaker 2: Did you--what brought you out, do you think? Some people never. Speaker 1: I think that--I think marriage and stable, good love and then a new child [Elizabeth Wilkins], a new child to love. And those were the things I can identify, but I think, internally, I'd gone through the process, a process that ate it up. Because also, you see, I expended an extraordinary amount of psychic energy in the sixties [1960s]. That job [in the Justice Department] just tore everything out of me. And then it was like Sisyphus, you know. Every day you did something and every day you woke up and the black people in those communities were still as poor, and their schools were just as bad, and their lack of access to health care was--and this was--these were my issues. This was the stuff of my life, and it was ripping me apart, and I couldn't fix it. And we would push and push and push, and it would get a little better, but it was still too little. And I did want--I did have these fierce feelings that I wanted to be out there with the black community and just do it and not have to deal with these white people. But of course, people--the movement needed people with all kinds of skills, and I had this skill with white people partially because of the high school [Creston High School, Grand Rapids, Michigan] I went to because I wasn't scared of white people. There was not--there's not a fiber in me to think there's a master race, and that was a great asset for the black community when I was inside the White House, inside the Attorney General's Office, or wherever I was because I never had to blink because I thought I was speaking to a human being who was my superior just because he had white skin or she had white skin. So--but that all took a giant toll. Story_ID: 15379 Speaker 1: And so in 1980, are you still at the 'New York Times'? Speaker 2: No, I left the '[New York] Times.' I did my usual thing. I was the first black on the editorial board of the 'Times,' and I was the first black columnist of the 'Times,' and then there was a lawsuit that had been started by some lower level employees at the 'Times,' and they wanted the writers to join because it was a racial discrimination suit. And I looked at the issues, and I was the highest paid black in the place, I was the black star. And I said, "Well, they're right. And they're getting gypped. I don't care how much. I should be on their side. I should be with them." And so I joined the lawsuit. And they finally had me--and then the people who ran the paper figured out--well, they were going to make me an editor, and they offered me the biggest job that any black had ever had, which was to be editor of 'Week In Review.' They'd never had a black at that level. I turned them down. I said, "I came to journalism. I've been an administrator. I came to journalism to write, not to administer." But, see, they're gonna give me that job, and then they're gonna turn around and say, "How can you say we're discriminating because Roger has that job?" But when I turned it down, they got really mad at me. And then I testified, a whole day of testimony, about how racist the head of the newsroom was, the executive editor, Abe Rosenthal. And then they settled because I was told that [James] Scotty Reston, a great journalist who was by then a member of the board of the 'Times,' read my testimony and said, "Oh, my God. We cannot have this man give this testimony in open court," and apparently had the rest of the board read my testimony, and subsequently they settled. Meanwhile, of course, I'm still at the mercy of this guy I've said all these bad things to because he's my boss, and of course, he's making things very bad for me so once I testified, then I knew I had to leave. Story_ID: 15380 Speaker 1: So I wrote a terrific--at some point or another I wrote a column about the Pope. The Pope came to New York [New York], and everybody ran and watched him every place, and I didn't. But then he was going to be in Harlem [New York], and I said, "Man, you will never see a Pope in Harlem in your lifetime." So instead of going on the entourage, I just got in the subway, went up to 135th Street and 8th Avenue and watched the Pope as he came along--I think it was 135th, 136th, 137th, something like that--and watched the Pope as he came up. And I wrote about what the people--how the people regarded the Pope and what they said about the Pope and what it looked like as this little white figure came up the street and some reflections on my childhood in Harlem. And I wrote the column, and it was one of those that just spoke to people, baboom, and even the editor of the opposition paper, the 'Daily News,' called me up and said, "That's a hell of a column. That's some real writing. That's some breaking journalism." So I said to myself, "Well, you're forty-seven years old. New York is getting too much with you. Your son [David Wilkins] needs you. You want to finish your book. You're never gonna--you may write some columns that are as good as this, but you'll never write anything that's better than this. What's the point? This guy ['New York Times' executive editor Abe Rosenthal] is gonna be here til you're fifty-five. If you work for this guy another eight years--because he was ten years older than me and he would have to retire when he was sixty-five-- If you work for this guy another eight years, you will either be crazy, totally crazy, or totally alcoholic, or both. What's the point?" So I quit, and then shortly thereafter I met Patricia [King], and we got married, and we took a Caribbean honeymoon on the first installment of my settlement from the 'New York Times' [employee racial discrimination] suit. Story_ID: 15381 Speaker 1: When did you start teaching? Speaker 2: 1988. Speaker 1: What are the important things that happened in this last period? I wanted to talk a little bit about the book, but anyway. Speaker 2: I have a baby child [Elizabeth Wilkins] who was born who is now seventeen [years old]. She was an academic superstar. She had her choices of colleges. She's a wonderful human being, and she's going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] next fall. But before she goes to Yale--she's going to Yale by way of Senegal so she's gonna get some Africa and her French teacher is Senegalese and he's taking a group of students to Senegal. I was the leader of the Free South Africa Movement, which finally was--now I had my dream. I was one of the black people on the street. There was a black movement, and it was--we weren't responsible to anybody and any bureaucracy, and we did what we wanted to do. And we helped pry open the U.S. [United States] government and change, and we had--there's no question but that we sped up the process. And so that was something that I'm proud of with Randall Robinson and Mary Frances Berry and Bill Lucy and Sylvia Hill, and those are just comrades of--you know, we just had a great time. And then I was coordinator of Nelson Mandela's trip to the United States in 1990. Harry Belafonte, old ugly Harry, was the host, and he asked me to coordinate it for--and so I did, and I got to know then Mr. Mandela and his then wife, Winnie [Mandela], whom I liked a lot. I don't say she didn't do the things they said she did. On the trip to the United States she was fabulous. And he was, of course, just--it was just one of the great honors of my lifetime to be able to serve him and to serve his cause and help present him to the American people and help him raise the consciousness about the ANC [African National Congress] and also help to raise money for the ANC. So I--that was just a wonderful opportunity for me. Story_ID: 15382 Speaker 1: I have taught happily and successfully [since 1988]. I served a term as--a five-year term as a Trustee of the University of the District of Columbia, and I think we did some very good things in saving and trying to improve the university. In that twenty-year period I published an autobiography ['A Man's Life: An Autobiography] which Jimmy [James] Baldwin reviewed. Talk about highs in your lifetime. Jimmy reviewed it for the 'Washington Post,' and these immortal lines--if I was going to have a gravestone, which I won't have, but I'd put this on my gravestone: "Go down and loot your nearest bookstore." I love Jimmy. I loved him. I'd started reading him when I was a young lawyer, and I just read him and read him and read him, and I just--and then I got to know him, and he was my friend, and I just - that was joyous. And you know, I've done--for seven years I was Chair of the Board of the Africa-America Institute that does human resources development in Africa. I'm the publisher of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] magazine, the 'Crisis,' and I think the magazine is really getting better, and we're really working hard on it. And I have just recently, six months ago, accepted an appointment on the District of Columbia School Board where my passion is improving the education of poor, black kids which is where I came in with Thurgood [Marshall] back in 1955 when I worked for him. But it is a real passion, and it is the newest frontier, the real frontier of the struggle. We've just got to open up the opportunities that are clogging these kids. Story_ID: 15383 Speaker 1: I mean when you see these homeless, black men wandering the streets of America's cities, they're the ghosts of slavery, and it's not over. The struggle is not over. These men are not, you know--they are disabled by lack of opportunity and being born into families that aren't families. I have a good friend, Sam Proctor, who was the pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church [Harlem, New York] after Adam [Clayton] Powell died. And when Sam was retiring, I said, "Well, Sam, what did you learn from seventeen years of pastoring in Harlem?" Sam said to me, "Roger, babies born without families." He said, "You know, a human being born without a family is like a human being born without skin." You know, you're just vulnerable to everything in the world. You have nothing with which to defend yourself, to fend it off so all the worst things in the world come to these kids, and the girls end up pregnant and young, and the young men end up in prison or dead. And we've gotta change that. We've gotta change it. And I have two things that animate me when I think about it now. One is Harriet Tubman, and the other is Jack [Jackie Robinson] and Jack's autobiography, 'I Never Had It Made.' 'I Never Had It Made' because you don't have it made if--you can't make a separate peace, you know? You can't. It is morally impermissible for a black person to make a separate peace as long as there are black people who are still being injured. And I would expand it to any poor people, but my fierce drive is for poor black people. And then, you know, there are all these people who say well, you know, man, I just wish--I was born too late. If I'd been with Ms. Tubman, I'd have helped her with the Underground Railroad. If I'd been with old Fred [Frederick] Douglass, I'd have helped him. Sojourner [Truth], I'd have helped her, and on and on. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois and [Dr.] Martin [Luther King Jr.]. If I had only been with Martin, I'd have been there down in the South." Hell, they did what they were supposed to do. They ain't here no more. We're here. And there are black people in need right this minute. So don't be talking about something back there. And there's a final thing that drives me. In the beginning of our conversation you asked me about my slave ancestors, and I think of my great-great-grandmother whose first name I don't even know, cuddling her little boy and saving his soul, the man who became my great-grandfather [Asbury Wilkins]. Deep down in slavery, holding it together, honor and hope and some kind of dignity that they passed on to me. And I honor and respect what they did and the contributions they made to this country, to its wealth, to its strength. And to the hold they put on the country and the way they shaped the country with their strength and their belief in their human efficacy. I couldn't be without them, and so I try to conduct my life as if someday I'm gonna have to meet them, and they're gonna have to look at me, and they're gonna say, "Boy, what did you do with your freedom?" And I'm gonna be able to answer them. I'm gonna live my life. I've always tried to live my life so that I could give them a answer, "I did my best." So I'm on the [District of Columbia] School Board, and this is the right thing for me to be doing as I finish the seventh decade of my life and start the eighth. Story_ID: 15384 Speaker 1: But this one just goes to the black community. I mean I know you're committed, and you've shown a whole lifetime of being committed. What are your fears for the black community? Speaker 2: Oh, that's easy. My fear is that we are creating a caste of black untouchables. You could see it in this city [Washington, D.C.] when opportunities opened up in the government, and there became a black middle class. and they went away to Prince George's County [Maryland]. And with it they took all the resources that it took to make stable neighborhoods so neighborhoods like Shaw [Washington, D.C.] which had been wonderful now just had the churches. They come back on Sunday to go to church, but then they go on back with their money and stuff, and they live over there across the county away from the poor people. And of course, the white people, lots of the white people have written them off. I mean, there's, you know, a lot of honorable white people that are still engaged, but a lot of white people just written them off. And the conservatives say, "Well, it's their fault, you know. They lack moral fiber, and they're lazy, and they just want to lay around and drink and have sex all day, and let's just forget them." So--and then you've got kids coming along who are not like my daughter [Elizabeth Wilkins] who is growing up in a household with a civil rights veteran as a father, kids who are growing up, and they go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and places like that, and they think they're there just because they're smart. They don't know that people struggled to pry those places open for them. And they don't know that they're supposed to give back. So they get out of school, and they do just like their white counterparts do. They go to the accounting firms and the law firms and the Wall Street firms. They sell their souls for big, fat salaries. And then they get a mortgage, and then they gotta have more fat salary, and then they get kids in private school, and they gotta get more fat salaries. And their lives and their attitudes don't differ very much from those of their white counterparts. And you don't see them in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or the Urban League even, and you certainly don't see them in the neighborhood associations, and you may not even see them in the black churches back in the neighborhoods. So we could really create a caste of black untouchables. That's my fear. That's all. And we are parting. The country is moving away, and we're like a great, big ocean liner going this way, and they're like a little rowboat and our lines to them are fraying and fraying, and that's my fear. Speaker 1: So I understand that, but do you think then--I mean what are the hopes for the black race then, if that is happening? I mean that's the fear and that, but what--you know, anything that we've done a lot in this country has been based on numbers. So I'm just asking what--you know, there is the class system. Speaker 2: Well, if you're asking what is the hope. Speaker 1: Um hmm. What is the hope? Speaker 2: Struggle. That's always been the hope. People had struggles when it looked the most hopeless. I mean there were abolitionists back in the eighteenth century. Now they died, you know? They didn't see their idea come true. There were slaves, black slaves, who were struggling for freedom back at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century. There are white abolitionists who didn't see their thing come true. There's [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois who worked and didn't see his thing come true. But we have--the struggle has continued. My hope is simply this: that just because I can't see the end of it in my day, who am I? I'm just somebody living this long in the scope of history. My job is to do what I can while I'm here to make things better and to keep the flame up there. You ask me why--you want to ask me why I come to do The HistoryMakers? Because if there is a place where you can keep the flame alive and where you can give flesh to--years after we're gone--give flesh to the aspirations of these people who are around here who did these things so the young people who are not yet born get a sense of what that torch was that's being passed to them. That's why I have spent the afternoon with you, as you have run around here beating these children in this house who are trying just to be children (laughter). Story_ID: 15385 Speaker 1: You know, you've talked a lot of about your father [Earl Wilkins] during this interview, and I can't help but think about how you said your favorite memory of his was you sitting on the couch. Speaker 2: We were sitting--he was sitting--we were sitting in chairs. Speaker 1: Chairs, together. Speaker 2: In the living room. Speaker 1: And I wonder, you know, what he would think of you now if he saw you because so much of it has been you thinking of him, but he must be - he would have been? Speaker 2: He would have despaired during the darkest days, but I guess that--I guess that, I guess I would hope that in these last days, these last years, these last twenty years, that he would have said, "My boy's okay." Speaker 1: He might have not despaired. He just may have known that you were hurting. That's all. Speaker 2: That's also possible. Story_ID: 15386 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Struggle. I mean my children are my most precious legacy, and they are wonderful people, all three of them. I have a daughter, Amy [Wilkins], who is now forty-one [years old] who is a fierce and effective advocate for better education for poor children in an organization called The Education Trust. I have a son, David [Wilkins], who is in television and is a terrifically hard worker and a wonderful guy. And I have this little child [Elizabeth Wilkins] who is about to go to college. And they're all terrific human beings and I just adore them, and they're funny, and they're lively, and they're idealistic, and they're decent. But I would simply hope that if anybody remembers my life that it would be simply an addition to that part of the black memory that was formed by people like Harriet Tubman and Jack Roosevelt Robinson. This was another guy who believed in struggle and who believed he never had it made, and the job was to keep on struggling till you couldn't struggle no more and to hand the torch to somebody else. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Story_ID: 15387 Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins (right) with students at George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, 2000. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15388 Speaker 1: This is Amy Wilkins at I suppose the age of about six. I see a tooth coming in. And it was here in Washington [D.C.]. She is my oldest child, and she is married now to an Episcopal priest here in Washington. And they have a son named Tyler Davenport who is my only grandchild to date. But Amy was a child of the Civil Rights Movement, and somebody asked her about vacations when she was young, and she said, "Daddy didn't take us to vacations. He took us to demonstrations." And I guess it stuck because Amy has been the ablest education lobbyist in Washington. And she is now head of a nonprofit organization, The Trust for Early Childhood Education, funded by Pew Charitable Trusts. And she--it's to improve early childhood education for poor children. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins's daughter, Amy Wilkins at age six, Washington, D.C., ca. 1968. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15389 Speaker 1: This is my father. It's his graduation photo from the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] taken in 1926. His name was Earl Wilkins. He died in 1941 at the age of thirty-five. He was a journalist for the 'Kansas City Call', the black weekly in Kansas City [Missouri], and he was a superb journalist. Nancy Weiss, the Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] historian, wrote a book about black politics in the thirties [1930s] and cited the fact that a young journalist named E. W. Wilkins was the only black journalist who was able to get Franklin D. Roosevelt and his running mate, John Nance Garner, to say anything about race relations. He taught me a love of language, a love of reading, a love of writing. And although he's been dead now for more than sixty years, there's not a day that goes by that I don't think about him and that his influence on me is not manifested one way or another. Speaker 2: [Graduation photo of Roger Wilkins's father, Earl Wilkins, from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1926. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15390 Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my father [Earl Wilkins] and me in front of our house in Kansas City [Missouri] where we lived when I was a child. I would guess that this was probably taken in 1939 or 1940. I was then seven or eight years old. And it was shortly before my father's death. He's obviously on his way to work, and I'm obviously a little boy who's pleased to be standing next to his father. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins with his father, Earl Wilkins, Kansas City, Missouri, ca. 1939. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15391 Speaker 1: This picture is of my mother's side of the family. The person sitting in the front is my mother, Helen Natalie Jackson Wilkins Claytor. She was a widow for about three or four years after my father [Earl Wilkins] died. But in late 1940--I guess 1944 she married a physician named Robert Claytor who lived in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and we all moved there. He died in--oh, I guess it was about 1989. And this photograph was taken on the occasion of the dedication of a clinic in Grand Rapids in the low income section of town where he practiced medicine. And it was a clinic named for him. And the people behind my mother are my stepfather's niece Roberta Marsh on the left. And next to Roberta is me. And next to me is my sister, Judy, that is the daughter of Robert Claytor and my mother. And behind Judy is my nephew, Troy Peters. And next to Troy is his mother, my other sister, Sharon Peters. And next to Sharon is Roberta's husband, Hank Marsh, who is the former mayor of Saginaw, Michigan. And next to Hank is Margaret Woodbury, Dr. Margaret Woodbury, another one of my mother and my stepfather's nieces and Roberta's sister. My mother is ninety-five [years old] now. When she was a widow--she started out as a social worker in Trenton, New Jersey after she finished at the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] as a Phi Beta Kappa, but she soon moved to Kansas City [Missouri] to marry her college sweetheart, Earl Wilkins. And she worked for the segregated YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] in Kansas City. And after my father died, we moved to [Harlem] New York, and my mother created and headed the Race Relations Office of the National YWCA. And before it was safe to do so, she traveled many times to the South to do civil rights work in the early forties [1940s]. Subsequently, after she married my stepfather, she became a volunteer in the YWCA and soon became the first black to head the YWCA in Grand Rapids, Michigan, which was resisted strenuously by a lot of the white folks of the community. And then she went on to become a national officer of the Y[WCA], and finally in 1967--I believe it was '67--she was elected national President of the YWCA, the first black person to head that organization. And she headed it for two terms into the seventies [1970s]. I should say when she headed the Office of Civil Rights, or Office of Race Relations, she broke in a young woman into the race relations business. The young woman's name was Dorothy Height. And as I say, Mom is now ninety-five and lives in Grand Rapids in the house we moved into in 1944 with my sister, Judy, who is a nurse. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins (second from left) with his mother, Helen Natalie Jackson Wilkins Claytor, and his maternal relatives, Grand Rapids, Michigan, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15392 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife, Patricia King, and me celebrating our marriage in February 1981. This was a celebration in Norfolk, Virginia, her hometown. Patricia was born in segregation in Norfolk and spent all of her school years, kindergarten through high school, in a segregated school, in segregated schools. And she went to Wheaton College in Norton, Massachusetts. Her family had very limited resources, but her uncle, John Wood, put a second mortgage on the only piece of property they owned and made it possible for her to start school. And she went through with scholarships, and she was really the odd kid out as a Southerner and not knowing any white people and now being up North in a New England town. But she adjusted and ended up as the student body president or the president of the student government, I guess. After working in the State Department [United States Department of State] for three years, she decided she would go to law school. And she was admitted to [University of] Virginia [Charlottesville], [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor], and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and made the terrible mistake of not going to Michigan. Anyway, she worked in the government for a while at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and then at the [United States] Department then of HEW [Health, Education and Welfare] in the civil rights area. But then in about '73 [1973] or so she went to Georgetown [University] Law School [Washington, D.C.] to teach where she has taught ever since. And she's been there for about thirty years. Her expertise is biomedical ethics and domestic relations, and she is a person with many, many accomplishments, one of which is that she's one of the few lawyers in the National Academy of Sciences. She's in the Institute of Medicine there. This was taken at our marriage. She was almost thirty-nine [years old], and I was almost forty-nine. And in this marriage we have had one child [Elizabeth Wilkins] who is now nineteen, and she is a student at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], a sophomore at Yale, a wonderful person of whom we're very proud and we love very much. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins and his second wife, Patricia King, on their wedding day, Norfolk, Virginia, February, 1981. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15393 Speaker 1: This photograph obviously is taken in the [Lyndon B.] Johnson administration. I am being sworn in as Director of the United States Community Relations Service in the theater of the White House. The people in the picture are the Secretary of Commerce who is John T. Connor, who is administering the oath. Next to him, of course, is me. And in front of me is my daughter, Amy. And holding the Bible is my first wife, Eve Wilkins, Amy's mother. Behind Connor you can see a forehead. That's Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr., who was Undersecretary of Commerce. Behind me is Nicholas de Belleville Katzenbach, who was Attorney General of the United States at the time. And behind Eve, unmistakably, is Lyndon B. Johnson, the President of the United States. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins (center) is sworn in as Director of the United States Community Relations Service, Washington, D.C., January, 1966. Also in attendence is his first wife, Eve Wilkins, daughter, Amy Wilkins, and U.S. President Lyndon Baines Johnson (right). From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15394 Speaker 1: This is a White House [Washington, D.C.] reception honoring, I believe, Justice Thurgood Marshall. That man's name is Ralph Wittenberg who happened to be a neighbor of ours at the time, but I don't know how he happened to be invited. This--and that's a military aide. This is Eve Wilkins, my first wife, greeting the President--being greeted by the President. And there's [Lyndon B.] Johnson with his most sincere smile. Pretty young lady, he's always ready. The next back you see is me, having been greeted by the President and having his attention quickly turning to the better-looking part of that marriage. I don't know who this man is, but the taller African American man is Clifford L. Alexander, Jr., who was then an assistant to President Johnson in the White House. I don't know who this person is, but the woman is Adele Logan Alexander, Clifford's wife and the daughter of a very noted Harlem [New York] physician who paid me the first dollar I ever earned when they went on vacation and I walked their little Scottie. Dr. Logan also was almost a surrogate father to me and was doctor to about everybody I ever heard of. He was Martin [Luther] King's doctor. He was Whitney Young's doctor. He was Jackie Robinson's doctor. He was Duke Ellington's doctor. He was a sweet, wonderful, wonderful human being, and that's his only child, Adele. This woman with the blonde hair I do not recognize. And there is Thurgood Marshall. Now I assume that this was after he was elevated to the Supreme Court of the United States. He was virtually every relationship to me that you could have except blood relative. He was--I met him when I was a child when I went to [Harlem] New York, he and my [paternal] uncle Roy [Wilkins]. My uncle Roy was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. He and uncle Roy were close colleagues and neighbors, and Thurgood was one of the adults who kind of stepped in to try to fill the void in my life from my father's [Earl Wilkins] death. When I was a--finished my junior year in law school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], I went to work for Thurgood at the--just for the summer--at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and worked on some of the follow-up to the Brown v. Board of Education [Topeka, Kansas, 1954] decision. And I did volunteer work for Thurgood for the rest of my life. I practiced--came back after I finished law school in 1956, and I did volunteer work for him. And then when he came to Washington [District of Columbia] after having served as a judge, we were neighbors, and he was still my mentor. And then when I became an officer in the Department of Justice, he was Solicitor General, and we were the only two blacks in the Department with presidential appointments. And we were colleagues and still neighbors and dear friends, and we remained dear friends until he died. And I knew his widow and then his wife Cissy [Cecilia Marshall] before they were married so they are good friends of both of mine. And my daughter Amy [Wilkins] to this day cannot swing a baseball bat properly. And so I tried to teach her one time after she was a young adult, and she said, "Daddy, I just can't do this. And you know whose fault it is?" And I said, "Who?" "Those rotten Marshall boys, [Thurgood] Goodie [Marshall, Jr.] and John [Marshall]. Whenever we'd go out in the park to play ball, they'd never let me bat. They'd always make me run and chase the ball." And so I tease the Marshall boys about that. The Marshall boys are obviously grown men. And John, the younger boy, always says, "It wasn't me, Roger. It was Goodie." So. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins and his first wife, Eve Wilkins, in a receiving line with President Lyndon B. Johnson (fourth from left), Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall (second from right) and others, Washington, D.C., ca. 1960s; Eve Wilkins is shaking hands with President Johnson. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15395 Speaker 1: This is recent. This is what I look like now. And it was taken about ten days ago [January 18, 2003] in the Hart Senate Office Building on the occasion of the Democratic members of the United States--Democratic members of the Senate of the United States having a forum on civil rights. And in the photograph I am shaking hands with Senator Edward Kennedy. And in the photograph as well are Lee Bollinger, former Dean of the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor], Provost at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], and now--President of the University of Michigan, and now President of Columbia University [New York, New York]. And next to Bollinger the Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle. And in the background there is Eunice Kennedy Shriver sitting with her hand under her hair and next to her Terry McAuliffe, the Chairman of the Democratic Party. And I was there. Here's the headline of the thing. That's the other headline. I was there to give the keynote, kick-off talk at the forum. And I was invited to do so by Senator Kennedy. And I suppose the reason he invited me was because we're both old. We're the same age. (laughter) He figured he needed a little ancient companion. Speaker 2: [Photo from the 'New York Times' of Roger Wilkins (right) with U.S. Senator Edward Kennedy (left), Columbia University President, Lee Bollinger (second from left), and U.S. Senator Tom Daschle (second from right), Washington, D.C., January 18, 2003. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15396 Speaker 1: This is an Associated Press story which went all over the country in December 1965 just after President [Lyndon B.] Johnson had announced his intention to appoint me as head of the Community Relations Service. And the reporter was looking for controversy. And there was a controversy then about whether the agency was going to stay--it was clear the agency was going to be moved from the Commerce Department where it had originally been placed by Congress either to the Justice Department or to the Department of Housing and Urban Development. And there was a person, who had been senior to me in the agency, had lobbied publicly for the agency to go to the Department of Housing and Urban Development after the President made it clear that he intended to move it to the Justice Department. There were people who didn't want it to go to the Justice Department because many of us, including me, felt that the Justice Department under the Kennedys [John F. Kennedy Administration] and then under Johnson was not as aggressive about civil rights as it needed to be. And I had participated during Robert Kennedy's attorney generalship--first of all, I had written a searing memorandum to President Kennedy, telling him that his civil rights program was bad and that the Justice Department was lily-white and condescending and paternalistic. And then I participated in a demonstration against Kennedy while I was in the U. S. government. So I certainly was not somebody who was soft on the Justice Department or soft on Kennedy. However, once the President of the United States makes a decision, this is the way it's going to be. You do it, and you make the most of it. And in fact, this was going to put a black person in civil rights in the Department of Justice where he could argue with the Attorney General when he was making those civil rights decisions. And it was a lot better to be there having an opportunity to argue than it was to be on the outside throwing rocks at the place. Also, I had a very close friend and ally in the Department, who was Deputy Attorney General Ramsey Clark. And Ramsey promised that he would do a lot of the blocking for us. So they were trying to make controversy in this. They came back afterwards--the AP [Associated Press]--and another thing about the question was, "Are you old enough? Do you have enough experience?" And I said, "I think thirty-three is plenty old." Speaker 2: [Newspaper clipping from the 'New York Post' announcing Roger Wilkins appointment as Director of the Community Relations Service, December 27, 1965. From the collection of Roger Wilkins.] Story_ID: 15397 Speaker 1: In front of me is my daughter Amy [Wilkins] who was I guess seven years old. Who you don't see is my son David [Wilkins] who--well, I guess Amy is six, and David then was just a little more than two. He was there, and he was very good, but he was not--it must have been--he wasn't walking yet because he was a babe in arms. And there is one photograph where just his nose is showing. But Amy is now forty-three [years old]. David is thirty-eight and he is a production worker on television series and on movies made in the mid-Atlantic region. He's done movies everywhere from Baltimore - I mean from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Richmond [Virginia]. But he lives in Baltimore [Maryland], and he's a great fellow. He's smart, hard-working, loves his work, loves his family, loves his [Washington] Redskins [National Football League team], and maybe one day he'll get married. We're hoping. Speaker 2: [Roger Wilkins being sworn in as Director of the United States Community Relations Service (Jan. 1966)] [Washington, D.C.] [From the collection of Roger Wilkins.]..