 Story_ID: 226886 Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interviewer is being conducted with attorney [HistoryMaker] Fletcher "Flash" Wiley. The date is October 15th, 2004. The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Scott Stearns. And we are located on the twenty-fifth floor of the law offices of Bingham and McCutchen [sic. Bingham McCutchen LLP] in Boston, Massachusetts, 150 Federal Street. Would you state your full name and spell your name for me? Speaker 2: Fletcher Houston Wiley, F-L-E-T-C-H-E-R, Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N, Wiley, W-I-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: You wanna stick the Flash in there? Speaker 2: Well, well of course Flash is the name that I go by and most people know me. Which of course is F-L-A-S-H. Speaker 1: Your date of birth and where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born on November 29th, 1942, the Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Your occupation, how would you describe your occupation today, your profession (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well today, I'll describe my occupation as being attorney/businessman. For most of my professional career I was an attorney or less focused more on the law. But of late, I have evolved from the day to day practice of law into an entrepreneurial aspect of my career. Story_ID: 226887 Speaker 1: Before we get into some more details about your early life and family we have some People magazine type questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that add a little bit of human interest at the opening of the interview-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --get a glimpse of your personality. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker Fletcher] "Flash" [Wiley] what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, I'll have to say that, that, that what comes to mind is the gumbo that my wife [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] makes periodically. Which, you know, has, has great amounts of okra and a very rich and, and mysterious roux made out of all kind of spices and everything but that would be my favorite dish. Speaker 1: Good, your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time year is springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, I won't pick a particular place but I can describe the place, which is, it's always warm, including the evenings, somewhere with a beach and a casino and a lot of balmy breezes and no cares. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black and red. I feel passionate about equal with both of those colors. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you use often? Speaker 2: Well I suppose when I introduce myself to strangers I wanna make sure that they know the most important thing about me, so I make sure that they know that I am the world's greatest over sixty year old basketball player. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: My wife thinks I use that too often, but sometimes you have to make it plain to folks. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: I want you Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], by the way out on the court. I know you told me you retired but I want a little piece of you just to see if you got anything left (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, we'll see what happens. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 226888 Speaker 1: Would you start by telling us a little bit about your mother [Mildred Berg]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --her name, where she was born and where she grew up. Speaker 2: My mother, story is, is a very interesting one. We're still trying to get the facts. You know sometimes folks kind of shape the facts but according to my grandmother [Florence Norton], when she was willing to talk about it, when she was a nursing student at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois], she was raped. And she said she was raped by a, a Caucasian man in Chicago when she had my mother. And that then she was continuing to go to school while my mother was, you know, going through her, her early stages as an infant. And according to my grandmother, somebody stole my mother and my mother ended up in Memphis, Tennessee. I don't know if that part of the story is true or not but what is true is that she was born in Chicago; she was separated from my grandmother and ended up in Memphis, Tennessee where she was raised, and when she was eighteen years old graduating from Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. She came across some letters and some notes or something that let her know that her real mother, her birth mother, was my grandmother, in Indianapolis, Indiana. And so she came through and confronted my grandmother and let her know who she was and that's kind of how they got together. My mother was a, a smart woman who struggled all of her life both physically, she wasn't that strong, and also just trying to make ends meet. She ended up as many woman of color, then and now, as that--in that great entrepreneurial business, the beauty business. My mother was a beautician. And for most of her, her life and then later on in years and when she moved to Boston [Massachusetts] she worked in--as a bank clerk or bank teller here in Boston. But for most of her life she was a beautician. Story_ID: 226889 Speaker 1: Would you give us your mother's name? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother, on her birth certificate is Mildred Berg, which sort of I guess kind of goes along with the white man story I guess. And she married--met my father [Fletcher Wiley] in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. He was a year ahead of her in high school. And when my father graduated, a year ahead of her, he moved to Chicago [Illinois] to sort of make his way, which is what--part of that great stream of, of black Americans immigrating from the South, in Jim Crow South to the City of Chicago and other places in the Midwest. Speaker 1: Now, did she share with you; has she shared with you her growing up years in the South? Speaker 2: Yeah she did, she did. Speaker 1: What did she, what did she share with you, what did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she, she, she made it clear that because she was light skinned, she caught a lot of hell from both blacks and whites, that you know, segregation was something you kind of took for granted. You learned how to work with it. Within the context of the black community though she had a lot of fun and my mother was always a half of glass full kind of person. So I'm sure that there were many parts of her growing up years that were a lot of fun. She was a majorette in high school, and high school traveled to Harlem [New York, New York] when she was a senior in high school and to participate in the big parade. So I got to believe--and then she fell in love with New York [New York] which then she lived, she lived in New York for much of her life later. So, I'd, I'd like to think that her growing up years were, were good, but I think she always felt like a stepchild which I kind of guess what she was. Speaker 1: Who raised her? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of the woman, but it was a woman that sort of had a rooming house or something like that. And, and she was kind of like a foster mother to my mother. But my mother knew that she wasn't her mother--she didn't act like she was my mother's mother. And you know, many years later my mother and I went to Memphis [Tennessee]--my only trip to Memphis during that era and met her. And she was nice--very nice lady and my mother was very fond of her. But you know like, like most people you want to know who your birth parents are and so she pursued that. Speaker 1: Now is your mother still living? Speaker 2: No, my mother passed away in 1988. Speaker 1: But she did live here in the Boston [Massachusetts] area for while? Speaker 2: She did. She moved with, with [HistoryMaker] Benaree [P. Wiley], my wife and I here in Boston, and spent the last ten years of her life here. And I had been raised by my grandmother primarily 'cause by mother worked and while my grandmother didn't really have a hand in raising my mother I ended up being the apple of my grandmother's eye, and being spoiled was something I kind of got used to (laughter). Speaker 1: Give me your grandmother's name and tell me a little bit more about her. Speaker 2: Okay, my grandmother's name is Florence Norton. She was born in Lost Creek, Indiana. Lost Creek is in the western part of the state near Terre Haute [Indiana]. And she was born in 1902 and they had some, some very terrible flooding in that part of Indiana--my grandmother's parents were killed so she was pretty much raised as an orphan. She lived around in various places but ended up being raised in Franklin, Indiana. And I don't know what sparked her, my grandmother had an ambition and also I guess you know, obviously some intelligence. And she ended up going to nursing school at Provident [Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois], which at that time was a very famous school for training African American nurses. And while she was there she had my mother. And then she, she came back after she graduated from school to--came to Indianapolis [Indiana] and she was the first nurse when they opened Crispus Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] in Indianapolis which was the all segregated black school, high school that had been put in place. And she was part of a marvelous faculty at Crispus Attucks. Because back in those days you had high school teachers with Ph.D.s and so forth that couldn't go to other schools or get jobs in colleges and everything that were teaching at the high school level. So she was part of the golden years at Crispus Attucks High School. Story_ID: 226890 Speaker 1: Your mother's [Mildred Berg] personality, what was she like as a person? How do you remember her? Speaker 2: My mother was loud and sassy and always full of fun, which made her a successful beautician because people loved to go to the beauty shop and hear her tell her stories. And she'd listen to other people's stories and enjoy those as well. She was hard working woman. My mother had good street smarts and good wisdom. And my mother was a--the disciplinarian. I got a whipping everyday by her. But my grandmother [Florence Norton] would, would whip me--but when I really needed you know, some, some sterner discipline my mother was there to do that. And so I always remember her as not taking a whole lot of stuff from me. And that probably was helpful to me not being as mischievous as, as I wanted to be. Speaker 1: She came to Chicago [Illinois] you said when she was about eighteen years of age? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what did she do when she arrived there? Speaker 2: Well she, she got together with my father [Fletcher Wiley]. And I don't know if she did--if she worked or anything. I was born in 1942, so she would have been eighteen in 1940, so she probably worked somewhere. But they got married. And then I was born in '42 [1942]. My father was already in the [U.S. military] service at the time. And so she pretty much raised me then. And we lived in Chicago for two years and then she went to New York [New York] where she had met some folks, I guess when she was in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], and so the next two years of my life I lived in New York City. And then we moved to Indianapolis [Indiana] when I was four years old and that's where I was permanently raised (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, okay. Tell-- Story_ID: 226891 Speaker 1: --[Tell] me about your father. Give me his name and tell me about his birth and when he was born? Speaker 2: Okay, my father's name was Fletcher Wiley and I'm not a junior because he gave me the middle name of his best friend Robert Houston Fentress. And so the two of them went to Chicago [Illinois] together. Bob Fentress ended up being a very senior executive with Johnson Publishing Company in Chicago. And so they struck out on their own. I guess I was kind of part of this generation too, which is once you came out of high school then you--people kind of figured you were prepared for life and you know, so you left to go out and do your thing. Father was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi and his mother, who he called Sister; I think she was like fifteen years older than him. So while they never shared the details with me, I can only imagine that, that was the product of some early fooling around on her part. But whatever his upbringing it worked because my father, like my mother [Mildred Berg], was a man of principle and discipline and--but a salt of the earth kind of person. He was very proud and had a, a great, wonderful sense of humor. And because my mother and father divorced at a early age, I never grew up under his aegis like my younger brother did. So we kind of became friends later in life. And it was, it was a lot of fun having your father not only as your father but your friend. My father was a janitor and that's what he did. Sometimes he worked two jobs as, as a janitor just trying to make ends meet and everything. When he remarried, his wife [Mildred Wiley] stayed home and took care of my, my younger brother. And so he was a hardworking guy. I think he took pleasure in, in my activities and achievements. And it makes me feel good to know that my family had some joy for me. Speaker 1: Tell me about--how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I have one brother. Speaker 1: Tell me your brother's name and tell me a little bit about your brother. Speaker 2: Okay, my brother's Keith Martin Wiley. His, his first name is from his maternal uncle. His middle name is from my father's best--other best friend in Chicago. And Keith was born March 5th, Crispus Attucks Day, 1959. I was sixteen years old at the time and it was a miracle and a joy to me to have--finally to have a brother 'cause most of the kids I went to school with had siblings and I was pretty much raised as an only child. He was in Chicago so I was still kind of had an only child existence. But my brother's been almost like my son but also one of my best friends throughout my life. And he lives here now in Massachusetts, he lives in Brockton [Massachusetts]. He moved here because Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] and I lived here and settled here and is now raising his own family. Speaker 1: Very good, and his profession or occupation? Speaker 2: He's a corrections officer with, with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Story_ID: 226892 Speaker 1: Let's see, you grew up as a young child in Chicago [Illinois], right? Speaker 2: No, I grew up--I was only in Chicago two years. Then New York [New York] two years. And so in 1946 I moved to Indianapolis [Indiana] and so most of my memories are Indianapolis. Speaker 1: All right, well let's go back to--what are your earliest memories, earliest memory of growing up in Indianapolis? Speaker 2: Well, I had a whole lot of cousins. Because my grandmother [Florence Norton], even though she was an orphan, she had a lot of sisters and brothers. I think there were seven or eight of them in the family. And one of their sisters had four children so my mother [Mildred Berg] had some first cousins and you know, my cousins as well. So I, I remember that and all of them fawning over me because I was the first child from that generation. So again, spoiled to death but I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 226893 Speaker 1: We lived in Lockefield Gardens [Indianapolis, Indiana], and-- Speaker 2: Say that again. Speaker 1: We lived in Lockefield Gardens. Speaker 2: Would you spell that for us? Speaker 1: L-O-C-K-E-F-I-E-L-D, Gardens. Lockefield I think was named after Alain [LeRoy] Locke and was one of the first housing projects ever built in the United States back in the 1930s. Primarily for--I think exclusively actually at that time for, for black folks. And most black families spent some time in Lockefield Gardens who lived in Indianapolis [Indiana] coming through that process. Our mutual friend, [HistorMaker] Janet Langhart [Cohen], in her book--her autobiography ['From Rage to Reason: My Life in Two Americas,' Janet Langhart Cohen] mentions Lockefield Gardens as a place where she spent some time. And so that's, that's what I remember and again that was part of growing up in the projects--was, was good for a kid because it was always plenty of playmates and so I enjoyed it and didn't know the difference. Speaker 2: What was the surrounding neighborhood like, how do you remember the infrastructure, and the place itself? Speaker 1: Well, you know as a, as a four or five year old Lockefield and the surrounding neighborhoods seemed like the whole world. I mean it was, you know, wasn't that big an acreage but, but at that time it seemed like the whole, so it could be a bit of walk from one part to the other was huge. It was a all-black community. Indiana was, at that time, one of the most segregated states north of the Mason-Dixon Line and of course had a history of discrimination. The Ku Klux Klan [KKK] had been very active in Indiana in the earlier part of the century, so black life was segregated both in terms of housing, social life, and so forth. But that was fine. I mean I, I never had any problem with that because it was all I knew and there was plenty of adventure and fun to go around as a, as a young, young child. Speaker 2: What was the day to day family life like for you and your mother [Mildred Berg] and what would-- Speaker 1: Well, during that era everything was extended family, so you know, my grandmother [Florence Norton] who was pretty well known in the community because she did the hair of a lot of people, so everybody knew her and she knew them and everybody knew me. My mother was trained by the way--I didn't mention this--at the Madam C. J. Walker beauty college [Indianapolis, Indiana]. And of course Madam Walker was a very prominent feature of the City of Indianapolis and the, the empire that she built there, the financially empire and education empire. My mother also worked in the Madam C. J. Walker beauty shop [Indianapolis, Indiana], so as a young child I went there with her on Saturdays and did errands and so forth. So I was raised in a beauty shop. That's why I feel like I have a better understanding of women than most of my male counterparts. The--so everybody in the community was part of your extended family. And I couldn't do anything and I did a lot. So, but everything I did got reported back home. It always got back home because everybody's watching and taking care of me. At the time I, I thought it was an oppressive system that big brother was watching you but in retrospect of course it was one the best ways to--for a close knit community to sort of come together and use the village to raise a child. I wasn't familiar with the term at the time but that's exactly what it was. And I was part of a wonderful village of people that looked out for each other. We had a common quest at the time which was to relieve ourselves of the oppression of segregation and discrimination. And at that time it was institutional segregation and discrimination, so it gave us something to work for and fight for in a commonality that the kids today don't have-- Story_ID: 226894 Speaker 1: What are some of sights, sounds, and smells that remind you of growing up in Indianapolis [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Ah man, well first of all Indiana Avenue, which I guess can be replicated in many areas, in Boston [Massachusetts] it'd probably be Blue Hill Avenue, in Chicago, Stony Island [Avenue], but, but all over the country you had a street that was sort of the street. You know like U Street in [Washington] D.C., where businesses thrived, sounds and smells were prevalent. The restaurants were, were cooking soul food, greens, and chitterlings and all the, the things that I, I came to love as a young child. The record shops were pumping out the music on the streets and so forth, so you couldn't walk down the street without hearing a tune you liked and popping your fingers a little bit. The clothing stores were, you know, selling their wares and the--Indiana Avenue was the locale of the three all black movie theaters. So in those they made all black movies, so you could go see a black cowboy movie, with black cowboy stars and so forth. So it was, it was a self-contained community of things that I came to grow and love and--the energy pumped out around the community was just great. And there were other parts of our community that were more not suburban in context but, but you know near the churches and so forth. And you had our areas of reverence and on Sunday morning you could go down West Street, which was the boulevard in the black community where the churches were. And you know if you went pass the Baptist church where you could hear the tambourines shaking, and the people clapping their hands and so forth, and the Catholic church would have the organ playing and people bring their family there. I went to St. Philip's Episcopal Church [Indianapolis, Indiana]--was kind of a hybrid between the African American tradition, the tambourines and so forth and the high Catholic. And that--church again was a, was another home. Across the street from our church, the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [Indianapolis, Indiana], all black YWCA and--so the community was self-contained with all the institutions there to help young blacks at the time grow and develop as human beings-- Story_ID: 226895 Speaker 1: Are there other growing up experiences that you'd like to share? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Were there any special people in the community outside of your family that meant something to you growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, well Indiana is a basketball state. And Crispus Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], when my grandmother [Florence Norton] was a school nurse, was the all black high school that beaconed for all the great black athletes in the city to come and play. And out of that crucible came some of the great basketball teams of all time, high school basketball teams of all time. Nurtured and developed as men and athletes by Ray Crowe, so the coaches for the young men were role models and mentors that not only taught you how to do the sport but also taught you about life and living and how to, how to get the most from that. And those people were role models for me, as were the athletes. I wanted to be Oscar Robertson. I knew Oscar. I know Oscar and as a man as well as an athlete, he epitomized the finest that I think has ever been produced from the City of Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 1: He preceded you by how many years? Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: Four years ahead of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, and my grandmother who was a school nurse was also a sponsor of the booster club. So we use to go on the road with the basketball team. They played all over the state. And I saw almost every high school basketball game that Oscar Robertson played and his older brothers before him-- Story_ID: 226896 Speaker 1: What year did you start your elementary education, what school did you attend? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell us the beginning of your elementary school education. Speaker 2: Well let's go back before that because again our black community had great institutions. And one of them was a place called Flanner House [of Indianapolis, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana]. And Flanner House-- Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us? Speaker 2: --F-L-A-N-N-E-R, Flanner House. Flanner House was a well-developed, well-organized and I guess pretty well-financed early childhood daycare/education center that many of the young kids that I grew up with went to. And so, you know, from--they had everything from six-month old children to up to four and five year old. Maybe the nearest thing here in Boston [Massachusetts] would be Crispus Attucks Children's Center [Boston, Massachusetts] that [HistoryMaker] Benaree [P. Wiley] and I had a role in developing. But Flanner House was the first educational experience I had in, in working with kids and teachers and other things. And I guess the thing I hated most about it they use to make us take naps in the afternoons, lie on these hard cots and take a naps. Speaker 1: How old were you when you first started? Speaker 2: I was four when I started at kindergarten there at Flanner House. Story_ID: 226897 Speaker 1: I started grade school at five; I would be six in November. And the public school education was a--I had some adjustment problems because I always use to talk out in class and fool around while other people were trying to get their work done. And so I, I got in a lot, a lot of hot water as a, as a young kid trying to learn the ropes. Played hooky a couple of times and--so I guess when I was in the fourth or fifth grade--well, actually they give it earlier, they give you an IQ test just to see if there's something wrong with me. And I guess I did pretty well on the test so they just said well you know, this guy is just not being challenged enough. And a couple years later I got involved as a charter member of a thing the Indianapolis Public Schools were putting together called the gifted child program. And I was the first black child involved in that program in a segregated city, 1952. I was transferred from going to all black schools, which I loved and so forth into, into the white community where I was the only black kid. And having to wrestle with that was sort of an adjustment for me. They would already had more money than I did, they wore clothes differently, they talked about different things and it was only then that I begin to see from their eyes how poor both financially and otherwise that they, they viewed me and other black people. So it took me a little while to deal with that. For a while I told everybody that my father [Fletcher Wiley] was a doctor (laughter). And my mother [Mildred Berg] went to school with me one day and, and she was talking to the teacher and the teacher said, "Well, how's Dr. Wiley doing?" she said, "Dr. Wiley, who's that?" (Laughter) But you cope you know; you cope as best you can. Story_ID: 226898 Speaker 1: Would you continue to tell us a little bit more about the gifted child program [Indianapolis Public Schools] experience for you? Speaker 2: All right, 'cause the first thing that I wanna bring back on that is when I got selected for the gifted child program and got taken out of the black community, I was both proud and embarrassed, because much of my life I'd spent trying to downplay the quote, unquote "smart kid program" 'cause that can get you an ass whipping in the community. And, so, I, I never--throughout most of my life never have shared the gifted child program with anyone. Of course for fear now that they'd laugh at me and say (laughter) you didn't do a whole lot with it. But the program was the brainchild of a lady named Dr. Jeanette Riker. And she went out on the limb to have a black kid involved in it and she, she insisted that I be involved and I'm glad that she did. It gave me a whole different world view of myself. I attend the program through the eighth grade which was the formal period through which the program lasted and the classes after me. And I was exposed to things that I use today. They had typing back then in the early 1950s as a mandatory class. And I was wondering why they were doing that. But of course now days for those of us that, that use computers and so forth are being faster with a, a keyboard is, is absolutely imperative. Learn French, the mathematics program was fantastic and as was every other aspect of, of what you would learn as a kid. And there was also a lot of opportunity for creativity. They tried to make sure that we had balanced lives in terms of athletics and so forth as well. Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject going through the-- Speaker 2: Actually Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], my favorite subject then and now is, is your favorite subject, which is history. And I've always loved history and political science. But really political science always considered to be a subset of history. And when I went to the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] and majored primarily in history I got a chance to focus more in that, in that aspect of, of my academic training, so I love it. Speaker 1: At the time that you were moving through grades six, seven, and eight in this program, did you have any notion or any ideas about what you thought you wanted to do as an adult, any aspirations at that point? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Florence Norton] who loved medicine and so forth wanted me to be a doctor. So and of course at that time your choices were you either be a lawyer, a doctor or a preacher, that's pretty much--teacher, lawyer, doctor, preacher, teacher. That's pretty much what our community was pumping people into too. There were no thoughts about entrepreneurs or banking or some of the other fields that people have done so much today. So, I was thinking about becoming a doctor. I, I held on to that notion until I got to high school. Then, then I didn't know what I wanted to do except find a way to get to college. My family being impecunious, it was clear to me that I was gonna have to find a way to, to have somebody pay for my college education or pay for it myself. So when I came out of the gifted child program, the--I was channeled to Shortridge High School [Indianapolis, Indiana]. And at that time Shortridge High School was one of the finest high schools in the United States. Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us please? Speaker 2: S-H-O-R-T-R-I-D-G-E, Shortridge High School-- Story_ID: 226899 Speaker 1: Shortridge [High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] was the college prep school for the entire State of Indiana, the premier school. We had a daily newspaper and had a radio station. Had of course the finest athletic teams and so forth that you could have. All kinds of clubs and so forth. Had the five years of math and English faculty, many of whom had Ph.D.s and master's degrees not unlike Crispus Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. And so it was a great preparatory environment. And I came to Shortridge as part of the first wave of African Americans coming in droves, because in 1954, with the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], Indianapolis [Indiana] had to cope with massive desegregation like other parts of the country. So, my wave going into high school was kind of, kind of the first shockwave of African Americans. And over the eight years from 1956 to 1964, the demographics of the high school went from minimum African Americans to majority African Americans as did the housing patterns in that community. Speaker 2: What kind of student were you in Shortridge High School? Speaker 1: Well, I've always been, been kind of competitive as a student. And while I probably didn't work as hard as I should, I worked hard enough to be--you know I would say a A-, B+ student. The school was at the time was mostly one-third black, one-third WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] and one-third Jewish, and very competitive as an academic environment. So I did, did pretty well and good enough to, to win a scholarship, two scholarships, one to Indiana University and one to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. But by then I, I had decided I wanted to become an astronaut. And so I had a passion to go to the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]. One of the members of the Tuskegee Airmen, one of the original Tuskegee Airmen was from Indianapolis [Indiana] and lived in Indianapolis. One of several from Indianapolis, but he was also a liaison officer of the Air Force Academy and he got me interested in wanting to apply that brand new school to train, you know spacemen. Speaker 2: What are your fondest memories and special experiences you recall in high school, anything that stands out in, in those four years? Speaker 1: Well, for me, high school, the four year period in high school was the most formative period of my life. Because I went from being a young teenager to a more mature teenager and back then coming out of high school as I said was that many people were set for life in terms of their life skills and so forth. I remember the rich academic experience, I remember the fun, I remember the friendships. My, my dearest and closest friends today are the ones that I was with in grade school and high school. Because you know, they knew what you were, and what you are and what you, you know, and so there's no illusions. I remember the tremendous impact that sex had on me in terms of being aware of opposite sex and being focused as a high school male on, on finding ways to becoming more involved in that activity. Back in those days drive-ins were prevalent and those provided some opportunities--as did those basement parties with the blue lights. Story_ID: 226900 Speaker 1: Tell me about your athletic interests and talents at that time, what sports were you involved in? Speaker 2: Well, I've always been interested in swimming. A movie came out in 1951 or '52 [1952] with Richard Widmark call 'The Frogmen.' And I thought it was so cool how those guys fought people underwater and so forth. So I learned how to swim at the Phyllis Wheatley YWCA [Indianapolis, Indiana] across the street from St. Philip's Episcopal Church [Indianapolis, Indiana] and became a pretty, pretty good swimmer. I continued that with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] at camp during the summers and I ended up training as a lifeguard under the American Red Cross course given at Indiana University. Again I was the only black participating in that program. I did well enough in that program that they then recruited me to become the water safety instructor. And so, they trained me to become a water safety instructor and then I began training lifeguards. During that period I, as a swimmer, thought maybe I could earn some money 'cause it was cool to be a lifeguard and I applied for the Indiana State Park[s] lifeguard positions that were being advertised. Scored number one on the test both in the written and swimming part of test in the whole state, but I was denied employment because they weren't hiring black lifeguards. So the following year I ended up being a lifeguard at the all-black pool Douglass Park [Douglass Park Family Center], named for Frederick Douglass in Indianapolis [Indiana]. And so swimming was a active part of my career. Basketball, of course, as a Hoosier, that's always the focus. So I did that twelve hours a day during the summers when I could. And then when I got to [Shortridge] High School [Indianapolis, Indiana] I played football. And while I was not the world's greatest football player, I had a lot of determination and, and as a senior and as my body matured and so forth, caught the eye of a coach from the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] who helped steer, steer me to the academy and give me an opportunity to come there and play as the first black football player. So that's pretty much--I got my knee hurt at spring training my sophomore year that ended my football career but I've continued playing basketball. And as I said, you know, the record speaks for itself-- Story_ID: 226901 Speaker 1: As you move towards your senior year in high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] and thinking about the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado], were you still thinking about being an astronaut? Speaker 2: Yes, and was becoming more focused, because the school was so competitive and because I was so competitive. One of the things that happens when you graduate is that they, they call out all the people won scholarships and where they're going to college and everything. I had a graduating class of five hundred in high school so and a lot of those folks, you know, National Merit Scholars and all that kind of stuff. So going to a service academy at that time had a lot of cachet. And I was in the cachet again as a way perhaps of inspiring some young ladies to spend time with me, so cachet as a scholar, cachet as a singer, cachet as a basketball player, all to one, one end. So yeah, I wanted to stay with the Air Force Academy piece and, and, and you know become a spaceman. It was the era of Sputnik, and the Friendship 7 astronauts and it was just an inspiring period of time to be thinking about space and mankind's ability to escape the, the, the bounds of this planet and go elsewhere. Speaker 1: Tell me about now the process of entry into the academy-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and what that experience was like as you remember the first entry years and what-- Speaker 2: Okay, service academies at the time were exclusively through congressional appointments. That means that each congressperson and each senator from the state had, had appointments to the academy as well as the United States vice president and United States president. Also, they had slots for the children, sons at that time 'cause they didn't have any women going to service academies, Congressional Medal of Honor winners. So those were kind of the slots you fit in and then they had a few slots for the regular [U.S.] Air Force and so forth. So when I applied while I was in high school for the academy, took the test and everything, for congressional appointment, I finished as the first alternate. The guy that was--received the principle appointment to the Air Force Academy had been the first alternate the year before, had gone to Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] for a year, and so he, he got the first appointment. I was despondent. It was kind of like the first thing I had failed at academically and I was just, you know, geez how could, how could I not be the guy. I didn't consider racial issue or anything like that, you know at the time and I don't think it was. So the Air Force Academy offered me, because of my football, to go to their prep school. And at the time the Air Force Academy didn't have its own prep school so they were getting a bunch of guys that the Air Force Academy wanted and sending them to the Naval Academy Prep School [U.S. Naval Academy Preparatory School, Bainbridge, Maryland; Newport, Rhode Island], primarily to bone up their college board skills so they could pass the test to go to the Air Force Academy. I'd actually done pretty well on the academic part, so that weren't really my problem. So I'm--after a great deal of anguish my grandmother [Florence Norton] talked me into going to the prep school. I didn't wanna do it 'cause I thought it was like going, going to high school and all my friends were going to be ahead of me, you know, and I wasn't gonna be like left back. I was ashamed at doing that. Turned out to be the best decision of my life, I'm glad I listened to my grandmother. Speaker 1: That was a one year experience? Speaker 2: Yeah, not even a year. I left in July of 1960, went to Lackland Air Force Base [San Antonia, Texas] 'cause you had to join the Air Force Reserves in order to go to the, the prep school. I went through basic training, then arrived in Bainbridge, Maryland in August for football training and also the academic part. And everything was geared towards getting you to take the college boards in March and then you were out of there. So it gave you an extra year of growing up--'cause I graduated from high school at seventeen so that extra year was good. I didn't really--I graduated fifth in my class out of four hundred at the prep school, so--and I didn't have to work too hard to do that 'cause I'd gone to such a great high school. So it was, it was a good experience to give me a chance to do some traveling on the East Coast and grow up a little bit. And so that's how I got to the Air Force Academy, through the prep school experience. Got the, got the principle appointment for Joe Barr, Congressman Joseph [W.] Barr from Indiana. Speaker 1: Would you spell his last name? Speaker 2: B-A-R-R, Mr. Barr later distinguished himself as being--in 1962 he got appointed by President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy as treasurer of the United States, so his name was written on a few dollar bills for a while. Story_ID: 226902 Speaker 1: So there I went, and I wasn't sure whether I was gonna be the only black there or not. When I got there I found out that there had been four other African Americans admitted before me and then six came in in my class. And four of the six that I came in with graduated because the academy has a order of merit in terms of how you graduate. I was, I was the number--the fifth black to graduate from the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]. And-- Speaker 2: That was a four year experience? Speaker 1: Four year experience, and again a very formative part of my life but not nearly much so as my [Shortridge] High School [Indianapolis, Indiana] years. Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden] it's hard to think about it now and to covey to you what it was like going to Colorado 7200 feet from Indiana into the 2400 cadets at the Air Force Academy. And there were, while I was there, there were ten of us were black. And being a part of that experience during those years it's just a growth experience. And just to mention a few highlights of that, that time, in addition to playing football, at the end of my sophomore year I was chosen to be in the color guard which carried the American flag for the graduation. And President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy delivered the commencement address; this is in June of 1963. And so then it was the last commencement address he ever delivered, fatally shot a few months later. Being able to travel all over the world and see the [U.S.] military and learn about space and airplanes and all that, it was just, it was a eye opening experience. However during the time I learned a couple things about myself. One is I didn't want to make the Air Force a career. Two, as a twenty-two year old graduate; I wasn't nearly enthralled with going to the moon as I was as a sixteen year old (laughter) high school kid (laughter). One of my dear friends though, Freddie Gregory [HistoryMaker Col. Frederick Drew Gregory], who is now the deputy director of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], he was in the class of '64 [1964]. He was the fourth black graduate of the Air Force Academy, became an astronaut, and then the commander of one of the shuttle flights. Story_ID: 226903 Speaker 1: But your performance at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] brought you a very distinguished award. Speaker 2: Well, that's true, I was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that. Speaker 2: I was awarded a Fulbright scholarship and one of few academy graduates and the first black graduate to do that. And so after I graduated I spent a year in Paris [France] as a Fulbright scholar. I was there ostensibly to study international relations and that's what I did. I related internationally while I was there. I had a good time in Paris, learned a lot, not all of it in school. One thing that was very pivotal about that point and time is you know, you go to a service academy and it's during the Vietnam War era, and you're--they're training you to come out and be a leadership person as a, as a group of warriors an America's warrior class. You steeped a lot of that military history, that military tradition and so forth. And what Paris allowed me to do was a chance to spend time in a international cosmopolitan city. Paris had Russians in it, East Germans, and North Vietnamese and North Koreans and everybody. Everybody was there going to school and so forth. And it gave me a chance to, to have a broader world view of just exactly what our human condition is and who's your friend and who's your enemy. And from that experience I took away a different kind of view of what we were doing in Vietnam and other parts of the world that we were interacting with some of the vestiges of which unfortunately remain today and what we're doing today. Story_ID: 226904 Speaker 1: So you completed your Fulbright opportunity [in Paris, France], what was next in your life? Speaker 2: Well I had to go do--then--actually serve as an [U.S.] Air Force officer. I decided to join the Air Force's version of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], which is called the OSI, it's the Office of Special Investigation[s]. And I joined OSI because one, it's career field where you don't have to wear a uniform. Two, a lot of people go from that field into the practice of law and I'd already decided I was going to get out of the Air Force. So it was a good sort of field to do training. And the OSI did three things; phase one was you did personal security background investigations for security clearances, phase two was--I became a criminal investigator, so I essentially became a detective, solving crimes of various sorts. And then my final assignment was in counterintelligence, and I was the chief counterintelligence analyst for the Air Force in Korea. So that's what I did during my [U.S.] military career. I enjoyed my--the military much, I'm glad I did it. I actually believe in universal conscription. I think everybody ought to spend some time in the military because it's good for them and it's good for the military. Very active as an academy graduate so I've not turned my back on that, that part of my life, I embrace it as I do all the parts of my life, but try to shed some new ideas to the military thinking that has prevailed with some folks. Speaker 1: Now that experience lasted how long? Speaker 2: The, what? Speaker 1: In the Air Force? Speaker 2: In the Air Force, I was in the Air Force for four and a half years after I graduated from the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 226905 Speaker 1: So I got out [from the U.S. Air Force] on December 9, 1969. While I was in Korea, that was my last assignment, I applied for law school. And so when I got I just waiting to hear from the law school that I applied to and what the story was and I was fortunate enough to get into all of them that I applied too and decided to come to Boston [Massachusetts] and--which was a fortunate decision for me for many reasons. I'm gonna tell you the love story now. The love story is that when I was a cadet at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] one of the guys that came in two years behind me 'cause he had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for three years, a guy by the name of Arrington Dixon. And Arrington and I, four years apart in age, but like I said he was two years behind me at the academy, and went to [Washington] D.C. Christmas break of 1963 to meet Arrington's fiancee, [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt. And while I was there I also met Sharon's younger sister, Benaree Pratt [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley]. And she was just a kid sister then and for most of the years that I knew her during the '60s [1960s], but I used to see her off and on because I came very friendly with Arrington and Sharon, they subsequently got married and became very close friends of mine and Bennie was always around. And so when I moved back to D.C. in, in 1969, after getting out of the service, Bennie was around and she--as it turned out she had applied to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Just a serendipitous thing, so both of us ended up going to Harvard graduate schools. And we started dating and--so, we started dating in April of 1970. And we got married in July of 1970 and started our lives together here as students at Harvard. So we've both been here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was gonna ask you all about that and you covered it very well. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Story_ID: 226906 Speaker 1: Tell me about Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and what was that experience like for you? Speaker 2: Oh boy, what a, what a great place that was. You know, after the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], America came to grips in a way that it never had before with the need to get something done about addressing racism in America, particularity with respect to racism against African Americans, former slaves. And out of that came many programs, not the least of which was opening up the elite schools for training of African Americans in business law, the arts, science, history and so forth. And Harvard Law School was one of those places that, that became attentive to that and but a gentleman by the name of [HistoryMaker] Walter [J.] Leonard, Dr. Walter Leonard, was trained in law at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and after his first--and he was a much older student and one year out Derek Bok, who was the dean of Harvard Law School at the time, brought Walter Leonard to Harvard to help him recruit and train African American lawyers. So there was a great wave that came through in '68 [1968], '69 [1969] and '70 [1970]. I was part of that wave, the 1970 wave of black lawyers. And I think we were probably a refreshing change for Harvard to say the least. And out of those other years came such notables as Chris [Christopher] Edley [Jr.], [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, Reggie [Reginald] Lewis, Bill [HistoryMaker William] Jefferson, who's a congressman now down in Washington, D.C., Weldon Rougeau, who's the, the president of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation [Inc., Washington, D.C.], innumerable folks who took advantage of that situation. So it was an exciting time, just some great people coming together and interacting with each other to--all with the, with the charge of taking our skills and training back to our communities and developing our communities internally. And that's what Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] and I did, we decided to do that in Boston [Massachusetts]. We join with the Harvard Law School/Business School graduate, Richard Taylor, and his family in moving into the community, Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] community, once we decided we were going to stay in Boston after school, and beginning to work inside the community to develop it economically, socially, and politically. Story_ID: 226907 Speaker 1: What was the status of Boston [Massachusetts] at that point in time socially, politically, economically; how did you find the city, I mean you had been here for four years as a [Harvard] Law School [Boston, Massachusetts] student but still, what was the ambiance and the feeling of Boston at that time if you remember? Speaker 2: I'm sure you've heard this before, but as a student we lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And there really was a disconnect between what was going on over in Cambridge. There's a whole different world than, than what was happening here in Boston. We were fortunate enough to have some friends that lived in Boston. Bertram [M.] Lee [Sr.] was a, was a friend and colleague and he at the time he was a Boston businessman notable. And so he introduced us to part of Boston's fabric and we had some family friends that, that did the same. But we were--for our first four years in, in the Boston area we didn't really interact. Once we move into the city of course you know we became aware of all these things; the busing crisis, the tribalism that existed in Boston among the various social groups, ethnic groups and so forth. And even among the ethnic groups themselves--within the ethnic there was certain tribalism kind of thing. So, it was a, it was a interesting place but sort of a tough place to figure out. Luckily, the first person Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] and I met when he came to Massachusetts proved to be a mentor and friend in helping steer us through the thicket of all those things. And that's Wayne Anthony Budd [HistoryMaker Wayne Budd], my lifelong friend now and law partner, former law partner. And Wayne who is a HistoryMaker himself helped us accommodate ourselves to the Boston community and grow. Story_ID: 226908 Speaker 1: You finished law school, before we leave that though, were you instrumental in forming the Black Harvard Law School Alumni Association [sic. Harvard Law School Black Alumni Association]? Speaker 2: I was, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: I was a founding member of that. Well as a [U.S.] military man I've come to appreciate the value of organized human effort, that if you can get talented people together, structure them and organize them and manage the task, you can accomplish great things. That happened in the Civil Rights Movement and other places. So I was predisposed to try to take this, this group of tremendously talented people, who have their Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] credentials, so you knew that they were gonna use that as a stepping stone to do great things and try to organize that as a network of folks who could collaborate with each other. Story_ID: 226909 Speaker 1: Finishing [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], you have your law degree in hand, and what was next? Speaker 2: Well I was talking a little bit about BESLA and--the Black Entertainment [&] Sports Lawyers Association just as a context for the various organizational activities I've been involved in as a lawyer in the legal field. So BESLA was an organization that was started in 1980 as an adjunct to the Black Music Association, and again the thought was that was by getting organized that we could find ways of not only training attorneys better but also providing a network to do deals in the entertainment industry. There's so much of the entertainment industry that our folks were involved in that was on the creative side, and on the talent side, but that the business side also offered opportunities and that if we could develop more managers, more accountants, more attorneys in the business, that would be a way of helping to create and retain the wealth that our folks were generating on the talent side. So BESLA was another one of the organizations that I became very actively involved in and eventually ran. I started out organizationally in the legal field though with [HistoryMaker] Wayne Budd, when Wayne became the president of the Massachusetts Black Lawyers Association, the venerable MBLA. And I became Wayne's treasurer when he was the president. And then when Wayne stepped down ten years later as the president, I became the president of the Massachusetts Black Lawyers Association. And, again that organization was focused on trying to develop attorneys as both scholars and professional business people. Story_ID: 226910 Speaker 1: I wasn't certain I even was gonna be a practicing attorney when I went to [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I just didn't know what else to do with my life. I knew I didn't wanna be a doctor which is something I thought about. I knew I didn't wanna be an astronaut, so I kind of went to law school as a holding place. And after my first year of law school three or four guys from the [John F.] Kennedy School [of Government at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] came over to Harvard Law School and they were recruiting because they were trying to find people that had a technical background, mathematics background, to join a new program that they were putting together at the Kennedy School called the public policy program that used quantitative methods to analyze and political matters and so forth. And they with the all-star group, guys that I had, had heard about in, in college [U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado] and, and, and indeed in high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Guys like Richard Neustadt, and Tom [Thomas] Schelling, and Howard (unclear), and Bob [Robert P.] Mosteller, all of whom were, were fantastic known scholars and so forth. So after a year of law I went to the Kennedy School, ended up doing the joint program with, with law and, and public policy. So I didn't get out of school until 1974 and was thinking about becoming a public servant. And the only thing I had not done was really work in private sector in a sustained way. And I thought you know that to be a good public servant you really needed to have some private sector experience. And that's what finally persuaded me to go into the practice of law. I said look you got the degree, you're a member of the [Massachusetts] Bar [Association], why not try it out for a couple of years and learn something about business. Story_ID: 226911 Speaker 1: And I guess I was practicing with the firm of Fine & Ambrogne [Boston, Massachusetts], under the aegis of Phil David Fine for about two months when I figured out you know what, if I can be like this guy, I can have every bit of impact I wanna have in my community, on politics, in business and so forth, but not have to be a public servant to do it and have more impact by being a private citizen. So that's kind of how I've modeled my career now. I still have the, the burning interest in changing things within our community financially and socially and everything, but I try to do it through generating resources and opportunity for folks. One of the first opportunities once I decided that I was gonna do that through the practice of law was to hook up with my dear friend Mr. [HistoryMaker Wayne] Budd and other dear friend his lifelong friend Tom [Thomas] Reilly and form a law firm. So we formed the law firm of Budd, Reilly and Wiley. And our associate at the time that became part of this foursome was Ralph [C.] Martin [II] and to be joined later by Dean Richlin. And the five of us I think though small, built one of the finest firms in city [Boston, Massachusetts]. And with, with the exception of myself all of my former partners and collogues in that firm went on distinguish themselves greatly in the public sector. Tom Reilly is now the current attorney general with perhaps other vistas open to him. Wayne Budd had a great career as a United States attorney for Massachusetts and the number three guy in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] as well as general counsel of John Hancock; president of Verizon communications for New England, so he's done well. Ralph Martin the first African American elected to Suffolk County [Massachusetts] district attorney, largest county by, by population in Massachusetts. So all these guys did well, Dean Richlin, Tom Reilly's first assistant ran the attorney general's office. So the firm was a great starting place. Speaker 2: This firm started when what, what year (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-nine [1979], 1979. Speaker 2: That's what I have. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]-- Story_ID: 226912 Speaker 1: Let me just back up a minute then, after you left the Kennedy program [John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], got your master's degree (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right the law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Kennedy School in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Yeah, what'd you do between '75 [1975], '76 [1976] up until? Speaker 2: Okay, my last two years of school I worked. My, my--Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] graduated in, in June of 1972. She went to work for a firm called Abt Associates [Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was a social science research firm based in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And I needed a summer job after working--I worked with Dick [Richard] Neustadt the first part of the summer of '72 [1972] for the Democratic National Convention. So I was part of the, the platform committee, group that help formulate platform for that convention. And then after that summer position was over I started to work with Abt Associates for the balance of summer. Well the, the work was so much fun and the money was so good that I decided to stay on while I was in school, so my last two years of school I worked there about thirty hours a week. And then after I graduated they offered me a job to become a senior executive with, with that firm, so I did that. I wasn't really interested, that interested in practicing law so I, I worked with Abt for that period of time. And the only thing that kind of brought me back to law was I was getting older and I was saying, "Well, Jesus, if I don't go practice law now I'm never really going to sharpen those skills." So in 1975 after talking with a bunch of buddies of mine who sent me to this firm that I talked to I started with Fine & Ambrogne [Boston, Massachusetts], just to see whether I'd like it or not. And I was there for three years. And then I went out on my own for a year just to see if I could support myself 'cause I didn't wanna join with [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Budd] and Tom [Thomas Reilly] until I knew, knew that I wouldn't be a drag on them as a partner. Once I satisfied myself that indeed I could do pretty well as an attorney then we formed the law firm [Budd, Reilly and Wiley, Boston, Massachusetts]. So the law firm started in March of 1979. Story_ID: 226913 Speaker 1: And what were your special responsibilities and areas of work [at Budd, Reilly and Wiley, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well I was a business lawyer in the firm. [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Budd] and Tom [Thomas Reilly] were primarily litigators. Tom did a lot of criminal work at the time. Wayne, a business lawyer but primarily in litigation and so forth, and I was the corporate lawyer, contracts and deals and so forth. And also I did a lot of real estate deals. And I found the business aspects of the practice interesting in terms of doing contracts, doing deals--derived a great deal of satisfaction out of being a conveyancer which, which is, you know, in Massachusetts parlance the buying and selling of residential property, helping people buy homes and so forth, helping to get the finance and everything. So I played a role in helping develop our community by helping people get financing and closing deal for them and so forth. So that's kind of what I focused on as an attorney and businessman. Story_ID: 226914 Speaker 1: Also, I got involved civically in a number of activities. I sat on the board of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute [Boston, Massachusetts]. I sat on the board of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital which then became Brigham and Women's Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts]. And the board of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce [Boston, Massachusetts] and again that was--joining the Chamber of Commerce was a eye-opening for me. And I worked very diligently to get--to open the board up. When I joined there were thirty members of the board. I helped recruit other African Americans to the board and women. And to expand the size of the board I headed up a small business committee. And this year we're celebrating the twentieth year of--under my aegis I developed with the Small Business of the Year Award, because the chamber weren't really paying attention to small business people and that was our fast growing sector and certainly in, in the neighborhood that's where the, the action was. And while I did not start out to do this I ended up being the first black chairman of the board of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce which was a very gratifying experience. Speaker 2: And you served in that position? Speaker 1: For two years as the chairman of board. I'm now chairman emeritus as are the other past chairs. I still sit on the board and on the executive committee of the, of the chamber which has become the premier business organization now I think in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In terms of influencing, influencing policy. Story_ID: 226915 Speaker 1: The law firm Budd, Reilly and Wiley [Boston, Massachusetts] and you were joined by [Ralph C.] Martin [II] and [Dean] Richlin. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That firm eventually dissolved or? Speaker 2: Yes, but not before, not before we had some great cast of characters come through. Like Steve [Steven] Wright, who's now a partner in a very prominent law firm, Holland & Knight [LLP, Boston, Massachusetts], was one of our associates at the firm. Judge Mal Graham, who now sits on the bench in the superior court was, was with us in the firm for a while. Let's see, Susan [H.] Spurlock-- Speaker 1: I was just gonna ask about the female partner 'cause I remembered her (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) right, right, Susan Spurlock was there with us and Pamoja Burrell, let's see, there's so many that have come through that, that we think we made, we made an impact on as attorneys in the city [Boston, Massachusetts] and, and that does our heart good to feel like we had that impact on the fabric, the legal fabric of the city but also the, the social fabric of the city. Speaker 1: What was next in terms of law firm affiliation? Speaker 2: Well, I guess the--we had a couple of pivotal moments. After we formed Budd, Reilly and Wiley, Scott Harshbarger in 1982, got elected as the district attorney for Middlesex County [Massachusetts]. And Scott was very friendly with Tom [Thomas Reilly] and he invited Tom to join him and run his office as the Middlesex County district attorney first assistant. And Tom took Ralph Martin with him. So Tom and Ralph left the firm and so the firm for a while became Budd & Wiley. And then we made Dean Richlin a partner a couple of years later, so it was Budd, Wiley & Richlin for a few years. And we experienced phenomenal growth doing that period. Then [HistoryMaker] Wayne [Budd], who, who had done many things in in the practice of law, including being the first black to head the Massachusetts Bar Association, was tapped to become--by President George [Herbert Walker] Bush I, senior, the first black United States attorney for Massachusetts. So he left our firm in 1989 to become the United States attorney. And so we went back to being Wiley & Richlin. And at that time the legal business--full-service legal business was beginning its first stages of consolidation. And there was another prominent black firm in the city that we had a great deal of respect for and--called Fitch, Miller & Tourse [Boston, Massachusetts]. And after a couple years of discussion and so forth, we decided to merge our two firms to form one of the largest black owned law firms in the country; Fitch, Wiley, Richlin & Tourse. And we operated that firm for three or four years. Eventually the--that firm dissolved--I think we were, we were in place for about three or four years. And it--that's one of my disappointments that that marriage didn't work out better. But our cultures were just a little different so it wasn't seamless as it could have been. But we all remain you know good friends today. I then joined Goldstein & Manello [Boston, Massachusetts] and was a partner there. And I was recruited from Goldstein & Manello to--by one of my clients, long term clients, to go in house with them to help them with their business development activities. And that's how I ended up with the company called PRWT Services Inc. [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. They had been a client of mine since 1991. I'd gone on their board and eventually became the chairman of their board and they recruited me to come in house and be a partner in the firm and help grow the firm. Story_ID: 226916 Speaker 1: What is the mission and the, and the programs and the services offered by PRWT [Services, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Tell us about and what it stands for also. Speaker 2: Okay, well PRWT was, was formed under a great business partnership under the auspice of a guy name John [M.] Brophy, who was a president of a--one of the Lockheed Martin [Bethesda, Maryland] companies, Lockheed Martin IMS. And Lockheed Martin IMS [Corporation] serviced state and local governments with using technology to help solve the administrative aspects of government. And one of the things that they had invented was a faster, more efficient way to process parking tickets. And Lockheed Martin got the contract in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to process parking tickets and they needed a minority partner to come in because at that time there were minority set asides and so forth. And John Brophy, who had been a public servant, knew of Willie [F.] Johnson because they both had been public servants together and, and in different cities. But you know they both had come to some renowned as public servants. So John suggested to Willie you know, "Hey, why don't you, you know start a company. You know you've been head of the SITA [ph.] program in Philadelphia. You know about training people and so forth. Why don't you start a company? We'll help you get started. And you can start with our business in Philadelphia." And the things worked so well in Philadelphia that when Lockheed Martin IMS got contracts to do--process parking tickets in other cities, like Boston [Massachusetts] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and so forth, PRWT had a chance to do that operation as well. So that was kind of what we cut our teeth on, which became the field of outsource business processing activities. And PRWT has become the largest minority-owned business processing outsourcing service provider in the country. When I came on board we were a seventeen million dollar company. Last year we were five times that size. We're number, we're number forty on the Black Enterprise 100 list this year as the largest owned, black owned businesses in the country. So we've come a long way and I helped play a part in that so I'm very proud of that. Story_ID: 226917 Speaker 1: So you've been with PRWT [Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] how long now? Speaker 2: I've been with PRWT, which by the way stands, just the initials, stand for the founders of the company. So it was Paul [Dandridge], Ray [Raymond A. Saulino], Willie [F. Johnson] and [William] Turner, those were the four guys that formed this company and they couldn't come up with anything better than that, so they just used their initials. And I've been with them as an employee since September of 1996. I still have a few other activities I'm involved in as well, because I am a entrepreneur and also I am a lawyer, so I'm also of counsel to the intentionally renowned law firm of Bingham McCutchen [LLP, Boston, Massachusetts]. And I'm sort of a senior advisor to their firm as well as a developer of business opportunities for them, but PRWT is my main focus and as I said, it's been a, a very gratifying experience. Much of my professional career has been focused on minority business development. I started with Mike [Governor Michael] Dukakis in developing business development opportunities. One of which was the Minority [Business] Development Commission that Mike Dukakis commissioned. And out of that came a number of interesting and, and major projects not the least of which is a signature project for Boston, the parcel-to-parcel linkage program that put the Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] parcel which now Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] owns, and Lincoln, 1 Lincoln [Street; State Street Financial Center, Boston, Massachusetts], which is a downtown parcel together as part of a development project. Speaker 1: What are some of the immediate projects and things that you're working on right now today with PRWT? Speaker 2: Well PRWT provides people, trained people, to do business processing activities. So, we do all the data entry, the imaging, and the labor intensive aspects of processing paperwork processing data. That's where our company is specializing--so what we do is recruit people, train them and manage them and so forth to do those activities. We also, being mindful of the great outsourcing opportunities, operate call centers, we process mailroom operations, lockbox operations in terms of handling cash, customer service activities in terms of working with American Express [New York, New York] and other companies to service their customers. And along the way we acquired a facilities management company that manages buildings and other large scale facilities for primarily governmental entities. So we are--I would say that our niche or forte is finding public sector needs that can be outsourced and managed better more cost effectively in meeting those needs in a way that can't be done inside the government. Story_ID: 226918 Speaker 1: Let's take a little different tact at this point. We've talked about the professional development and your career, at the same time you have family, you've been raising a family, tell us about your children, their names, and what they've been doing. Speaker 2: Well, I have two children and Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] has two children, and then thousands of others, two biological children and thousands of others that are her extended family children. Of course she's always wanted to have more children and, and her job at the partnership has allowed her the opportunity to do that in terms of working with young minority professionals to develop them. We--our children now young minorities, our son Pratt [Wiley] was born in the bicentennial year 1976, is now twenty-eight and a second year student at Boston College Law School [Newton, Massachusetts]. And our daughter BJ [Benaree Wiley] is a first year student at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in the M.B.A. program; she's twenty-six, and so they're both back in school now. Neither one of them are married nor as far as I know, have any serious interest other than focusing on getting their next two years of schooling done so that they can get out and pursue their career activities and then build a family. We also have because we're an extended family, two nieces who are very close to us--three nieces actually because my brother [Keith Wiley] has a daughter as well and then all of the other cousins and so forth that, that are part of that extended family. Our children--we moved to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1978. And one of the major reasons we did that is because we wanted our kids to be brought up in a black environment. We thought it was important for them culturally to be brought up the same way we were and that, that has paid some dividends we think in terms of doing it that way. They are of course citizens of the world and the world was different in--for them than it was for us but that's one of the gifts I think we gave them is a chance to have that enculturation process happen at an early age. They're both graduates of the Crispus Attucks Children's Center in Roxbury [sic. Dorchester], Massachusetts. Story_ID: 226919 Speaker 1: Okay, I was just going to come to that because I know that you and your wife [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] have worked together as partners on many projects-- Speaker 2: Yes we have (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) across the city [Boston, Massachusetts] but I know that one that you're very proud of is the Crispus Attucks Children's Center [Boston, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --would you tell us a little bit about you and your wife's involvement with that center? Speaker 2: Okay, Carolyn [French] and David French, two very prominent people in Massachusetts when we got here, and were old family friends because they both were from Washington, D.C. of Bennie's [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] parents [Mildred Petticord Pratt and Carlisle Pratt]. And David French started Roxbury Comprehensive Community Health Care [sic. Roxbury Comprehensive Community Health Center, Boston, Massachusetts] that in and of itself was a legendary enterprise. And his very talented wife in addition to bearing him eight children was the first executive director and one of the co-founders of Crispus Attucks Children's Center. And the way this came about was the Avco Company had sold it--sold the company, the operation to Bertram [M.] Lee [Sr.] a local entrepreneur. And they had the daycare center there and they were trying to figure out what to do with it. And the manager of the, of the center, and again another family friend from Washington, D.C., [H.] Minton Francis [Sr.], 1944 graduate of West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], running the plant at the time, called us in Bennie and I, to write the proposal. They need somebody to come in and was cheap to write the grant proposal financing the center. So Bennie and I got involved right away in, in the funding part by writing the proposal by which Crispus Attucks would, would be funded and founded. They had to have a name and because I was from Indianapolis [Indiana] and knew about Crispus Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] and also of Crispus Attucks' rich history here in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which is where it all happened for him, I suggested well why not name it Crispus Attucks. That way its killing two birds with one stone, remembering my grandmother [Florence Norton] and my youth and so forth-- Speaker 1: That's the historian in you also. Speaker 2: --right, right and carrying it on here. So, they liked that idea and that's how the name got started and how Crispus Attucks Children's Center got started. Bennie and I immediately got on the board, began to develop the center as board members and so forth. I also succeeded the renowned former Justice Rudolph [F.] Pierce, former lawyer and current lawyer of the center, as the center's lawyer. Then we got off the board as young people came on and, and we did other things. But we've always had involvement with the center. As I said, our kids went there and so forth and just a great training ground. Not unlike the Flanner House [of Indianapolis, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana] that I remember as a kid growing up where people could come together from all walks of life. All of our kids could get the great first start, the great head start that propelled so many people in life to realization of their talents. The--we've always been benefactors, financial benefactors. And another aspect of my life is I've always wanted to be an entertainer, onstage entertainer. For some reason I never saw a microphone I didn't like. And so for my fiftieth birthday I did a fundraiser, rented out the Berklee Performance Center [Boston, Massachusetts] and I got a bunch of my friends who were local would be entertainers like myself, to do a talent show, all-star talent show, R&B show. And we raised and netted to Crispus Attucks Children's Center $75,000, that was 1992. So we were able to, to do that. And for my sixtieth I was--took it up a bit. I brought in The Temptations, who I've always wanted to sing with, and The Manhattans, and that time we were able to net $200,000 for the Crispus Attucks Children's Center. So that's how we kind of continue to be involved financially, spiritually, and as proud parents of that institution that has produced so many fine young people for our community. Story_ID: 226920 Speaker 1: We're coming down to maybe two minutes on this tape, would you like go give us a rendition? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], as I said, for my sixtieth birthday, I have retired now. If you'd caught me ten years ago, you could've caught me in my full glory. I do have some of that on tape but my voice has changed like [Frank] Sinatra's did. But there was a song that I sang to my wife [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] one time which went something like this; (singing) "You can dance every dance with a guy who's giving you the eye, let him hold you tight. You can smile every smile with a man who held your hand beneath the pale moonlight. But don't forget who's taking you home and in whose arms you're gonna be, oh Bennie save the last dance for me." And of course it sounds a lot better with The Drifters behind you (laughter). Speaker 1: You're off the hook. Thank you, you're off the hook. Story_ID: 226921 Speaker 1: At this point is there anything else that you'd like to add, something that I haven't asked you about, that has not come up as we've reviewed your life history and your ongoing professional activities, anything else that you'd like to add at this point? Speaker 2: Well I guess one thing that I haven't said because maybe the questions didn't lead into it but certainly for the last thirty-four years the most important aspect of my life has centered around my wife [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] and my family, a different kind of family. And I really never planned on getting married. You know it was amazing to a lot of people that I ended up getting married. I got married at twenty-seven which for my generation was pretty old. Most of the friends I grew up with were married with children by the time they were twenty. And Bennie and I kind of got married you know, almost by happenstance. You know, we dated four months, and one of the months that during that four month period she was off in Europe. So it's kind of amazing that this wonderful lady, this blessing to me, happened to me. But I'm lucky I'm blessed, you know, and I feel good about that. And as I reflect back on our relationship, one of the things I said to her last week is, you know I always do stuff wrong. I always screw things up. I don't call when I'm supposed to call. I don't--hardheaded about things so forth and so on. And as I thought about it, you know, there's almost nothing I could say that would describe her that way. And I said it to her when she thought I was trying to be funny. But it's true, she's absolutely perfect. She drug me kicking and screaming into parenthood. I didn't really wanna be a parent. I always wanted to be the kid. And that was probably, next to her, the greatest thing that happened to me, and these two human beings [Pratt Wiley and Benaree Wiley] I had a chance to watch come into the world. You know, we did the natural childbirth thing and I was right there when they were both born. My wife introduced that miracle to me that I never would have had if let to my own devices to have done. And so, and to the extent I've made a lot of good professional decisions. She's been a part of that and never been a part of any the bad professional decisions I've made (laughter). I made them probably in spite of device, advice. So having a great team member, a great partner, life partner, she's everything that a wife could be and a mother could be, has been very special to me. And if I died tomorrow or died this minute after giving this interview, I feel much better having said that because I wanna preserve that not only for my own history but for others who listen who are fortunate enough to find someone who can be a life-partner for them through the good times and the bad times and to work together to develop each other for the benefit of themselves, their family and their community. That's what bliss is all about. Story_ID: 226922 Speaker 1: You have made the statement and you fashioned yourself as the country's or the world's greatest basketball player over sixty years of age-- Speaker 2: The world's. Speaker 1: The world's (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The world's, yes. Speaker 1: Will you be saying the same thing once you reach seventy plus? Speaker 2: I hope so. A lot of folks I guess fantasize about how they wanna you know, leave the planet. My fantasy, contrary to popular belief, is in the middle of a jump shot as I'm coming down from elevating so high and the ball is released and as you know, it hits me right then and so my last dying breath I hear, swish. Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life? Speaker 2: Well, like everyone who is honest and reflective, there're some things that I'm very proud that I've done and there're some things that I'm not proud that I've done but they were all part of the growth process that have produced who we have today. I wrote a poem that I'd like to share at this moment. I hadn't thought about doing this but since you ask the question it comes to mind. And this poem was written when I was in high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. When I was in high school my senior I was in the composition class. And that class allowed us to free think about all kinds of issues and so forth. And one of the things I thought about was you know, what is it all about, you know as a seventeen year old, you know, what happens next. You know, I'm getting ready to go out in the world. So the poem went something like this; it's called 'Life is Just A Fleeting Breath,' and so this is how it was written in high school. "Life is but a fleeting breath, a span of time a lot of (unclear), then comes the frigid hand of death to claim the precious gift again. Life is short but very dear, above all else each man's heart and often time we shed a tear because we know we must depart. We wonder where, we wonder why those that die have gone to some place distant in the sky a celestial eternal home. It matters not which course death takes there's one that's thing for sure, some day my life will terminate, that fact I must endure." And that was sort of how I dealt with life. And then as I got older, and this was occasioned by my fiftieth birthday, I thought about that poem, I said, well what have I learned? And I added two stanzas to the poem which go like this; "Inevitable though our fate may be, that need not be a source of woe. Rather we should strive to see the precious gift we've been bestowed. And when we see that we've been blessed, we'll greet the passing of each day and take the time to do our best to help someone along the way." That's kind of my philosophy of life now, that's kind of what I've come to. Speaker 1: What do you still wanna do that you haven't yet done? Speaker 2: Writing. I--my wife [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] tells me I'm a pretty good writer. Most of my professional career has been writing in terms of contracts, letters, complaints and all kinds of things. But what I'd really like to do is to do some writing and I hope to do so. I wanna be like you, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden]. Story_ID: 226923 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American communities or community here locally [Boston, Massachusetts] and nationally? Speaker 2: Well, as a person who takes a perspective on history and some of the humorous things that history weaves into its fabric of the human story, I believe that one of, I've always felt this way, that one of the ironic stories of history has, for us that, is that the seed of Africa that was robbed, in terms of us, becomes the source of inspiration and salvation for the country. And I felt that most strongly during the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] years when the African Americans leading Civil Rights Movement were calling into question or forcing America to deal with the ideals upon which the company--the country was founded. Now we all know that when the country was founded, you know, slavery was institutionalized, women were written out and so forth. But, but the words are still there, life, liberty, pursuit of happiness, inalienable rights, all these kinds of things. And, and we did that during the civil rights years to force Americans to deal with each individual human-being's right to be free and to be themselves. I think the next level of development on that scale is for America and human-beings in general to deal with the spiritual realities that have to be explored and validated in order for our species to survive. And these spiritual realities, some people find them in their organized religions, whether it's the Qur'an [Koran], or the Bible, or the, the Old Testament, whatever. But in other, other religions have had this as well. Everybody, every human-being, has this spiritual awareness and spiritual unfulfillment. And I'm hoping that all people who seem to be on the cutting edge of spiritualism in this country, both in the entertainment forum and in the organized church forum, to bring that together so that we provide leadership to solve the real problems of the world; which is how can we all get along together and respect each other's differences and embrace those differences as strengths for the human, human species. Story_ID: 226924 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): If I may Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], I have one real quick one. You mentioned earlier that you have a unique or unusual view about public service, mandatory [U.S.] military or civil service and we're here nineteen days from the presidential election, the first time in thirty years there's been talk about conscription and I just wondered if you wanted to say anything about that. That may of historical interest somewhere down the road perhaps. Speaker 2: Well, for the 20th century part of American military history, but maybe even part of the 19th century part of American military history, the military, a very conservative institution, was in fact the most embracing institution of all the great social changes that happened. Long, not long before, but before the workforce was integrated in other respects, parts of our society, President Harry [S.] Truman integrated the military. Military integra--desegregated its school system, on base school system, in 1953. The military desegregated its housing system on base and then worked to desegregate the off base housing system. The military desegregated its workforce and provided equal opportunity and affirmative action type measures to ensure that there would be opportunities for prior disenfranchised people to grow to the, to the top levels. And fifty years after Harry Truman did his thing; we have the phenomenon of [HistoryMaker] General Colin [L.] Powell, who rose to the top and became the top guy in the military. So the military is a great socializing institution. And it can be a better socializing institution in terms of giving people a fresh start which is also what it did. Because no matter what you did in high school and so forth in your prior life, when you got in the military you got a fresh start with everybody else. And during conscription times the rich guy and the poor guys both came in at the lowest levels and then your talent allowed you to rise within the context of the military establishment to, to see what you know, what you would be in that. We need the opportunities for people to have fresh starts from their prior life and an institutional way for that to happen. We need institutionalization of the notion of peace in the military hierarchy. We need some people in the military that actually believe that peace is the best way to go. And so we've got to infuse the military with that. There's a lot of reasons why the military interestingly enough can be our salvation if we have people that have reticence to use force and arm to action and try to work things out. So, that's my thought on that. One last point, which is, I was pleased to be around in 1976 and since that time, when the first women came to the service academies. And now I've seen almost thirty years of women graduates--twenty-five years of women graduates coming out of the service academies. And I tell you these ladies are sharp. They're women but they're still professionals in the military. But they bring a different kind of bend on human relationships that men quite frankly need. We cannot have a testosterone driven leadership, testosterone only driven leadership. We've got to allow our softer side to prevail. Story_ID: 226925 Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered, what do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well, I want people to, when they hear my name that a smile comes to their face. And they remember me as someone who enjoyed smiling and hopefully provided some smiles to them. I want people to feel that I made a contribution to my family, to my people and to all people. I--so much of our generation's focus has been on being a credit our people, meaning African Americans, fellow African Americans. And along the way we've developed some, some shoulders that that other people can ride on as well and I wanna continue to do that and become an internationalist. I want to be remembered as a good parent and a good husband and a regular guy. In other words, someone who never got highfalutin and that recognized in the end we're all the same. Story_ID: 226926 Speaker 1: That's a picture of me that was taken by--actually I guess a famous photographer at Bachrach Studios [Boston, Massachusetts] and the Bachrach Studios photograph all the chair, chairpersons in the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce [Boston, Massachusetts] and that was my chairman photo. And Mr. [Louis Fabian] Bachrach [Jr.] now uses that photograph to sell his wares. I mean if you go into his shop now he has that photograph there and I guess what he's saying is that if you can make [HistoryMaker Fletcher] "Flash" Wiley look good you can make anybody look good. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, there is a picture of my class, a part of the gifted children program. I'm probably in the sixth grade in this class, so that make me about eleven or twelve years old. And the reason I'm not smiling is I'm not sure what's gonna happen with these photos and everything. But that was just part of my class and we had about fifty members in this gifted child class. And-- Speaker 2: Ahhh, that's a picture of my mother [Mildred Berg] taken when she was probably say thirty or thirty-five years old. My mother was a very attractive woman. And she was also a very gregarious woman. She loved to party and she had a certain style to her. And this is I guess posing her style. This probably went to one of her boyfriends. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 2: Ahhh, that's my father as a young man, Fletcher Wiley. And he sent the--it says "To Mil, from Flet." So he sent this to my mother after he finished his basic training in the [U.S.] military and he was on his way to Italy to fight in World War II [WWII]. A right nice looking guy if I do say so myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This was the first love of my life, my grandmother Florence Norton, RN [Registered Nurse], which is exactly what she has on her tombstone, just simply Florence Norton, RN. She was a registered nurse at Crispus Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] and she played as much a role as anyone in the thirty-six years that she worked at the high school in terms of developing these young people to take their place in life as responsible citizens. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear), okay thank you, next. Speaker 2: I guess early in life I became a poster boy for the flaunted Indianapolis [Indiana] program for gifted children or the Indianapolis Public School's Program and in the photograph here our French teacher is holding up a French saying for those of us in the class to read. I should point out to you that I was not the best student in French at this point of my career. But I did become much better at it later and ended up being the number two person in French at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's good that got you to Paris [France]. Speaker 2: It did indeed. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): There you go. Speaker 2: This photograph is part of a charitable event that, that the three gentlemen are attending me on the left. In the center [Robert] "Bob" Lobel, the well-known sportscaster for Channel Four [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] and on the right Ralph [C.] Martin [II], at the time was the district attorney for Suffolk County [Massachusetts]. And all of us involved in raising money for Rosie's Place [Boston, Massachusetts], one of the many, many charities that all three of us worked with. Ralph now of course is my law colleague again at, at Bingham McCutchen [LLP, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. Speaker 2: (Laughter) The gentleman in the center with me is Mr. [HistoryMaker] Otis [Clayborn] Williams, flanked by two of the big wigs at Citizens Bank and Trust [Citizens Financial Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], on the right the chairman of the board, Larry [Lawrence K.] Fish and on the left Bob [Robert M.] Mahoney his vice-chair. But they sponsored The Temptations at the South Shore Music Circus [Cohasset, Massachusetts] and invited Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] and I to attend knowing that my love for the music and the men. And this is my fist occasion to be with Otis and sing a little bit. Speaker 1: Ahhh, this was a photo of--the man in the center is B.O. Davis, Jr., Benjamin O. Davis, who succeeded his father [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] as one of the first generals in the United States military. He became the first black three-star general. The he became [U.S.] [assistant] secretary of transportation in the 1970s. And this photograph is taken in the '70s [1970s] or actually in the '80s [1980s]. Richard Taylor, another Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, is on the right there, who became secretary of transportation for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. And I'm there just standing next to two of my idols. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This picture hopefully will have even greater historical significance as time goes by but it's already somewhat historical in that it captures the five key members of the law firm of Budd, Reilly and Wiley [Boston, Massachusetts]. On the far let Tom [Thomas] Reilly, the current attorney general of Massachusetts, his very best friend next to him on the left [HistoryMaker] Wayne Budd, very accomplished, in the middle Dean Richlin, Tom's first assistant and next to him Ralph Martin and then me on, on the far right. And we'd like to think that our firm and the individuals that comprised it, have for the era in which we practiced law and were citizens of the commonwealth, have made as much differences as any five other individuals that we can think of. Of course we're not accurate in that reflection but we'd like to think that anyway. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Ah-ha, here I'm with a friend and a, and a--another famous person Mr. Dan Rather on the far left, in the center Mayor Tom Menino at a breakfast hosted by the chamber, again I'm the chairman of the chamber of commerce welcoming Mr. Rather to town but also explaining to Mr. Rather, which why he has a smile on his face, that I the world's greatest over fifty year old basketball player. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Ahhh, this is me in early 1980s as a practicing attorney. I have not quite yet trimmed my afro down to business size proportions nor my appetite for confrontation. But here I'm giving a speech to business leaders about why they ought to use our African American firm for their legal services. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And in that same speech my partner at the time Wayne Budd is delivering the same remarks. He has of course trimmed down a little more than I have from his, his afro of the early '70s [1970s] when he looked a lot like Sly and the Family Stone. Speaker 2: Ahhh, there's a great family photo. We're holding someone's baby. I can't remember who. I think it's a friend of ours, Randy Kinder [ph.]. This is--so this is Christmastime, may be in 1999, my son Pratt [Wiley] on the right, my daughter BJ [Benaree Wiley] on the left and the love of my life Bennie in the center, all enjoying each other's company around Christmas time. Speaker 1: Let's see, the gentleman to the left of my wife is my brother Keith Wiley and we're looking at his daughter, so that's about 1998 when she was born. And we're all marveling at how gorgeous she is. I'm not sure who the other young in the picture but obviously the center of attraction is my niece Aliana [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Here we have a picture of my stepmother Mildred Wiley. She has the same first name as my mother. This is my brother's mother, Millie. And then next to my brother is his wife and then my wife. So we have all the Wiley women there, all looking absolutely gorgeous. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with a semi-flat stomach. This picture was taken in 1996, 1997, and some friend of ours has a Rolls Royce obviously, that we are admiring and Mrs. Wiley is allowing me to, after coming off the basketball court, to fondle her nevertheless. Speaker 2: This is one of the ways that I want to be remembered. I'm not sure what the event is but again, almost any event in which there's a microphone present I will break into song because I've always had a song in my heart and I like to share that with everyone even if the music doesn't sound good to them. Story_ID: 226927 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And we were talking off camera about the origin of your nickname. Speaker 2: Ah yes, the nickname Flash I picked up when I went to prep school [U.S. Naval Academy Preparatory School, Bainbridge, Maryland; Newport, Rhode Island], after high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]. And I was playing football and we were introducing ourselves and I introduced myself as [HistoryMaker] Fletcher ["Flash"] Wiley. And a guy said, "Fletcher?" He said, "We got to get you a nickname, how 'bout Fletch?" I said, "No that's not good enough," and so forth and so they watched me play a little bit and they said, "you know what, we're gonna call you Flash." And I said, "Why is that because I so fast?" And they said, "No but maybe if we give you the name it will grow to the name," which of course I never did. I am flashy in other ways though...