 Story_ID: 267586 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer here is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Roger S. Walden, spelling, R-O-G-E-R, middle initial S, for Stanley, Walden is the last name, W-A-L-D-E-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Place of birth is Des Moines, Iowa, May 21st, 1922. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired. Speaker 1: Okay. You're a retired lieutenant colonel, right? Speaker 2: Right--from the [U.S.] Army and retired from the City of Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: All right. And you were with the famous Triple Nickle, right? Speaker 2: I was in the first test platoon that started off with the 555 [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion]; seventeen men. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Gee, you gave it to me a while ago--slipped outta my mind. It's the 8th of April (laughter), 19--2004--2005, sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right and-- Speaker 2: --I think I've got that date on there wrong. Speaker 1: Yeah, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Well, you're sitting in the community organization area at 3445 Santa Maria [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right--in your home, right? Speaker 2: Right-- Story_ID: 267587 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: And the first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? Well, I guess my favorite food is eggs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Scrambled eggs, hard-boiled eggs, so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right; a favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Ha! Spring and summer. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Michigan--preferably, Upper Peninsula. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think I have one. Speaker 1: Could it be, holy Moses (laughter)? Speaker 2: Do your best. Speaker 1: Do your best. Okay, all right. Story_ID: 267588 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Virgil Walden] side. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Ellen, E-L-L-E-N, is her first name, M. Parkey, P-A; M as in Mike, P-A-R-K-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay; and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Gee, I think she was born in Straight Creek, S-T-R-A-I-T [sic.], Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's her date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know; I'd have to look something up on that. Speaker 1: Okay. So would you guess--is it 'round 1900 or so? Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen something-- Speaker 1: Eighteen something? Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety something. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Well, back to the Civil War. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They go back to volunteers; I think they wound up in the 54th. Speaker 1: The 54th Massachusetts [Volunteer Infantry] Regiment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had like relatives on your mother's side who were volunteers in the Civil War? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about them? Do you know their names? Speaker 2: I don't recall 'em offhand; this is where I need my wife [Wendy Brierly Walden] on it. She recalls those things. She's a gerontologist--not a gerontologist but a genealogist. And my folks separated early on when I was young, very young, and then I was bounced around from different people--aunts, other relatives, that raised me. My father and mother both died on the same day, and I don't remember that date, but they died on the same date; they were separated, and then they died. Speaker 1: Now, are there--well, are there any stories about your mother's side of the family--about, you know, them living in Straight Creek, Kentucky and, and why they moved to--did she stay there her whole life, or did she move from there? Speaker 2: Oh, no, they went from Kentucky to Iowa; I think Buxton--Buxton [Iowa] was the area; I have a book or something here on Buxton. Speaker 1: Buxton, Iowa? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then eventually--and they lived in Des Moines [Iowa] 'cause I was born in Des Moines, so they were in Des Moines. Speaker 1: Now, was Buxton a mining town or something? Speaker 2: Mining town, right. Speaker 1: I've heard of it before, I believe, and it--didn't the whole town kinda close down after the mining--the mine closed? Speaker 2: Oh, they packed up the--moved the miners out, and packed the houses up and shipped 'em to another area where they were still mining coal; they closed out Buxton. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were born in--after the mine closed and they moved to Des Moines, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 267589 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ellen Parkey] talk about growing up in Kentucky? Did she talk about that? Speaker 2: No. If she did, I don't remember; I was too young then--I wanted to play. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about going to school? Speaker 2: No, I don't recall that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't--you weren't around your mother that much when you were growing up. Speaker 2: No, because they separated when I was in my teens and earlier, and I was raised by an aunt in Chicago [Illinois], and went to school there in Chicago. Speaker 1: Now we don't wanna get ahead, but--so can you tell us anything else about your mother's side of the family or your mother? Speaker 2: No, not very much about--it's only from her sisters and others that I know anything about 'em--about her; I don't know that much about her. Speaker 1: What was she like? I mean what was her personality like, as far as you can tell? Speaker 2: Well, I guess for their age, I guess they'd be about the same as--this is before my times, see--that they were like the other young women today. Whatever--I mean clothes and things that they wore for the time, they wore the same thing, see? I don't know much about 'em. She didn't do much taking care of me; all I remember mostly is an aunt--the aunt in Chicago. Speaker 1: Was that her sister? Speaker 2: It was her sister--her older sister. Speaker 1: Okay. What was her--your aunt's name? Speaker 2: Alison [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Alison Parkey, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Alison was a last name of her oldest sister; she married William Alison. Speaker 1: Okay, but her last name was Alison, so her-- Speaker 2: Alison. Speaker 1: What was her first name? Speaker 2: Nora. Speaker 1: Nora Alison, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) N-O-R-A-- Story_ID: 267590 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Virgil, V-I-R-G-I-L, Virgil Marion Walden. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know exactly his date--I'm thinking that the place of birth-- he was--Newton, Iowa, I think it was. Speaker 1: Was he born in the 1900s too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean the 1890s-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --eighteen nineties [1890s]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace those ancestors? Speaker 2: Hmm. Well, I can trace--they came from Indiana; the Waldens came from Indiana and then they were, before that, in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. So were they in North Carolina when slavery ended? Speaker 2: Not my father, now. Speaker 1: But his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, his father [Walker Walden]. I'm trying to think of--they came with Quakers, a Quaker group out of North Carolina; but I think they were, they were what you might call free people-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because they always told me that they were never slaves, and there were no slaves in any of their relatives back there, but they were free people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of them was freed at twenty-one and a member of the family then. Speaker 1: What do you mean? He was a member of the family that freed him? Speaker 2: Well, he was a member of the family that gained his freedom at age twenty-one in North Carolina. He eventually wound up in Sioux City [Iowa] with a church; he was in the ministry--a minister. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had a picture of it--the one A.M.E. church [Lost Creek A.M.E. Church] that they had in Lost Creek, Indiana. Speaker 1: That's a colorful name. So, Lost Creek, Indiana and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother's [Ellen Parkey] from Straight Creek, Kentucky (laughter). You got Lost Creek and Straight Creek, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Are there any stories about your father's people? Any other stories about him that you remember? Speaker 2: There are stories, but I don't recall them. I can't recall them for you, for your purpose here. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they talk about race relations in those days, those days between Reconstruction and the early part of the century? You know, those were some tough times for black people, but did they talk about those days at all? Speaker 2: The only thing that they talked about was Buxton [Iowa] area; I think the--that was principally a black community that was there, but there were whites there also--miners, but they were a minority of the total number of people there; most of 'em were black in that area. Story_ID: 267591 Speaker 1: Now, we interviewed another man [HistoryMaker Quentin Mease] from Buxton [Iowa], and I can't remember his name right now, but he's an educator, I think, from Washington, D.C. [sic.]. Maybe I'll--we'll try to arrange for you to talk to him, you might have something (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --you know, maybe something that you all can share about Buxton, but he was telling us that his father was like the trial justice in Buxton, you know. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: He was a miner, but he became the trial justice in Buxton-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know. He said it was pretty much a black town-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and when the mine ran outta whatever it had, they moved; they just shut the whole town down. Speaker 2: Yeah. And the people went to Des Moines [Iowa] and other places around there, except the miners; they, 'course they shipped out wherever the mines were at, see? Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Virgil Walden] talk about going to school? Did he have a chance to go to school and get much schooling? Speaker 2: I don't recall; I don't recall. I don't think he had much schooling; he--probably elementary school--six years of that. Speaker 1: Did he--was he a soldier in World War I [WWI]? Was he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, he was a soldier in World War I as his brothers--at least one of 'em, Louis Walden [sic. Lucius Walden], he was in a machine gun company. Speaker 1: Okay. Now--so did you have a closer relationship with your father than with your mother [Ellen Parkey], or was it about the same? Speaker 2: Well, it depended on where I was at the time. I don't recall ever being raised by my mother; I was born in a house diagonally across the street on Amherst [Street] in Des Moines, Iowa, from an uncle, Harry Walden [Harold Julius Walden], and--where are we? It slipped (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay. You were--I was asking you if you had a closer relationship with your father than with your mother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't close because I was bounced from pillar to post mostly because, I don't know, I guess I was kinda rambunctious or something, and the period that I remember there when I was in Chicago [Illinois] and raised by my Aunt Nora [Alison (ph.)], they couldn't keep me, and so they made arrangements or something for my father to take me, and he took me back. I was going to Catholic school in Chicago--St. Anselm's [School, Chicago, Illinois]; you probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I know where that is, right, I know where that is--St. Anselm's-- Speaker 2: --So I went to St. Anselm's and evidently they asked--the agreement was that he would continue me in the Catholic faith. Well, he did that for a while, then he couldn't afford it and so pulled me out of it and I went to public school. Story_ID: 267592 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory--the first thing you ever--that you recall remembering? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I remember is--that stands out, is where we lived in Des Moines [Iowa]. It was near an area where--an enclosed area where they kept cattle, and I can recall that I used to go over the fence there and--with a red flag or something, and wave this red flag at the cattle; maybe I had seen too many pictures. And they would chase me and I would hop up over the fence (laughter) when they got closer, when they were comin' in my direction (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, that's a dangerous--that sounds dangerous, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), flirting with danger (laughter). But I always had that fence close, so I could climb up on it and over it, and he couldn't get me (laughter). Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: Oh, probably 'bout eight or nine years old, like that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you lived in kind of a rural area; you had a corral with animals and stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Cattle pen or something? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 267593 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Des Moines [Iowa] when you were a little kid? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. I can remember my uncle [Harold Julius Walden]--we lived three doors down and across the street from him on Amherst Street, and I used to go over there, and climb up in their cherry trees and pick cherries until he chased me out of there (laughter). But I can remember that; he had a horseshoe--what do you call it--course or something, where they used to pitch horseshoes next to his house and so forth, and then they had vegetables, corn fields and things of that nature, right adjacent to the house. But I can remember that cherry tree because he used to tell me to keep outta that cherry tree (laughter). But I used to go back in there because I loved to eat those cherries (laughter) when they were ripe. Speaker 1: Okay; now, anything else about growing up there? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, in those days, your parents [Ellen Parkey and Virgil Walden] were still married, right? Speaker 2: No, they were, they were separated then. I don't remember--this was about '35 [1935], or--1935 or something like that. And then my father and his brother, one of his brothers--the brother that eventually raised me here in Detroit [Michigan], and we drove to Lost Creek, Indiana and, I don't know if somehow he arranged with him that he would take me because he couldn't handle me anymore. Story_ID: 267594 Speaker 1: Okay, now let's get the chronology together here. Now you--in Iowa--your parents [Ellen Parkey and Virgil Walden] separated when you were about what, twelve, thirteen? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or earlier. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what school did you go to in Iowa? Do you remember the name of your school? Speaker 2: Well, I went to Catholic school initially; I don't remember the name of it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was a Catholic school in Iowa-- Speaker 2: Yeah, elementary school initially-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and then I transferred to the public school. Speaker 1: In public school. Then you said your mother sent you to live with her sister in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, this was before--this was from Chicago; my Aunt Nora [Alison (ph.)] that raised me in Chicago, she arranged to send me out to Des Moines [Iowa] to my father, see? Speaker 1: Well, I'm just trying to get--well, what came first. So, when you were in Des Moines, you went to Catholic school, then you went to public school-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --then when your parents broke up, you were shipped to Chicago? Or was that first (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they had broken up before that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I was at a younger age; they separated, I guess, and divorced. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I don't think they remarried or anything like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just trying to get what came first. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: They were divorced, then you went to--did you go to Chicago after they were divorced, or what? Speaker 2: Well, I went to Chicago--I remember going to Chicago first; from Chicago to Des Moines, and Des Moines to Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, when you're in Chicago, you lived with your Aunt Nora-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you went to St. Anselm's Catholic School [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Anselm's-- Speaker 1: --that's at 61st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know exactly where that is--across from St. Edmund's Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois] across the street-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and so you were there--how many years were you in Chicago? Speaker 2: Oh, probably a couple years there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this was about the time of the [Great] Depression so I think the problem was they couldn't take on raising me there, so that's the reason why they shipped me to my father in Des Moines; it was his responsibility, he brought him into the world, we'll send him back there and we won't have to feed him any longer, or clothe him, see? Speaker 1: Okay, so they sent you to live with your father-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --then your father, you said, drove to Lost Creek, Indiana with you, so you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With my uncle [Harold Julius Walden], see? Speaker 1: Okay, with your uncle-- Speaker 2: --and some arrangement was made for my uncle to take me; he was from Detroit-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and this is where I came, to Detroit, then. Speaker 1: Okay. So--now what school did you go to here in Detroit? Speaker 2: Well, I went to [Levi] Barbour [Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]--I don't know whether this is the sequence of it--Barbour Intermediate, that's on the east side [sic. west side]; then I went to [Emma] Munger [Middle School, Detroit, Michigan], and I guess one of the reasons for the change of schools was a change of our location-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and Chadsey [High School, Detroit Michigan], and then Eastern [High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I ultimately graduated from Eastern High School. Speaker 1: Okay. What year did you graduate? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: June of '41 [1941]. Story_ID: 267914 Speaker 1: Tell me now, what kind of a little boy were you? What--you know, what you described so far, you liked to kinda get into trouble a little bit, or kinda like to stretch things (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true. When I was with my father [Virgil Walden] now, he was--at the time, he was an engineer. When they call an engineer, they fired a furnace in apartment buildings-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we had a room downstairs in the basement there. I used to play cards with him, and I'm trying to think of the name of the card game that we played, and he took the first card off the deck; he dumped out about ten cards, I think, to each person--two of us playing, and he took the first card and he spread 'em all out; he won the game, and I threw up the table (laughter). He didn't play any more cards then (laughter). I didn't have a chance. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So it wasn't a game of chance with him, huh? Speaker 2: Oh, no; he had the first one, and he just went out; I don't know whether it was conquian or some other game that you played that you dealt 'em out and then you'd start it back and forth and changin' cards. And he went out on the first card, so I didn't get a chance to play then, and I think I, in a fit of anger or something, threw up the table or something, and I guess he was through with me (laughter). Speaker 1: So how did you feel about it? Now, your parents divorced and you had to move around quite a bit. I mean how did you feel as a little kid? Did it make you angry, or-- Speaker 2: You know, when you're young you don't feel. I remember vaguely that we had--we had bread and we used to put sugar on bread; we had maybe a tablespoon of sugar or something on bread, and we'd eat that. People talk about when they were young, they didn't have much food. Now, I probably didn't have much food then; that was one of the reasons for puttin' the sugar on the bread, but I don't recall eating as a problem or anything. I think that when you're young like that, all you wanna do is play--stickball, or football, or something of that nature, see? Story_ID: 267915 Speaker 1: So did you do a lotta playing when you were coming up? Did you play a lotta ball and stuff (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I played with other kids and things and hide and seek, and depending what the age was then, see. Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school? Did you like school? Speaker 2: Well, I seemed to like school, and the teachers all seemed to, to like me and I responded to them; didn't have the problems that we seem to have now. I don't recall those things then; my problem was adjusting to the demands of teachers and things, and some of the times, I didn't wanna do what they wanted to do, or wanted me to do, and--but food wasn't a problem, but I imagine that it was a problem with the people that were raising me, that--providing the food for me, for my father [Virgil Walden] then, that became much of a strain for him, see, because being--during the [Great] Depression, he couldn't take care of me, that's why I think he agreed with my uncle to take me; that would relieve him of any responsibility for feeding and clothing an extra person there. He could take care of himself but he couldn't take care of himself and this boy. Speaker 1: Now what did your uncle do for a living--the one in Detroit [Michigan] that you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he raised me--Harold and Lena Walden, H-A-R, Harold J. Walden and Lena E. Walden. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They raised me here. Speaker 1: So you were--when you got to them, you were how old? You were in high school, I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Well, not quite; maybe fourteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --whatever the age is for going to intermediate school, see? Speaker 1: Well, maybe thirteen then, maybe thirteen. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so--now what did your uncle do for a living? Speaker 2: He worked in private family and he was a chauffeur, gardener and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that time, and he graduated up to handling real estate here in Detroit, and then he moved out to--after, by then I had gone to the [U.S.] Army. They moved to San Diego [California], but during the period that I was in intermediate school [Levi Barbour Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan] and high school, they raised me until I went into the Army. Story_ID: 267916 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at grade school, did you have a favorite subject in grade school and high school, or-- Speaker 2: Well, I think math was my--math and shop. I can remember making a steam engine, and I used to--I got to the point to where the thing was assembled and everything and they wouldn't give me permission to go to the basement or something and try the thing out, so I took off and went down to the basement of the school and tried it myself, and it was a success--a steam engine. Speaker 1: So was this a kit, or did you have to make it from scratch? Speaker 2: Well, it was about this big, steam engine--and it wasn't a kit as I recall it; it had various parts and things in it you had to make out of--on a lathe, and then you had to assemble 'em together and so forth, and I enjoyed it so much that I just took off, and I think they gave me a few days off for disobedience (laughter). Speaker 1: At school? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), for doing that. But shop and so forth and math--I remember math, I used to give the teacher a rough time when I was in high school and so forth like that. I knew how to do the math and I would do it when she'd call on me, but I guess I didn't apply myself all the time for her. I wanted to play. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school--or favorite teachers? Speaker 2: Well, I can remember this one and her name was Paula Henze, and she was a math teacher and she was probably my favorite. I had probably other favorites; I had--in the shop I had a guy named Bellows or Beddows [ph.], who taught machine shop, and he was one of my favorites, a male teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were in high school--now you went to several schools, right? You went to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [Levi] Barbour [Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan]-- Speaker 1: --Barbour and-- Speaker 2: [Emma] Munger [Middle School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I think that was another intermediate school; then Chadsey [High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: That's a high school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Chadsey High School, and then-- Speaker 2: Then Eastern [High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Eastern. Story_ID: 267917 Speaker 1: How long were you at Eastern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] before you graduated? Speaker 2: I graduated in '41 [1941], so I was there about three or four years there--whatever the high school was then. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you get involved in--now did you have to work when you were in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked; my Uncle Harold [Julius Walden] found me various jobs. I worked at a bookstore; I remember Haymer's Bookstore [ph.], downtown on Congress Street [Detroit, Michigan], and then I worked for a--let's see--tailor shop, pressing, pressing clothes. I can remember once that I was pressing clothes and I was pressing a pair of pants and I left the iron on top of the pants and it scorched 'em--burnt 'em (laughter), and the guy that hired me there, he didn't fire me, but I guess he musta docked my pay there for a week to pay for those trousers that I burnt up (laughter). But that's the kind of employment I had. Whatever Harold could find for me like that, I had jobs like that. He got me into--he worked in the bookstore and so he got me into the bookstore. Speaker 1: Now what did you do in the bookstore? Did you-- Speaker 2: We would pack books to send--ship to people, and then set up displays in the window there, and whatever else was required there by the bookstore owner. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you get involved in any high school activities? Were you involved in sports in high school, or-- Speaker 2: I played on Eastern's tennis team; I was--they wouldn't let me play football because they were afraid--Harold and Lena [Walden] were afraid that I might get hurt or something--break a leg or something else, so they didn't want any contact sport or anything where I might get physical damage or something like that. But I was on the--I was interested in, always in tennis. They were interested in tennis, and they were the ones that caused me to do it, because living with them, they played tennis, I played tennis. We used to go over to Belle Isle [Park, Detroit, Michigan] and at--Northwestern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] had tennis courts, and then other various courts located all over the city. Speaker 1: Okay. So they were pretty good--would you say that they were pretty good guardians for you when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, they--I appreciated the life I lived with them. The war [World War II, WWII] started with the December 7th thing and, and of course I had just finished, and graduated from school, and I was hired at Ford's [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan] as an apprentice, learning various machine tools, and I eventually wound up--I was at the [River] Rouge Plant [Dearborn, Michigan], and I wound up at the Highland Park Plant [Highland Park, Michigan] working on the 90 millimeter anti-aircraft Director, using the skills that I had learned at Ford apprentice school. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were working on a--this is a gun or-- Speaker 2: A what? Speaker 1: A gun you were working on at-- Speaker 2: The Director. The Director is about this square. It, it's a big instrument, but to control a 90 millimeters; I don't know how many it controlled, but I worked on the Director itself out at the Highland Park plant. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It controlled several guns--the elevation of the gun and the setting of the explosive to go off, and it would set 'em up, and we had to work to--what--zero, zero, zero, one thousandths--various machines--milling machines, lathes, grinders, and so forth like that. Story_ID: 267918 Speaker 1: Now, when you were finishing high school [Eastern High School, Detroit, Michigan], did you think about going to college at all? Speaker 2: No, I--you know, that was something that was--I think that college was something that I could not consider because of their [Walden's paternal relatives, Harold Julius Walden and Lena Walden] raising me and taking care of me, and of course as they expressed to me, that I had to go out--after I finished high school, I was gonna go out and get a job, and of course I finished in forty--high school in '41 [1941], and I worked for the DSR [Department of Street Railways; Detroit Department of Transportation] for a while, but I wasn't old enough to drive a bus; I could drive it on the property there, and drive buses around, line 'em up, park 'em wherever they needed, but the big job was gassing 'em up as they came in. Speaker 1: So the DSR stands for the Detroit what? Speaker 2: Street Railways. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess they still call it that. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Now, you enlisted in the [U.S.] Army, right--at a certain point. Speaker 2: Yeah, I volunteered for it and--that sheet in here-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: What is it? One of 'em--this one here. Now, this was--we did--I made a contribution to the National Museum [of the United States Army] there, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you joined--when did you enlist in the Army? Speaker 2: Seven, December, 1942. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a year after Pearl Harbor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One year exactly. Speaker 2: Shortly after Pearl Harbor, I tried to get into the [U.S.] Air Force; I, I was interested in flying, but when they examined me, they said I had a deficiency in my eyes; I was 20-30, and they wanted 20-20 at that time, so I couldn't get in, and because I couldn't get in the Air Force then, I didn't--I waited 'til 7, December '42 [1942] and then volunteered, got inducted, and that's in--all in there. Speaker 1: Right, okay. But couldn't you tell us about it? Now, where did you--now you went to Fort Custer [Michigan] first, right--I believe--right? Speaker 2: Well, it was--Fort Wayne [Detroit, Michigan] here inducted me, and then I got shipped to Custer. Speaker 1: Okay. You had basic training there? Speaker 2: No, Custer was just an intermediate stop then--then I was shipped out after a couple weeks there at Custer--KP [kitchen police] and guard duty, and so forth. And then I was shipped to Camp Atterbury, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We called it Naptown, Indianapolis. Speaker 1: You had basic training there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had basic training run by the 365th Infantry Regiment company, Company C. Speaker 1: Okay. And then--now, what, was the [U.S.] military what you expected it to be when you joined? Speaker 2: Well, I was expecting to fly, so I kinda delayed that after I got a disappointment and turned down for a physical there, and then when I volunteered, I felt I was needed, or they needed other people, or many as people as possible in the service then, so I volunteered in December, 1942-- Story_ID: 267919 Speaker 1: But was the [U.S.] Army what you expected it to be? Did you--were you treated well in the Army? Speaker 2: Well, it was pretty much--I had an idea that what it would be like there. They harassed me a lot. I say harassed--the sergeants and people that were in position like that. One incident I remember down at [Camp] Atterbury [Indiana], the guys told me, "Don't pay any attention to that sergeant; he doesn't know what he's doin'." He--the sergeant had assigned me to wash all those windows there. They said, "Aw, don't wash those windows." So I didn't (laughter) because of all the rest of the men were tellin' me, "Don't do it," so I didn't do it, and what did I do that for (laughter)? He says, "Hey, 'cruit, you got those windows done?" I said, "No, sergeant." "I'm gonna fix you." (Laughter) And he'd catch me out in the line of the lunch, and he said "'cruit, drive out across that field there about a half mile over there; see that red car over there? I want you to drive out to that"--through the snow was 'bout this high out there--"and drive through that snow and come back here with a license number for me." And things like that because I didn't--it got me in trouble (laughter). And I said, "Boy, I can't pay any attention to these people; they tell you all kinda things," (laughter) not to do--not to obey the sergeant and so forth. Speaker 1: So now, the Army in 1941 was segregated, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: And so you're an all-black unit. Speaker 2: That's right, 365th was--it was a component of the 92nd [Infantry Division]; other elements, I don't know where they were, but they eventually assembled out of Fort Huachuca [Cochise County, Arizona]. After I finished basic there at Camp Atterbury, we transferred to Fort Huachuca and they were assembling all the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fort Huachuca, that's in Arizona? Speaker 2: Arizona, right, right, Fort Huachuca, Arizona. And that's when we were assembling everybody to prepare for--to go through advanced training, company, battalion, regimental-type training, and then they were going to go to Louisiana for maneuvers, then to the ETO [European Theater of Operations], but I didn't go that way. Speaker 1: What did you decide to do? Speaker 2: I decided I was gonna get the hell outta there (laughter) 'cause I felt they were gonna surely kill me (laughter) if I stayed in there, see? We had a--oh, they had a casual outfit consisting of a bunch of deadheads and things, and I felt I didn't wanna go with these deadheads and things; they're gonna get me killed, I could see that (laughter). Oh, boy. Story_ID: 267920 Speaker 1: So what did you do, now? Now, this is when you decided to become--is this when you decide to become a paratrooper (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By then, a team from the parachute school [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia] came out to the 92nd [Infantry Division] to get volunteers to form the test platoon--a black test platoon. Speaker 1: Now, what do they mean by a black test platoon? Speaker 2: Well, they, they had first when we got into airborne--well, probably several years before that, they had fifty men--white--as a test platoon; they went through and they formed a--the first units, regiments--501st [Parachute Infantry Regiment; 501st Airborne Infantry Regiment], 502nd [Parachute Infantry Regiment; 502nd Infantry Regiment], 503rd [Parachute Infantry Regiment; 503rd Infantry Regiment] and so forth like that, so there were no blacks in it, and they were not going to--or hadn't planned on accepting, except the pressure from blacks at home, and the president's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] wife, Eleanor [Roosevelt], and so as a result, they sent a team--parachutes from the parachute school out there, to get twenty men to volunteer as a test platoon to see if blacks would jump outta planes. Speaker 1: So that's the state of race, I guess, knowledge in those days was, people didn't believe that blacks would jump out of a plane? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--they didn't believe they could fly planes and they didn't believe they would jump outta planes, see? So that's part of the segregated system then in the [U.S.] military. So I volunteered for it, to go, and was accepted, on the way to Benning. Speaker 1: Okay, Fort Benning, Georgia, right? Speaker 2: Fort Benning, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is where they had the training (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Parachute school was there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --down at Lawson Field [Lawson Army Airfield, Fort Benning, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Now how was that now? How were you treated at Fort Benning in--yeah, at Fort Benning, Georgia? Speaker 2: Well, being treated--the [U.S.] Army being segregated, and you're in a black outfit, you were denied certain things. You couldn't go to the PX [post exchange]--the main PX; you had your own PX in there. They established that for you to go to there, you had to ride on segregated buses and things to Columbus [Georgia] if you left. I didn't go to Columbus that often, but whenever I did go, I had to ride on a segregated bus, and I had to get a segregated bus comin' back, see, from there. So you didn't usually go too often to these places--I didn't go because of that. And the theater was--I think they had a balcony post theater, you didn't go to the main PX, you had your own PX there. Speaker 1: Was it just as good as the other one? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it equal? Speaker 2: It's not. The main PX is--has everything, so (laughter). Story_ID: 267510 Speaker 1: As a test group, did you all--did your group like meet about what kind of example you were gonna have to set? Did people talk to you about what it meant to be a test group, and what you'd have to do? Speaker 2: No, they didn't. We had a schedule you know, you form up in your company; now, we were in a barracks and there were twenty of us in a barracks, and I think that we were downstairs and we were all NCOs [non-commissioned officers]; I was a buck sergeant at that time, and there were people there all the way to a first sergeant. The first sergeant had been in parachute service company there, and he transferred in; he became the first sergeant in our group, so he commanded our group there and he had assistance, but most of the people were NCOs; I don't think--we might have had a few corporals in there. Speaker 1: But I--what I'm asking is did anybody--when you all volunteered to be part of this test group, was there ever a meeting, or someone who spoke to you about what it meant to be a test group in this situation? You were the first African American paratrooper group, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, did somebody actually sit down and did you all discuss this and say, "Hey, we've gotta be on point; we've gotta make sure that we don't get in trouble." Speaker 2: I don't think there was anything like that. They may have just mentioned that it was a test group and that this would determine whether there would be any admission of blacks into the paratroopers then. They had already passed the fifty of the whites, and they had formed several regiments by then, see--and divisions, so it was a case of overcoming this belief that blacks wouldn't jump outta planes, and so they were gonna test run this test group through, and if they were successful, then they would organize a company. Speaker 1: Did you feel--I mean when--I mean how did you feel personally about it? Did you feel that you were gonna make it no matter what, or did you feel like, "Well, if it gets too tough, I'll drop out," or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I didn't really know what it was about when I first volunteered out at Fort Huachuca [Cochise County, Arizona]. I didn't really know what getting into the paratroopers was about, or probably I would have gotten out (laughter), but--and not until I saw the 250-foot towers; I think they had three or four of 'em there, and the thirty-four-foot tower that they had to jump off of out there, and then I realized what this test group was gonna go through, and what it ultimately was gonna be--jumpin' outta planes. So I felt it behooved me to give my all to it, and that's what I was going to do--live or die (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now did you ever feel like--did you ever feel like, "Oh, I don't know if I wanna do that; let me"-- Speaker 2: No, I never felt that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I always felt that I was gonna succeed at this. I think they instilled enough of us in--of an idea that they were gonna form--take blacks in if they were successful with it, and only--we only lost three people out of the twenty; seventeen of us finished it. One of 'em had a rough time; his father died and he had gone through part of it and had to come back, so he had to be sandwiched in with the whites that were going and, and they wouldn't pack his 'chute. What you did is pair off--you packed your own 'chutes there initially, and he didn't have the benefit of all that. The rest of us we could pair off and pack 'chutes; now, we might pack 'chutes, and then you'd re-pack 'em again, and then if your buddy didn't like the way a 'chute was packed, he would ask, "Let's tear this apart and let's repack this 'chute again." It never worried me and I never worried about it. I packed mine, I think one time, then I let it go; I was satisfied with it. The only one that you didn't pack was your reserve, and the riggers packed those-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the one that fits in the front up here, the safety one. Story_ID: 267511 Speaker 1: The treatment that you receive [at U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia] was so hard and so strenuous that it caused you--you immediately felt animosity toward the NCOs [non-commissioned officers]; you had nothing but NCOs down there, white NCOs and things, and it would cause you to feel, "I'm gonna make a success of this and I'm gonna do this and I'm gonna accomplish this," and you would run. We'd run down there every morning before we had breakfast down--five miles down 'round Lawson Field [Lawson Army Airfield, Fort Benning, Georgia] and back before you had breakfast, see? And then you'd run some more, then you'd run some more. Double-timing is it--to build up your legs, for one thing--strengthen your legs, and the push-ups to strengthen your arms so you could pull down on those risers and things in the 'chute. But the whole training was geared to make you want to succeed, make you want to succeed. Speaker 2: So, was there ever a time when somebody did something to sabotage what you all were doing, or did you pretty much support it? Speaker 1: I don't recall that; I think all of 'em--they wanted us to, to succeed and the, the white NCOs that supervised us directly and that ran us, they wanted us to succeed. There was it--I think if they'd wanted to sabotage you, they could have easily sabotaged you even by pushing you beyond your ability to endure it, see? Then you would have had a problem-- Story_ID: 267512 Speaker 1: You started telling us about how you spent your day [at U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia]; you got up and ran five miles, then you ate, then you ran some more, and there's a lotta running and push-ups and so forth-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but what about the, the other training? Now, they had these towers--I saw pictures of these huge towers they take you to. Did--tell us about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well, you had small doors representative of a [Douglas] C-47 [Skytrain] and you--or--and even platforms before that. You jumped off a platform; you'd have to stand like this--you imagine me standing up there, and you'd jump off there and you had to jump with your feet together and then land to the side and roll, and we did that, and we exercised. Speaker 1: How high a place would you jump off with your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The platform was about four feet high; yeah, four feet--four feet high, or five feet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And after you jumped off of there and, and you did it in a satisfactory fashion, then you'd line up on the inside of a mock-up of a C-47. They tell you how to put your hands in the side of the plane, and then to stand with your left foot 'cause we--at that time, we jumped outta the left side of the plane, and then you did a kind of a half-turn when you swung out, but the air stream passing by the plane would make you turn anyway, see? You'd kick your right foot out, and you'd turn to the left like that, and then you would take your hands off the side, and then you'd--your 'chute was there. They had stage--A Stage, B, and C--four stages I think they had in there, and the initials--A Stage was physical conditioning, to build you up to the--and then the B Stage was jumping off the platform and inside the mock-up. Story_ID: 267513 Speaker 1: C Stage went to the towers, the 250-foot tower. Then, the first one you went up, you sat in a seat, and it would just go up and you would have a harness on and everything, and it would just drop you down; control--very controlled; it had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cables-- Speaker 1: --cables on the side to it. Now, when you graduated from that, that's to give you the experience of it, or if you weren't--if you were gonna fall out, that's when you'd fall out--I mean if you quit or something like that. Speaker 2: If you couldn't take that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you couldn't take height. Speaker 2: That sense of dropping and falling-- Speaker 1: Lotta people couldn't take heights, and so forth like that, so--then the next stage you'd graduate to freefall in a 250-foot tower and, and they would hook the 'chute [parachute] up. The 'chute--this is--imagine, this is the 'chute, the outer circumference there; they would go 'round, and hook this on and then you would go up, up in the air, 250 feet, and then they would hold you up at the top, and you would drop a piece of paper and they would watch that for the wind drift; if it drifted back in the tower, they wouldn't let you go, they'd keep you up there and go to the next one. There were one, two, three--four, four 'chutes could go up, I think, at one time like that. Wherever the paper drifted away from the tower, they would say, "Ready," and then they would go up and somehow that 'chute, the 'chute when it got to the top, would release it from its hook around here, and you were free. You would slowly drift out and 250 feet down you'd hit the ground, and you were supposed to go through all the--keep your feet together, get your reserve, hang onto your reserve; okay, prepare to land, and land. And then you'd be up like this and pull down, pull down on your risers, and then you'd land and you'd--kinda like a tumble, so that you would roll with it. Speaker 2: Now, what happened if--did you ever--if the wind was blowing back the other--towards the tower, then that would mean that the 'chute would hit the tower, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They wouldn't drop because the 'chute would hit into the tower, and then the 'chute might get killed (laughter) up there if you land in that tower up there, so that's the reason they had a piece of paper to you to drift away from the tower, see? Speaker 2: Now, did you see anybody get hurt? Speaker 1: No, not, not there [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia]. Most of the time they got hurt from exiting the plane. I mean when they got out and hit the ground, like I did--I think my fourth jump or so, I hit it, hit it wrong and kinda broke my ankle a little bit, but not enough to warrant getting out there, or you might break your arm or somethin' like that, but you were so trained from the physical build-up in there that you could al- you felt like you could jump out of a plane without a 'chute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's the way you eventually reach the point that you thought you could jump outta there without a 'chute; land on the ground safely (laughter), and see you'd squash (laughter). Story_ID: 267514 Speaker 1: Tell us about the first time you went up in a plane, and-- Speaker 2: Well, because my last name began with W, I think there was only one other W behind; I was usually the next to the last, or near the last to jump whenever we got ready to jump, and what they would do, you would line up and then you would stand in the door, get ready; the sequence of it was to stand up, hook up, check equipment, and when you checked equipment up there, the man in front of you would turn around and you would check him off, then you would pat him and then tell him he was over--you'd hit him on the leg. The last man had to turn around for this next man to--in front of him to have him check him out to be sure he was hooked up, be sure he had all his equipment on there, and he was ready to go. Then, they would come over and make--the initial jump was made on individual basis. The jump master would be on the floor of the plane, and he would tell you, "Stand in the door," while the rest of the people were sitting down. The first man, "Stand in the door," and had you throw your ankle line snap fastener, throw it past the door--this is the door here, and then you'd stand in the door--stand with your hand out, then you're ready, and you would exit when the green light came on. You'd look over here and--but only on the command of the jump master. Jump master would tap you on the inside of your--just below your knees there, and he'd say, "Go!" And you would go. Then, the plane would circle around, and then he would take the next man and he would say, "Stand up! Hook up!" So, it would make about twenty circles like that see? And so you jumped individually and--the idea being that this is the--will make or break; either he goes or he doesn't go, and if he doesn't go, he's gonna balk; he's gonna stand there, and maybe he says, "Go," and you don't wanna go, so you balk, and he'll just tell you, "Go on back in there and sit down on the right"--you're rejected (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so they never, they never push you out anyway, huh? Speaker 2: No, don't push you out, they don't push you; not at this stage. This--pushing out is--usually is caused by an individual who hesitates; he hesitates in the door, and if he hesitates, then either the next man may push him out if the whole stick is going, or the jump master may push him out if they're jumping individual basis, as we did on the first one. Individual basis is, that's a part of breaking down the system of whether the guy is gonna really make a paratrooper, or not. That would--that's usually when--some of 'em may break down before that because of--allergic to heights or something like that and they didn't know it. Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel when you first jumped out? Did you--were you glad to go, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was eager; I was an eager beaver, ready to go, 'cause I was going to, going to make it. There was no question in my mind about it, see? And plus, there's an incentive for it because fifteen or more had already gone out there; what am I gonna do? 'Course you can quit anyplace along the line, see, and some would quit that don't get up; they don't get up. They aren't gonna go, or they might say, "I'm not gonna go." They transfer those people out and get 'em out; they get orders that day. Story_ID: 267515 Speaker 1: Now, out of the twenty black men who were in this experiment, like three didn't make it. Now-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Did they--were they afraid to jump, or did they do something else? Speaker 2: I don't recall what, what caused those three to go out; that's a good question. I don't--they weren't near me or I wasn't near them at the time that they quit; some may have quit on the ground, or may have said that they didn't wanna go. "This is not for me; I'd rather do something else than jump out of a plane" (laughter). Well, I thought that at the beginning, but when I got down to the parachute school [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia], I felt that it was a case of making it or breaking it, and I wasn't gonna break it; I was gonna make it. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now the--sixteen of you made it on that first time, right?--and then a seventeenth later, but they called the first sixteen the sweet sixteen, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They called them that because they did, and then they found out that the seventeenth man came back from his father's funeral and everything, but he had to be placed in with a white group that was going in, and 'course they had the segregation and so forth, so he didn't have anybody to go through; so it was hard for him. That guy got outta the service and went to--later, he got out and went to I think it's Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland], became a doctor. Now, see, we had each other--all seventeen of us together; we can go back to the barracks and so forth like that, see, so we could talk about things; he didn't have anybody here. He could get back to the barracks with us; we already had our wings and everything. Speaker 1: Okay. So, after--now, was there a--after the sixteen of you made it, and jumped out all right, I mean was there a lotta publicity following that about black people being able to be paratroopers? Speaker 2: Well, in the papers, they had it--the newspaper reporters; black newspaper reporters evidently received word of it, and the black press received, but I don't recall anything; they had a post paper [The Bayonet; Bayonet & Saber] there, and then immediately, we went into--they, they designated us as the nucleus of the 555th Parachute Infantry Company [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion], and we were to stay there, and we were to receive volunteers; they had a whole raft of people that wanted to volunteer for the paratroopers. Speaker 1: Now, these were other African Americans, right? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 267516 Speaker 1: So, you were going to be the nucleus of a black squadron of paratroopers, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, battalion, yeah. Speaker 1: Battalion, okay, okay--555th [Parachute Infantry Company; 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion], the Triple Nickle, they called it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is that what happened? And other people came and you--did you all, did your group train additional people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we--while we were waiting for the people to come in, you know, they have to be processed; they had to be clothed, and they had to be assigned the barracks and things like that. That didn't take long, but what took the--took a little time was to--the number that they would pass through; in other words, how many were gonna go? Twenty of 'em at a time, or are there gonna be forty of 'em or fifty of 'em? I don't know those figures there because I wasn't privy to that information, but the first sergeant had that--privy to it and maybe they had twenty; whenever they got a number of twenty, there would be a team, and they would take 'em into the system there. The rest of us that had finished there--I went to demolition school; they had airborne or parachute demolition school, and I went to a communications school. I went to jump master school, all this to build up for the unit because they were gonna need jump masters, and they need communication people; that's where I learned Morse code, and where I jumped with a pigeon, where it mentions in one of those papers that I gave you there, that I jumped with a pigeon and I used a light system. We were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Well, I just wanted to--I'm just kinda curious about the pigeon. Now, what was that about, the jumping with a pigeon? Speaker 2: Well, that's part of the communication school, see? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First, demolition--all aspects of it. We didn't--as I recall it, you went to those schools on a integrated basis; you reported at a certain time, and you were integrated right in with other whites that were going to the--those schools and things; there wasn't a segregated system there. Now, back to the pigeon, the pigeon was part of the communications school because that was the means of communicating amongst the radios and things; we jumped with all kinds of radios--PRC-6 [AN/PRC-6], I think it was, then we had PRC-300 [sic. SCR-300]; it's about this wide--great big one. And it'd sit down beneath your 'chute here, and you jumped with that one; that was the biggest radio that we jumped with. And then you jumped with a pigeon in a cage, a little cage, and I guess he was down underneath; I don't recall exactly where he was--so you wouldn't squeeze him to death or anything like that. But it would show that in a communication platoon, they had pigeons, and that was their means of either a regiment or a battalion, to communicate any means--probably a last resort. Speaker 1: Okay, so you could write a message on a pigeon and the pigeon would go back to where the base was--the homing pigeon (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, these pigeons were all trained from--so they would go back probably to the parachute school, see? Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 267517 Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera about the weight of the equipment that you had to carry--a pigeon, radios, you said your M1 rifle [United States Carbine, Caliber .30, M1] was in a case-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Now, the initial stage now--by the initial stage, as we were going through parachute training, you didn't jump with that equipment; it was added on. After the first jump you made, you might jump with a pack and you'd have a pack about that big, made with a roll on it, and you might jump with that, but the first stage is just the parachute--two parachutes--your main on your back, and your reserve up here in front. You didn't get the rest of this equipment until you went out; now, when you got demolition you had demolition. That's the reason they had the legs on, the paratroopers had pockets on the side here, pockets up here, pockets all up here on your thing, and you had a knife that was zippered in here, up here so that you could cut your suspension lines or anything else you needed in case you got into trees or things like that; they had that on there. Speaker 1: Did you ever get caught in a tree? Speaker 2: Well, I've been caught in 'em, but not to the extent where I had to use this knife here to get down, because you might get down and you may have a rope. Now, when we had jumped out west, in the northwestern section there, there were a lotta men that landed in trees and so forth, and they had to take their reserves off and let their reserve down, and I guess maybe twenty feet you'd have on it, to climb down it, and then you had a rope on you--fifty-foot rope that you could climb down, but I never had occasion to use, use any of that equipment or even use the reserve. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, did you spend all of your time in teaching as a paratrooper, or did they send you to combat? Did they ever send you to-- Speaker 2: Oh, your basic combat training was infantry. After you get on the ground, see, you--that's just a means of getting there, see? You fight like infantry. Well, I think that handles--now, in the demolition course, you jump with explosives on you, and you have taps, safety fuses and things like that, but you learn how to blow down trees, how to blow railroad tracks, how to blow up trains and so forth like that, see, in demolition. And you jump with demolition equipment in demolition school. In communication, you had the radios and you graduated--got up to this big SCR-300 radio; it's a big heavy radio, see, and you had your pack. Now, I was going to explain that when, when it got to be excessive in the weight that you carried, you would have all the way down to your boots, and what you would have--the excess weight you would have hooked onto a rope, and when you, once your 'chute opened out here, then you would take this rope, and drop down the equipment, so really heavy equipment and so forth--maybe you had a lot of explosives; if you had a lot of explosives, you might have them in a container or something, and then you would drop that down in a big bag or something like that if they didn't send it in to you or drop it in to you, I should say. But an individual--if the individual had a lot of equipment, like you have all this paraphernalia here, you would hang this on a rope, and then what you would do, you're suspended up here on a 'chute, and you'd drop this equipment down; the first thing it's gonna hit would be the equipment. You don't land with that equipment; you land all right, but it's tied on the rope (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so that kinda makes it a little easier on the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, making it easier on you because if it hits first, and it'll drag along the ground and then you'll hit, but you're only carrying your rifle, your pack, and the ammunition and so forth like that for combat. Story_ID: 267518 Speaker 1: I read that you were assigned to the Northwest at some point, out in, was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, after we were organized as a infantry company and it began to exceed the capacity of a company and the assigned area there in the barracks, what they did was ship us to Camp Mackall [North Carolina]; that's near Fort Bragg [North Carolina], not far from Fort Bragg, and they had the company [555th Parachute Infantry Company] there, and then they re-designated as a battalion [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion] because they could see that they were going to exceed even a company, and so they had to have--expand out more into a battalion size unit to accommodate all this. At that time, we got to Camp Mackall--I think it was '44 [1944], and the Germans were breaking through in December, I think, of '44 [1944], and we were losing a lotta paratroopers over there; they called on us to furnish one company to go into combat, so we had expanded to a battalion, we pulled back and assigned everybody to a reinforced company with two officers per platoon, see? There were three--two platoons--three rifle platoons, and there was a headquarters company and A, B and C company, and each of the companies then expanded, and we initially expanded to a reinforced company, and then they called it off; they gave us classified orders to go to Pendleton Field [Pendleton Army Air Force Base, Pendleton], Oregon. We were training for combat, I was--the officer that had encouraged me and was mentoring me to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School] and everything--I went to OCS and came back and became his platoon leader and we were in A Company, and each platoon had a platoon leader and an assistant platoon leader, the idea being that if he got killed, they had me there, or if I got killed, they had him there, then of course if both of us got killed, you've got the platoon sergeant, and then an assistant platoon sergeant--they're backed up. In the airborne, that's the way they go into combat, with two officers per platoon. Story_ID: 267519 Speaker 1: So you didn't get shipped out to Europe [as a member of the U.S. Army 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion during World War II] or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we went to Pendleton Field, [Pendleton Army Air Force Base, Pendleton] Oregon to fight the fires caused by the Japanese [fire] balloons. Japanese balloons were--they were really successful with 'em; they were hitting in the northwest states of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, California, northern California, and southwestern Canada. Speaker 1: Okay, so these balloons were launched by the Japanese from the Pacific and--with explosives on them? Speaker 2: Launched from Japan-- Speaker 1: From Japan. Speaker 2: --and they'd go through the--what do you call it? The [jet] stream, the stream of air that's way up--sixty thousand feet up in the air there, and head to the Northwest. Speaker 1: So, they were designed to then drop down, or something there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were timed, they were on rings and so forth. The ring--the balloon itself was very flimsy, but they accomplished the job, and they were timed for this wind to hit the northwestern section of the United States, and then to drop; then they would drop a bomb, go a little further, drop another bomb, and these were--what should I say? They were flammable type bombs and so forth, so they would start fires and so forth--small fires; and they could see these small fires starting up, so whenever they would see the small fire like this, or smoke or something up there, then they would call us up at Pendleton. We had a detachment down at Chico [Army Air] Field in northern California and--but the bulk of our troops were at Pendleton Field, Oregon, and they would send out, based on reports of the size of the fire or something, and send out men--C-47s [Douglas C-47 Skytrain]--to fly over; they'd pick a DZ--try to pick a DZ--sometimes they weren't successful--a Drop Zone, DZ, and land in it, I would say maybe fifty feet, something like that; if they could land in fifty feet like that for one man, and then come back and run a pass and drop another man in like that, and then they would take off from there and go fight this fire. Now, in some cases, very few cases, because most of those bombs went off; they hit and detonated when they hit the ground or hit up against a tree or something. There might be some that would not detonate, and they trained us with that; we got training--the [U.S.] Forest Service worked with that, too, and we worked with them. They were conscientious objectors, mostly; they didn't wanna fight, but they would jump in and go into this, so they helped train us, and we would have the mask and everything over the helmet; there was a grilled thing over the top of it, and a heavy suit. Most of the times we wore the type suit that the pilots used--the pants and the jacket and thing; that was basically it, except for the helmet, and the helmet had a mesh over the front of it so if you landed in a tree, the chances of it hitting your--knocking your eye out, or your head off or something like that, would be small. We only lost one man like that, and he fell on a very high tree, and I think he got his rope attached to the reserve and so forth, but it was so high that he couldn't stand it any longer and he broke his neck, see? But the rest--most of the men, they fell through these limbs and trees like that; you'd fall to the ground, see? Speaker 1: You were like dropping down in the forest, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So your chances of being-- Speaker 2: Well, there were some clearings in there, or short shrub-like trees and things, and you could jump, and that's why you make several passes. Now, if you--if it was a ten-man jump, they didn't jump a stick in there because they wouldn't hit it all; you come back, fly over, jump on out, fly over, jump another one and drop another one 'til they got up to the size of the number of men going in there, see. Story_ID: 267520 Speaker 1: How long did you stay in--as a paratrooper--as an active paratrooper [with the U.S. Army]? Speaker 2: Oh, I was--for cumulative time there because there was a period, a period that I was in Korea. They finally caught up with me two years after my--'49 [1949], I went to Korea, and I was going to Japan as occupation forces, and I went to Company A of the--as a platoon leader. I had been an operations officer and a staff officer, S2, intelligence with the [555th Parachute Infantry] Battalion back at [Fort] Bragg [North Carolina], but when they got me over there, I had all these old soldiers that had been around a long time there, so all I could do was manage the opportune (laughter). But I was a first lieutenant then, and I commanded Company A of the 24th Infantry [Division] and--but they ran outta captains; they were--they pulled me from being a captain--not a captain but a first lieutenant commanding a company and I was to turn my company over to a captain, and they were pulling captains from all over Japan--black captains from all over Japan to take over these infantry companies that had first lieutenants in 'em. But then, just before we got ready to ship out to Pusan [Busan, South Korea], they found out that they had one company left, that I was in a process of turning it over to my captain that was to take over that company, and they assigned me to Second Battalion--F Company--to take over F Company, so I went to F Company as a first lieutenant, the only first lieutenant commanding a company going over. Speaker 1: So everybody else is a captain, except for you? Speaker 2: Everybody else was captain. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were pulling captains from all over--PX [post exchange] officer, theater officer, whatnot; maybe an officer, but they were all infantry officers and they wanted the infantry experience and so forth, so they didn't feel they could train this--or take this first lieutenant, but then they ran out of captains, black captains, to command the companies. Speaker 1: So they had to promote you eventually, didn't they (laughter)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I got promoted by the theater there first, and then a month after we got over there, orders came out from the [U.S.] Department of the Army to promote me (laughter), but it was too late; they had already--the Far East Command had already promoted me to captain, see? Speaker 1: So, so this is about what year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, 1950. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: July, 1950. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We went into Korea. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Landing at Pusan. Story_ID: 267521 Speaker 1: Any memorable stories from those days? Speaker 2: Well, I remember we left Pusan [Busan, South Korea] and went on a train, and I remember this train being--bullet holes all in this train; I was really shocked; this--evidently, the .50 calibers or something had done a fine job in shooting up these trains and cars; you could see the sky through the holes in it (laughter), and blood spots all over, and on the train there, so that was a memorable one to me. That part of it--other than the fighting now; that was memorable (laughter). Speaker 1: What--now, did you experience a lotta combat in Korea (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I commanded F Company [25th Infantry Division, 24th Infantry Regiment] for the entire period. I think I was over there about nine months, and all except five or six months, the last five or six months, I commanded that company--Company F, Second Battalion, through all of it, and that was something. Speaker 1: Now, the Korean War is--a lot of people, younger people don't even remember the Korean War now, but the Korean War was a really hot--I mean a lot of fighting was going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lotta fighting. We were on the way to the Yalu [River]--spread out with Eighth [U.S.] Army on the, on the west section and Tenth [U.S.] Army with [Major] General [Edward] Almond in charge of the Tenth Army on the east, heading up to the Yalu when the Chinese hit--Chinese volunteers. We had--this was after the breakout, and if we'd gone up there--some units had made the Yalu River; 7th Infantry Division, they made the Yalu. Elements of the British, I think, made the Yalu--elements of them, but we were entirely spread out too far to do this; we didn't know. They talked about the Chinese and we didn't believe it until they hit us, and when they hit us they massacred us--tore us apiece, and I remember being on a big hill about five hundred meters high. I was pretty, pretty safe up--that's the farthest I ever got in Korea there, but they didn't bother me there; no, they didn't bother me because they were on the low levels, faster going than to go over top of these mountain peaks up there, but then when you pull out the--our units were so spread out there, all on the line there; I was next to the 2nd Infantry Division and I can remember the night that the Chinese attacked (unclear). I said, "Those poor guys down there are really suffering; they are really suffering with that attack," because it was a tremendous attack that they launched on us, or we eventually ran into 'em up there like a beehive or something. We believed it then, that the Chinese were in there, and they pushed us back and we withdrew--I withdrew from my position down along where the 2nd Division was; I was on the right flank of my regiment, and then to the right of us was the 2nd Division, and that was horrible; that was really horrible to go through that. Story_ID: 267522 Speaker 1: Was this your first big combat, I mean, in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this was my first combat there, the baptism of fire. We pulled down at Kunu-ri [Kaechon, North Korea], and at Kunu-ri, I remember running into a colonel, a battalion commander; I think he was white, he had commanded the Third Battalion. I can't think of that left element of the 2nd Infantry Division, and those people were catching hell, and he was--asked me the question, where was his battalion. I didn't know where his battalion was, I didn't--"Have I seen any of 'em?" (Laughter) I wouldn't know 'em if I saw 'em (laughter). Well, if I saw their patch up here; they had Indian [Native American] heads on their patches up here, but I could see he was kind of out of it; next thing he was gonna be is evacuated, but I had to leave him and go apart because I crossed the Chongchon River and regrouped to go join my unit [Company F, Second Battalion, 25th Infantry Division, 24th Infantry Regiment], and I was lucky to get back just myself (laughter), and the few men I had with me there. Speaker 1: So, this--I know you read about Korea--the Korean War, you hear of human wave attacks where there's a lotta people coming at you at one time. Was this the kind of-- Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was, to a--up in that stage there, but they talked about--it was a human wave; machine gunners wouldn't fire because nothing but men did they see--enemy down there, but eventually, when he fired, it was just too much; he wasn't gonna knock out everything--well, it would have run over the top of him, see? Those things did happen like that. Now, I had that experience where they hid us after we pulled south, several lines--positions we'd pull to, but what it did to me, it caused a disruption of my company and so forth, down to the only thing I could control were the few men around me, and I got back with them, and I got a long route withdrawal, and we established blocking positions, and then we stayed there for a while and we moved back to the--further south to blocking positions, and this continued but it was a--really confusion, real confusion. Part of my element--they said, "Well, get on any transportation going out." Well, the infantry unit given a command to get on infantry--to get on any vehicle going out meant that they would get on trucks of this unit or that unit, get on artillery pieces. Some units were going way over to the coast. We were in a position; we were to go to the next route leading south. Well, I just had a band of people there, just a small band, and when I got back there, they were pulling people off of trucks and they set up check points and things, and they asked people, "What outfit are you in?" They'd tell 'em where they would go; it was confusion, real confusion. And when I got back to the regiment, I was given the assignment of protecting the CP [command post], the regimental CP, with the few men that I had, before we got down--as we got further and further back, we'd pick up more and more people, see--stragglers that said, "Check point,"--MPs [military police] and things, and check points would unload the people off the artillery, unload 'em off the trucks and things, check them and see where they were supposed to go because, in the initial confusion, there was no effort to try to keep people together, to keep a unit together--not until we got further south. Story_ID: 267900 Speaker 1: Now, how long were you--well, the Korean War lasted until, basically, what--'55 [1955] or so (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For me, it lasted until April of '51 [1951]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then I went to--I was rotated to the [United] States, and I was sent to the regular course at--advanced course at Fort Benning, Georgia--Infantry Advanced [Leader Course], and upon completion of the Infantry Advanced Course, I was assigned to the 11th Airborne Division; this is before, I told you there was a break between the time that I was with the 82nd [Airborne Division]. See, from [Fort] Campbell [Kentucky], I think I forgot to mention this to you--we went to Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and we were assigned to the 82nd Airborne Division, and eventually, the 82nd took us in as an integrated unit, living in a segregated area, all-black area of Spring Lake [North Carolina], and--but a few officers and a few NCOs [non-commissioned officers] were assigned individually within the 82nd, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how did you feel about--now you were in the [U.S.] Army when [President Harry S.] Truman integrated the [U.S.] Armed Forces. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you see it coming? Speaker 2: Well, I saw it coming because of the efforts of [Major] General [James M.] Gavin; General Gavin wanted to integrate them in there earlier; there were a lot of white officers, high-ranking officers, that were opposed to it and so forth, and they didn't like it. In fact, one of the higher ranking officers said, "Was he going to let those blacks wear the fourragere that the French had bestowed on the 82nd, and the Belgian lanyard?" And he said he was, he was definitely gonna do it; that was part of the uniform for them when they integrated, but he was the man who really pushed the integration there for us. And in 1947, we were made the 3rd Battalion of the 505 Airborne Infantry Regiment [sic. 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment; 505th Infantry Regiment], but we stayed in a segregated area over there that most of the unit did; they were 3rd Battalion 505; it was the only regiment that had three battalions. See, back then, we only had two battalions in a regiment; there was--the other two regiments consisted of only two battalions, but he integrated the third battalion into them in 1947, and in '49 [1949], of course I went to Korea and we discussed what happened there--part of it, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I left the outfit then and then, let's see where, where we are now; we skipped over--we followed Korea-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're in 1951, and you said you had retrained and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, went to the Infantry Advanced Course down at Benning-- Speaker 1: --at Fort Benning, right. Speaker 2: --and then on completion of that course, I was assigned to the 11th Airborne Division-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at Fort Campbell, Kentucky-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I was assigned to the 188th Airborne Infantry Regiment. Story_ID: 267901 Speaker 1: What happened at Fort Campbell [Kentucky]? Speaker 2: Fort Campbell. Well, the major thing I think that happened then was that they weren't gonna ship me out; the outfit was being gyroed. I was the regimental adjutant of the 188th [Airborne Infantry Regiment]; I had graduated--what--promoted to that, and they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you're a captain by now, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely a captain. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I came there as a captain there; I didn't make major until I went back to [Fort] Bragg [North Carolina] again. They accused me of being a communist. Speaker 1: Where? At-- Speaker 2: They said that I'd attended meetings of Paul Robeson. Well, my wife [Roberta Hill Walden] at that time was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait a minute now; let me get the dates straight on this now. Is this at Fort Campbell, Kentucky? Speaker 2: Fort Campbell, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is nineteen fifty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: --two [1952], okay, all right. So--and when did you get married? Speaker 2: Well, I was married in--now, let's see, we were '52 [1952]; the second marriage I don't count; the third one is my wife [Wendy Brierly Walden] now; the first one I was married to Reverend [Charles A.] Hill's oldest daughter. Reverend Hill was (unclear) you're going to Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] and he supported Ford Motor Company and a union and so forth, and his church at Hartford Avenue Baptist Church [Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan], and that's one of the reasons for their success, because they had this support--one of the reasons for it. But they accused me of being a communist. Speaker 1: And why did they accuse you of that? Speaker 2: They said the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had seen my car at Reverend Hill's address, and Paul Robeson was there at that time. Paul Robeson was there to sing-- Story_ID: 267902 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1952, in Fort Campbell, Kentucky (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: --and they said that--they accused you of being a communist because your car was in front of Reverend Campbell's--I mean at Reverend [Charles A.] Hill's church. Speaker 2: Because the car was parked in front of Reverend Hill's house. Well, I stayed at Reverend Hill's house because I was married to his daughter [Roberta Hill Walden]; I had nothing to do with Paul Robeson. Speaker 1: So, did you hear Paul Robeson speak at all, or you were just there? Speaker 2: No, I never heard him speak and wasn't even introduced to him, and so I didn't really know he was there. Well, they might have mentioned that he was there attending--he's going to sing at the church [Hartford Avenue Baptist Church; Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan] and so forth like that, but I had two girls then; maybe a third girl--yeah, maybe a third girl, and that was my father-in-law, so I stayed at his house; whenever I was in Detroit [Michigan], I stayed at his house. Now, I didn't, didn't know anything about the thing--I, I think they, they were barking up the wrong tree, but it affected me because they said, "You've attended the meetings and so forth; there was a meeting." I didn't know anything about it; I didn't even go to hear him sing at the church, so I don't think that's true. Speaker 1: So, what did they do? Did they believe you, or what did they do? Speaker 2: Well, they relieved me of my assignment as a regimental adjutant there, and they assigned me to a post unit, which was a non-airborne status, to work with range central. I did this for a while but they--in the meantime, the 11th Airborne Division had received--they were gonna gyro to Germany and they were going to go to the area of Augsburg [Germany] and somewhere around that area. Now, I wanted to gyro with them; I was in the outfit, so why shouldn't I go? Speaker 1: Now, what does gyro mean? I mean what is it when they say, gyro? Speaker 2: Oh, you gyroed--at that time, the terminology meant that you were gonna be shipped to Europe. Now, normally, they would bring another outfit out of Europe; I don't know which outfit they were gonna bring outta there, but they were gonna send the 11th Airborne over there; that's what gyro meant there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to an outfit. Usually, you exchange with another one; that was the gyro. But, because they had relieved me and I was not an airborne status--jump status, and you receive a hundred dollars a month being on jump status, I didn't wanna be at range central or range control; I wasn't trained for that, I took on that job--I could do it. That was to, I think, to--because they were gonna go, they had to get rid of people that were--what do you call 'em? Undesirable, let's say; you're questionable, you're a security risk--that's what it was, a security risk. But I pressed; I asked for an audience with the commanding generals--Snuffy Smith, I called him, and I said--I complained about being assigned to range central having been assigned as the regimental adjutant--first time that a black had been assigned to a regimental level, and being relieved of that job and given to range central; he couldn't explain to me the reason why or anything, but then I said, "I think that they--I deserve to have a hearing." Well, they had a hearing for me; it was like a Gestapo or [Joseph] Stalin's--what's his outfit called? They questioned me for hours and everything, and that's when it--they brought up the business of my car being at Reverend Hill's house when Paul Robeson was there, and that I attended the communist meetings and so forth, and sympathies like that, and my wife was a member of the American Youth for Democracy. I said, "Oh, God, these damn people" (laughter); excuse my English here (laughter). I said, "All they do is fight up the wrong street; the people that they should fight, they don't fight, that they need to accuse and get on they don't get on, they get on somebody like poor me, poor me" (laughter). Story_ID: 267903 Speaker 1: Well the upshot of it was, they weren't gonna take me on the gyro to Europe with the 11th Airborne [Division], so I stayed there until they left, and then they transferred me back to the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] because I was a paratrooper, and they probably knew more about me than anybody else did, but General [Snuffy] Smith [ph.] didn't investigate or do anything about it there, and so I think I kind of outlived that one down, because when I got back to the 82nd, that's when I got promoted to major, and then I became the G2 exec [executive officer] of the 82nd Airborne Division. Speaker 2: So you--so when were you promoted to major? What year was that? Speaker 1: About '53 [1953]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Shortly after I got to the 82nd--1953, I think it was--'53 [1953] or '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: So you were back with the 82nd Airborne in Fort Bragg, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Well, those were the days of the [Senator Joseph] McCarthy hearings on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was part of it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The McCarthy--that's what I got ripped into. Speaker 2: Those were those witch hunt days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the guy's name?--The Jewish fellow that--Cohn? Cohn, or something? Speaker 2: Cohn, Roy Cohn, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the one that--evidently, they uncovered something on there and they said something about me being a security risk and so forth, but that's--the actions of those people caused me there an unhappiness. Speaker 2: So that kinda--did that kinda blow over after '54 [1954]? You know, when they had the McCarthy hearings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --and they kinda got discredited there. Speaker 1: Yeah, they--but they'd done the damage then, see, and I think what they did, they mark your file--your file in Washington [D.C.] or something like that; you become a questionable case, see? "We got to watch this guy; we got to watch him. What is he gonna do?" (Laughter) Nothing but fight for his country, give his life for his country, and so forth. It was something. Story_ID: 267904 Speaker 1: So you're a major now at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] in '53 [1953]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what happened then? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we're continuing the story--I forgot; we jumped all over. Well, I stayed there until '57 [1957], and in '57 [1957], I was assigned to Europe, to the 746th Armored Rifle Battalion--[746th] Armored Infantry Battalion, and later it was--changed its name from that to 3rd Battalion of the 51st Infantry [Regiment], 4th Armored Group [4th Armored Division], and I was part of the armored group. And I was stationed at Kirch-Goens--Kirch-Goens, Germany with the 3rd Armored Division, and in the 3rd Armored Division we received the training and so forth with them, but we were part of an armored group that was stationed down at--I can't think of that place; it's one of the places we go into, Frankfurt, Germany. Speaker 1: So--now, this is like--you were stationed over in Germany during the Cold War, I guess, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how tense did things get over there? I mean--or was it pretty much routine? Speaker 2: Very tense, very tense. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We went out, stayed in the field most of the time; I spent most of my time at the training area, Grafenwoehr [Army Base, Germany] testing armored battalions--armored rifle battalions; not the tank battalion but the armored rifle battalions, running 'em through tests, the companies through tests, and the battalions through tests, and when we were back at our main cantonment area, what we did, we stayed in the field and went out to battle positions. Now, we were part of 5th Corps, which was a reserve unit, and they were to--they had four tank battalions and one heavy tank battalion, and 'course we were with the 3rd Armored Division, and they had their own organization in there, and we would train with them, but we stayed in the field and we made reconnaissance and so forth in case the Russians [People of the Soviet Union] decided to attack, and we-- Speaker 1: In those days, the [U.S.] Army took that as a serious threat that the Russians might attack, actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --at some point and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we even had their--worked out with nuclear weapons and certain nuclear weapons were to be exploded along the--certain roads and so forth like that, and we had classes on 'em. They're about this big, a big ball, 'bout that, that diameter there; we had training on that and everything to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, these devices were actually planted along roads and-- Speaker 2: No, they were to go; they weren't planted there, they could be brought there. The troops would bring 'em there and usually engineer troops and things, and we had a 280 millimeter cannon and so forth. Everything was governed on a basis of where the Russians would hit us, where they would go, and we were to go out, and 'course we would--in our unit, 3rd Armed Rifle Battalion, 51st Infantry--be part of the 4th Armored Group; it's a corps group--corps level group, and they had a sector for us to go into blocking position. The Fulda Gap was one of the areas that they expected the Russians to come in there. It was something. Speaker 1: Now, did you ever encounter any Russian troops to come close (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I wasn't allowed to go because of my security clearance and so forth; I wasn't allowed to go anyplace where I could be captured or anything like that, see, because of classified plans and things. And that was about it. Speaker 1: So how long were you in Germany? Speaker 2: 'Til 1960--a three-year tour over there; '57 [1957], I think, to '60 [1960]. Story_ID: 267905 Speaker 1: I came back to the [United] States and I was assigned to the Sixth [U.S.] Army headquarters. I think I was one of the first black officers to be assigned the Sixth Army headquarters; the rest of 'em were assigned at--rest--I mean black officers were assigned to the corps headquarters, and this pretty well follows those handouts and things that I gave you there to-- Speaker 2: So, you served about--now where were you assigned? It was like you were in the Sixth Army headquarters. Was that in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Presidio [of San Francisco, San Francisco], California. Speaker 2: At the Presidio, out in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: San Francisco, yeah; I'm sorry. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I just assume that you know all this (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, and the people watching don't know all of it, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I was at Sixth Army headquarters there, and--Sixth Army headquarters I was within six months of receiving my bachelor's degree, and I applied for a bootstrap program, and you could be assigned to a university and stay in your job there, so I was assigned for six months to San Francisco State University [sic. San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], and I got my bachelor's degree at that university and returned back to the headquarters, and they in turn had orders for me to go to Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio] and be the PMS there. Speaker 2: Okay, now what does PMS mean? That's the-- Speaker 1: Oh, professor of military science. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So that's in charge of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and all that sorta thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, ROTC. So I went there; after some training, I think I'd gone to Keesler Field [Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi] air ground operations training, and I had nuclear weapons employment training, and after I had gone to the school for that, and then I reported into Central State University. Speaker 2: So how long did you stay at Central State? Speaker 1: Three years. Speaker 2: Okay, so this takes us to what, 1964 or so? Speaker 1: What did I say? Sixty--wait a minute--sixty--where are we, '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: I believe--now--so you were at the Presidio until--so what year did you get your degree at the Presidio? That was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]? Okay. And then you were assigned to Central State for three years, so that takes us to about '65 [1965], I guess, right? Speaker 1: Three years of that. Story_ID: 267906 Speaker 1: Oh, '66 [1966], I got out [of the U.S. Army], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], I retired from there. Speaker 2: Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 1: I had gone just about as far as they would let me go, considering that I was a security risk-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: --so they weren't gonna promote me to full colonel, so this is the avenue that they used to get you outta service; you don't get promoted to the next promotion, you have to go. So I'd finished twenty-three years of [U.S. military] service then. But I was expecting to go to Vietnam [Vietnam War], 'cause Vietnam was really the battle; in fact, I was all geared up and planning with family and everything. They couldn't go with me, they'd have to go home, and then I'd go to Vietnam but it wasn't to be. Speaker 2: Now, how did you like being at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] on a college campus after all these years in the-- Speaker 1: Well, I had heard from other black officers that this is the route that the [U.S.] Department of the Army uses to get rid of black officers as they go up, up; you wind up at PMS [professor of military science], and that's gonna be the end of you. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I don't think that's true now. Speaker 2: That's ironic. Now, Central State is right there at Wilberforce, Ohio, where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wilberforce, yeah, Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 2: --where the famous Colonel Charles Young only reached the rank of colonel. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. He was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]; in fact, that's what the background is--was there--Colonel Charles Young. Speaker 2: Colonel Charles Young; and then buried four miles from the campus is Major Martin Delany, who's the first black major in the Civil War-- Speaker 1: Huh. Speaker 2: --is buried right there, so it's interesting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll be doggone. Was he from Xenia [Ohio], or-- Speaker 2: Well, he was living in Wilberforce [Ohio]; his kids were going to school but he was really from Virginia and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]; you know, he was raised in Virginia, Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, and Pittsburgh-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but he ended up in Wilberforce. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep. But a lotta [U.S.] military history in that little part of Ohio because a lot of Civil War soldiers are buried around there. Speaker 1: Well, after I retired in '66 [1966], I came back to Detroit [Michigan] here, and then of course I got into schools--university and everything, and I was to go to Seattle [Washington] to work with the housing commission, but I got as far as Butte, Montana and my wife [Roberta Hill Walden] died, so I--well, I was going to take my internship at--with the Seattle Housing Commission [sic. Seattle Housing Authority], but she died in Butte, Montana so I couldn't go there, so I came back here to Detroit for the funeral with my two kids that I had with me, and then I was assigned to Port Huron [Michigan]. Story_ID: 267530 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer, and this is the completion interview for you, so would you please just restate your name, and tell me today's date? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's June 29th, 2007, and I am Roger S. Walden, U.S. Army retired, lieutenant colonel. Story_ID: 267531 Speaker 1: I want to start with talking about your internship with the housing--the Detroit Housing Authority [sic. Detroit Housing Commission, Detroit, Michigan]. Was that the actual name of the--who you worked for after you retired from the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: It was the housing commission, and I was with them a short while, and then I was transferred in total--I say in total because, along with several other people, to the--I was trying to say, it was involved in housing repairs, and they became a separate unit by themselves, but I was with the housing commission initially. Speaker 1: Okay, so--and then you went to--was it the City of Detroit's [Detroit, Michigan] Vacant Housing Rehabilitation Program [VHR Program]? Speaker 2: That's right; that was one of the programs that we had with the CED, Community and Economic Development [sic. Community Economic Development] department at that time, and we were transferred from the housing commission to the Community and Economic Development department. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me what did you do there? Speaker 2: Well, we would go over the list of houses that the federal government had, and we would determine whether we would buy those houses or not; we would send people out to look at the houses and, and see if we could make the repairs on them and if so, we'd buy that house from the federal government and then it became the property of the City of Detroit then. Speaker 1: So, these houses--were these houses that were maybe foreclosed on and FHA [Federal Housing Administration] owned those properties through HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or through FHA? Speaker 2: It could have been, could have been. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Usually, we did not know, at the time, whether, whether it was a foreclosure or not; it was just a list of houses that they had available that they would let the city look at them, determine whether they would purchase the property. We couldn't take a house that was too far gone or should be demolished, but if it had been kept in good shape, reasonable shape there, and we could repair it by our estimates and so forth, we would do that. Speaker 1: Well, this was in 1966, '67 [1967]? Later (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, '67 [1967], '68 [1968], about that time, and it continued on. Story_ID: 267532 Speaker 1: We had the VHR Program, the Vacant Housing Rehabilitation Program, and then we expanded out--we had the [Urban] Homestead Program included here in the City of Detroit [Michigan], in which we would enlist these houses and repair them, and then we would list them up for homesteading purposes. Speaker 2: Tell me what the purpose of homestead was. What was the purpose of the homestead? Speaker 1: It's to add 'em--let a person buy a house, homesteading it--the house--they had to pay for it; of course they had to pay for it but usually they were pretty good deals, and we didn't have to do too much as far as repair work or something, and--because we had to contract--have contractors would bid on the house and how much it would--how much they would pay on it to repair it, and then we would put it in the homestead program, and we had that for a while, in addition to the VHR Program. Speaker 2: Now, the vacant house, that was just--those were homes that people just abandoned. Speaker 1: Yeah. And we could repair them and sell them at Vacant Housing Repair Program [sic.]. Speaker 2: And these houses were sold at a reduced price or a fair market price? Speaker 1: Fair market price there. Speaker 2: Was this program something like HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] where--could people buy any of these homes for very low amounts and then fix them up and sell, or did you fix all of the houses--repair all of the homes? Speaker 1: No, we had to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You rehabbed all of them? Speaker 1: We had to have contractors that would do the repairs. Initially, what happened, there would be a list and the city would go out and say what repairs had to be done as a minimum on the house to make it livable, and then that was the basis for determining those programs. Speaker 2: Well, were any of these programs like the HUD program--the Housing and Urban Development programs? Speaker 1: They were, they were very similar, very similar to this, but they were City of Detroit-run programs. Speaker 2: Right. Were there a lot of houses that needed to be repaired? Speaker 1: Oh, quite a few. Story_ID: 267533 Speaker 1: Tell me, why do you think that that happened--why there were so many vacant homes [in Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Well, it's like the situation that exists now; people lose their job, and ultimately they lose their home because they're working at a--probably at a low scale, and if they have a large family there, the chances of them being able to maintain the home would be very slim, and they would lose them. For various reasons, they would go back to the mortgage companies, and the mortgage companies would then turn them over to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and it would become a list of properties; we'd have a lot of 'em. Speaker 1: So, with this program, were people able to buy houses? Speaker 2: Yes, but they had to show the means to pay for 'em--have a job, steady income, and be able to meet the requirement for 'em. Speaker 1: Was there any down payment assistance in purchasing a home? Speaker 2: Well, they could get a house for minimum down payments--practically nothing down in many cases there, or just a small amount down, but as the situation is currently, people just can't; if they lose their job and the husband is the main bearer for the payment of the house, and he loses his job, they're eventually going to lose the payments. Speaker 1: What was going on during that time that there were so many people out of work? Speaker 2: Well, there were various things; automobile plants were cutting back, as they're cutting back now, and competition from foreign automobile plants and so forth eating into General Motors [Company, Detroit, Michigan], Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], Dodge, Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], and what would be their take. Now, their competition is increasing; now, we have Toyota [Motor Corporation, Toyota, Aichi, Japan], and Toyota's pushing General Motors. Speaker 1: So, how long do you stay with the [Detroit] Housing Commission [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well, I really stayed with them for--well, for quite a while--about fifteen years I was with them. It's not the Housing Commission; the Housing Commission was separate--initially, the Housing Commission mainly handled public housing, and then when we took over, we became a separate entity. Speaker 1: And you had a number of programs and one of them was the Vacant Housing Rehabilitation [Program, VHR Program]. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 267534 Speaker 1: Were there any other programs that you worked with? Speaker 2: Oh, that was it mainly. The Vacant Housing Rehabilitation Program [VHR Program], and within the communities, we had each district council, and that's one of the communities there. I was in the Virginia Park [Detroit, Michigan] area, and that's where we principally handled our effort. Speaker 1: So, most of the properties were in that area. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And what part of town is that? Speaker 2: Well, that's in the northwest section of town--Virginia Park; Virginia Park was there, but we had these district councils were spread all over the City of Detroit [Michigan]. We had Corktown [Detroit, Michigan] community council and we had Virginia Park as one, we had some on the east side, but I was handling Virginia Park mostly. Speaker 1: And did you--you worked with the community? Speaker 2: The community organization, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and what was their focus--the community organizations? Speaker 2: Well, the community organization set the guidelines, and they would meet periodically, and they had an organization, a president, and vice president of the community, and they would--like in Virginia Park, they had, they wanted to have a bank, have a community organization in their area, and they have it now; I have it now, and they had other businesses and so forth in the area; most of 'em are like that. Speaker 1: Now, as you worked for [Detroit] Housing [Commission, Detroit, Michigan], were you involved in any other organizations? Speaker 2: No, that was my principal job there. I was heading, heading the Virginia Park office, and then when I went downtown, I spread out, someone else took over Virginia Park's office there, and then I had oh, about six or seven other areas that I had to be responsible for, and I supervised 'em from downtown. Story_ID: 267535 Speaker 1: And you retire in what year from [Detroit] Housing [Commission, Detroit, Michigan]? What year did you retire? Speaker 2: Oh, I retired in '84 [1984], 1984, from the City of Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Now, were you in the [U.S.] Army Reserves? Speaker 2: No, I was a regular [U.S.] Army officer. Speaker 1: So when you retired, that was it. Speaker 2: That was it (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Did you have any other community involvement after you retired? Did you belong to any organizations? Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I didn't have time for that (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, what were you doing that you didn't have time after you retired? Speaker 2: Well, I was raising kids (laughter). I had four kids to take care of, and shortly after I retired from the service, my wife [Roberta Hill Walden] died in about sixty--first wife died in '68 [1968], and so that left me the responsibility of raising these kids; they were still teenagers and so I had four of 'em. Speaker 1: So you were a single dad for a number of years. Speaker 2: Do what now? Speaker 1: I said you were a single father for a number of years. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And that was right after you retired and went to work for housing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I wanna know about after you retired from housing. Speaker 2: Well, how do you mean? Speaker 1: What did you--what have you been doing since you retired in '84 [1984]? Speaker 2: Well, I'm eighty-five years old, and--now, so I guess with aging and the responsibilities of that, I couldn't do anything else. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about how it was to be a single father. Tell me about the responsibilities, and share some of the experiences with me. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it was mainly--I had two daughters--two daughters at home; one daughter had married, and I had a young son [Roger Walden, Jr.]--a teenager, and he probably was the major problem (laughter). Yeah, always in trouble (laughter), or causing trouble. Speaker 1: So, I understand that you remarry. When do you remarry? Speaker 2: In '76 [1976], 1976. And she had a son [Allen Brierly], he was a teenager, so I had two teenagers (laughter). I had to worry about fighting over the cars, whether they were going to get the car or something like that; they never took a car or anything like that, or anything, but there were a lotta little things going on. Speaker 1: What is your wife's name? Speaker 2: Wendy--the present wife. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, Wendy--Wendy Brierly [Walden]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, in 1984, you retire and, and what happens? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nothing happens (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nothing happens, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 267536 Speaker 1: Because you have shared your story with us, the information will be made available to future generations to hear about your story. What would you want to--what message would you want to send to the future generations? What would you say to the future generations? Speaker 2: Well, I think the--I would say to them, get all the education that you can; get a high school diploma, go on to college, and try to get a degree from a college, that's what I would say to them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have-- Speaker 2: --because so much depends on education; your education and training that you've had, that it behooves a youngster today to strive as far as they can go educationally-wise; that's what I would say to them. Now, my son [Roger Walden, Jr.], he had to get his high school GED; he had to go back there. He finished at Cass Technical [High] School [Detroit, Michigan], but he had to go back and finish it with a GED [General Education Development], otherwise, he never would have gotten into the [U.S. military] service. Now, my son retired from the service--twenty years of service, see? But that has been a world of good to him; he's now in Iraq at the present time, working for Kellogg, Brown and Root [KBR, Inc., Houston, Texas], company there that associated with our vice president, [Dick] Cheney, and I worry all the time about him being over there, because any day I expect to see somebody up here telling me about, oh, he's involved in an IED, improvised explosive device, or something like that. Although he's a civilian, he's a civilian worker over there in Iraq. He was not in Iraq as an enlisted man in there, but he served in a lotta places there. Story_ID: 267537 Speaker 1: What is your concern for the younger generations--for African American youth? Speaker 2: Well, my concern is that they avoid the use of drugs--smoking, if they can give that up because that will help prolong their life--no guarantee, though, but it will lead toward better health and so forth, but it's back to education again--getting the maximum amount of education that they can get, and many of the kids are not getting an education. It's hard enough to succeed in this world without an education; it can be done. If you have some talent or you're in some type of business or something, you can make it on your own, but by and large, education helps you. Story_ID: 267538 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: My-- Speaker 1: Legacy. Speaker 2: --legacy? Well, there's not much that I can do about that now, other than stay as I'm--stay the course that I'm staying on, because I'm involved in taking care of my health, and so is my wife [Wendy Brierly Walden]; she's over sixty-five, and I'm over eighty-five. My days are numbered. The legacy that I have is mostly airborne--and when they either look at the Triple Nickles [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion] there or see something there, that was my opportunity there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I made it all. Story_ID: 264685 Speaker 1: That's me; that's Sergeant Roger S. Walden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Roger Walden]. Speaker 2: Okay. What year? Speaker 1: That was 1943--'43 [1943], 1943. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right, now, tell us--same kinda information about this one--who's in the photo, when was it taken, and what was the occasion? Speaker 2: Well, that was taken--well, let me see; I was the detachment commander at Central State University [Central State College], Wilberforce, Ohio, 19--just before I retired from the [U.S.] Army--three years before, because I spent three years there. Speaker 1: So this would be 1963? You retired in '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], yeah, from there. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. We're allowed to do ranges; we don't have to be exact if we can't remember. Hey, an action photo--I love it. Okay, what about this one? Speaker 2: That's Major General Gavin, James Gavin, James M. Gavin, and probably Second Lieutenant Roger S. Walden, and we're looking out the [Douglas] C-47 [Skytrain] at paratroopers that have just exited the plane, and I'm probably gonna exit that plane, too. He's gonna--the general's going to exit the plane; his aide is gonna put the 'chute on him later on. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: Ahh, year. Speaker 1: Approximately--decade; what decade was that? Speaker 2: Well, that's back at Central State College; that's at [Fort] Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania. PMS [professor of military science] usually goes to the summer camp, the summer camp. And you want the year; that's--what are you saying, say the years? Speaker 1: Your, your best guess; it doesn't have to be precise. This was in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Six--the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me again, getting ready to stand in the door, as a second lieutenant then, and I'm going to exit the plane. That's at Fort Bragg--Fort Bragg, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, that's a good one. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Well, that's my first wife there, and the four kids. Speaker 2: From left to right tell me who they are. Speaker 1: That's, that's the young son there (laughter), and you wouldn't believe it though; he's about a head taller than I am now (laughter), and you wouldn't believe that--well, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What's his name? Speaker 1: The one next to my wife there--first wife, she's in a Ph.D. program there in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: What is her name? Speaker 1: Rogena [Ann Walden]. Speaker 2: And what is your son's name? Speaker 1: Roger [Walden], Jr. Speaker 2: Okay. And then your daughter to the right of your wife? Speaker 1: That's Rogena, the tall one there, and the other one is--to the right of her as you face it there, is Robey [Georgia Roberta Walden]; she was named after her mother, Georgia Roberta [Hill Walden], and then the other one is Renay [Walden]--in front of her, sitting next to Roger, Jr. Speaker 2: And what year or decade is this? Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: The '50s [1950s] or the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]; no, that was--yeah, that was 'bout that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's similar to the other one at Fort Bragg, North Carolina with Major General James M. Gavin, Second Lieutenant Roger S. Walden. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's, that's me with the dark hair, and that's my stepson Allen [Brierly]; he's a professor at University of Northern Iowa in Cedar Falls [Iowa]. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Do what? Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah; we're standing, standing on a ship--the Pinta. One of [Christopher] Columbus' ships had came into Detroit [Michigan] here, and that was--well, let's see-- Speaker 1: This is the '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'bout '80 [1980]. Story_ID: 264686 Speaker 1: Well, that trailer there was '87 [1987], and that was a new trailer then--brand new trailer. Speaker 2: Tell me who's in the picture. Speaker 1: Do what? Speaker 2: Tell me who's in the picture. Speaker 1: Oh, my second wife. Speaker 2: Her name? Speaker 1: That's Wendy Brierly Walden; we married in August, August 6, '76 [1976]. Speaker 2: Who's in this picture? Speaker 1: That's when I was at OCS [Officer Candidate School] at Fort Benning [Georgia]; most of these are at Fort Benning like that, and there are some other candidates there. Harmony--we're at Harmony Church [Fort Benning, Georgia], and I am in the upper, or second row, left, top. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, this is forty--oh, that's when I was a private, yeah; no stripes on me then. I was a recruit, probably. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1942. Speaker 2: All right, very good. How 'bout this one? Speaker 1: This one here was-- Speaker 2: Looks like the first one we shot, only it's black and white (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, this is staff sergeant there; I was staff sergeant there, and that's in 19--I got parachute wings, and I've got three up and a rocker below, so I just finished qualifying jump school--1944. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, '44 [1944]. Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951], Korea--yeah. I got the airborne patch up there--yeah. Speaker 1: Next. Speaker 2: Okay, this--yeah, on the back of 'em it, it should give some of the dates there--some of 'em. That's Harold [Julius Walden], that's the one that raised me there--Harold and Lena Walden; they're both dead now. We were at--we were in the parade in Chicago [Illinois]--Chicago parade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is [Fort] Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania in 1962, '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's the same thing; that's 19-- Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 2: It's another picture of me as attachment commander and PMS [professor of military science], Central State University [Central State College, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's in my dress blues at the Presidio [of San Francisco, San Francisco], California, 551B, standing out in front of my house there on the Presidio. I was in [U.S.] Army G2 section. Speaker 1: Oh, that's my wife there, and we--that's our wedding at the Veterans Memorial Building [UAW-Ford National Programs Center, Detroit, Michigan]; it's now no longer the Veterans Memorial Building, but it was at that time. That's where we got married--1976. Speaker 2: This one I can't pin the time; I can't pin it down, it was--Central State invited us down there to a reunion of some sort there, of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] unit at Central State University. Speaker 1: That's you and your wife? Speaker 2: Do what? Speaker 1: Who's in the picture? Tell me who's in the picture. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's me and that's my wife there--current wife, Wendy Brierly Walden. Speaker 1: And this was my graduation in 19--July of 1962, at the Cow Palace in San Francisco [sic. Daly City, California], and that's John Cassell and his wife, Muriel--Muriel Walden; she's my cousin, but they attended my graduation there. I was on the bootstrap program, Army bootstrap program, in order to secure. Speaker 2: You might have to hold that, I-- Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about this. You can start; it's okay. Tell us who's in the picture. Speaker 2: Oh! Yes, that's my first wife, Georgia Roberta [Hill] Walden, and this was the 555th Parachute Infantry Association, Bridges Walden Chapter...